<doc id="2983" wikidata="Q28513" url="?curid=2983" title="Austria-Hungary">
<text>Austria-Hungary, also referred to as the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Dual Monarchy or the Habsburg Monarchy, was a multi-national constitutional monarchy in Central Europe between 1867 and 1918. A military and diplomatic alliance, it consisted of two sovereign states with a single monarch who was titled both Emperor of Austria and King of Hungary. Austria-Hungary constituted the last phase in the constitutional evolution of the Habsburg monarchy: it was formed with the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867 in the aftermath of the Austro-Prussian War, following wars of independence by Hungary in opposition to Habsburg rule. It was dissolved shortly after Hungary terminated the union with Austria in 1918.

One of Europe&#x27;s major powers, Austria-Hungary was geographically the second-largest country in Europe and the third-most populous (after Russia and the German Empire), while being among the ten most populous countries worldwide. The Empire built up the fourth-largest machine-building industry in the world. With the exception of the territory of the Bosnian Condominium, the Empire of Austria and the Kingdom of Hungary were separate sovereign countries in international law.

At its core was the dual monarchy, which was a real union between Cisleithania, the northern and western parts of the former Austrian Empire, and Transleithania (Kingdom of Hungary). Following the 1867 reforms, the Austrian and Hungarian states were co-equal in power. The two countries conducted unified diplomatic and defence policies. For these purposes, &quot;common&quot; ministries of foreign affairs and defence were maintained under the monarch&#x27;s direct authority, as was a third finance ministry responsible only for financing the two &quot;common&quot; portfolios. A third component of the union was the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia, an autonomous region under the Hungarian crown, which negotiated the Croatian–Hungarian Settlement in 1868. After 1878, Bosnia and Herzegovina came under Austro-Hungarian joint military and civilian rule until it was fully annexed in 1908, provoking the Bosnian crisis.

Austria-Hungary was one of the Central Powers in World War I, which began with an Austro-Hungarian war declaration on the Kingdom of Serbia on 28 July 1914. It was already effectively dissolved by the time the military authorities signed the armistice of Villa Giusti on 3 November 1918. The Kingdom of Hungary and the First Austrian Republic were treated as its successors &quot;de jure&quot;, whereas the independence of the First Czechoslovak Republic, the Second Polish Republic, and the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, respectively, and most of the territorial demands of the Kingdom of Romania and the Kingdom of Italy were also recognized by the victorious powers in 1920.
==Name and terminology==

The realm&#x27;s official name was the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy (, ; , ), though in international relations &quot;Austria–Hungary&quot; was used (; ). The Austrians also used the names () (in detail ; ) and &quot;Danubian Monarchy&quot; (; ) or &quot;Dual Monarchy&quot; (; ) and &quot;The Double Eagle&quot; (; ), but none of these became widespread either in Hungary or elsewhere.

The realm&#x27;s full name used in internal administration was The Kingdoms and Lands Represented in the Imperial Council and the Lands of the Holy Hungarian Crown of St. Stephen.
* German: 
* Hungarian: 

From 1867 onwards, the abbreviations heading the names of official institutions in Austria–Hungary reflected their responsibility:
* (&#x27; or Imperial and Royal) was the label for institutions common to both parts of the monarchy, e.g., the &#x27; (Navy) and, during the war, the &#x27; (Army). The common army changed its label from &#x27; to &quot;&quot; only in 1889 at the request of the Hungarian government.
* &#x27; (&#x27;) or Imperial-Royal was the term for institutions of Cisleithania (Austria); &quot;royal&quot; in this label referred to the Crown of Bohemia.
* &#x27; (&#x27;) or &#x27; (&#x27;) (&quot;Royal Hungarian&quot;) referred to Transleithania, the lands of the Hungarian crown. In the Kingdom of Croatia and Slavonia, the autonomous institutions used &quot;k.&quot; (&quot;&quot;) (&quot;Royal&quot;), since according to the Croatian–Hungarian Settlement, the only official language in Croatia and Slavonia was Croatian, and the institutions were &quot;only&quot; Croatian.
Following a decision of Franz Joseph I in 1868, the realm bore the official name Austro-Hungarian Monarchy/Realm (; ) in its international relations. It was often contracted to the &quot;Dual Monarchy&quot; in English or simply referred to as &quot;Austria&quot;.

==History==
===Formation and background===
Following Hungary&#x27;s defeat against the Ottoman Empire in the Battle of Mohács of 1526, the Habsburg Empire became more involved in the Kingdom of Hungary, and subsequently assumed the Hungarian throne. However, as the Ottomans expanded further into Hungary, the Habsburgs came to control only a small north-western portion of the former kingdom&#x27;s territory. Eventually, following the Treaty of Passarowitz in 1718, all former territories of the Hungarian kingdom were ceded from the Ottomans to the Habsburgs. In the revolutions of 1848, the Kingdom of Hungary called for greater self-government and later even independence from the Austrian Empire. The ensuing Hungarian Revolution of 1848 was crushed by the Austrian military with Russian military assistance, and the level of autonomy that the Hungarian state had enjoyed was replaced with absolutist rule from Vienna. This further increased Hungarian resentment of the Habsburg dominion.

In the 1860s, the Empire faced two severe defeats: its loss in the Second Italian War of Independence broke its dominion over a large part of Northern Italy (Lombardy, Veneto, Modena, Reggio, Tuscany, Parma and Piacenza) while defeat in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 led to the dissolution of the German Confederation (of which the Habsburg emperor was the hereditary president) and the exclusion of Austria from German affairs. These twin defeats gave the Hungarians the opportunity to remove the shackles of absolutist rule.

Realizing the need to compromise with Hungary in order to retain its great power status, the central government in Vienna began negotiations with the Hungarian political leaders, led by Ferenc Deák. The Hungarians maintained that the April Laws were still valid, but conceded that under the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713, foreign affairs and defence were &quot;common&quot; to Austria and Hungary. On 20 March 1867, the newly re-established Hungarian parliament at Pest started to negotiate the new laws to be accepted on 30 March. However, Hungarian leaders received word that the Emperor&#x27;s formal coronation as King of Hungary on 8 June had to have taken place in order for the laws to be enacted within the lands of the Holy Crown of Hungary. On 28 July, Franz Joseph, in his new capacity as King of Hungary, approved and promulgated the new laws, which officially gave birth to the Dual Monarchy.

===1866–1878: beyond Lesser Germany===
The Austro-Prussian War was ended by the Peace of Prague (1866) which settled the &quot;German question&quot; in favor of a Lesser German Solution. Count Friedrich Ferdinand von Beust, who was the foreign minister from 1866 to 1871, hated the Prussian chancellor, Otto von Bismarck, who had repeatedly outmaneuvered him. Beust looked to France for avenging Austria&#x27;s defeat and attempted to negotiate with Emperor Napoleon III of France and Italy for an anti-Prussian alliance, but no terms could be reached. The decisive victory of the Prusso-German armies in the Franco-Prussian war and the subsequent founding of the German Empire ended all hope of re-establishing Austrian influence in Germany, and Beust retired.

After being forced out of Germany and Italy, the Dual Monarchy turned to the Balkans, which were in tumult as nationalistic movements were gaining strength and demanding independence. Both Russia and Austria–Hungary saw an opportunity to expand in this region. Russia took on the role of protector of Slavs and Orthodox Christians. Austria envisioned a multi-ethnic, religiously diverse empire under Vienna&#x27;s control. Count Gyula Andrássy, a Hungarian who was Foreign Minister (1871–1879), made the centerpiece of his policy one of opposition to Russian expansion in the Balkans and blocking Serbian ambitions to dominate a new South Slav federation. He wanted Germany to ally with Austria, not Russia.

===1878–1914: Congress of Berlin, Balkan instability and the Bosnia Crisis===


Russian Pan-Slavic organizations sent aid to the Balkan rebels and so pressured the tsar&#x27;s government to declare war on the Ottoman Empire in 1877 in the name of protecting Orthodox Christians. Unable to mediate between the Ottoman Empire and Russia over the control of Serbia, Austria–Hungary declared neutrality when the conflict between the two powers escalated into a war. With help from Romania and Greece, Russia defeated the Ottomans and with the Treaty of San Stefano tried to create a large pro-Russian Bulgaria.

This treaty sparked an international uproar that almost resulted in a general European war. Austria–Hungary and Britain feared that a large Bulgaria would become a Russian satellite that would enable the tsar to dominate the Balkans. British prime minister Benjamin Disraeli moved warships into position against Russia to halt the advance of Russian influence in the eastern Mediterranean so close to Britain&#x27;s route through the Suez Canal. The Treaty of San Stefano was seen in Austria as much too favourable for Russia and its Orthodox-Slavic goals.

The Congress of Berlin rolled back the Russian victory by partitioning the large Bulgarian state that Russia had carved out of Ottoman territory and denying any part of Bulgaria full independence from the Ottomans. The Congress of Berlin in 1878 let Austria occupy (but not annex) the province of Bosnia and Herzegovina, a predominantly Slavic area. Austria occupied Bosnia and Herzegovina as a way of gaining power in the Balkans. Serbia, Montenegro and Romania became fully independent. Nonetheless, the Balkans remained a site of political unrest with teeming ambition for independence and great power rivalries. At the Congress of Berlin in 1878 Gyula Andrássy (Minister of Foreign Affairs) managed to force Russia to retreat from further demands in the Balkans. As a result, Greater Bulgaria was broken up and Serbian independence was guaranteed. In that year, with Britain&#x27;s support, Austria–Hungary stationed troops in Bosnia to prevent the Russians from expanding into nearby Serbia. In another measure to keep the Russians out of the Balkans, Austria–Hungary formed an alliance, the Mediterranean Entente, with Britain and Italy in 1887 and concluded mutual defence pacts with Germany in 1879 and Romania in 1883 against a possible Russian attack. Following the Congress of Berlin the European powers attempted to guarantee stability through a complex series of alliances and treaties.

Anxious about Balkan instability and Russian aggression, and to counter French interests in Europe, Austria–Hungary forged a defensive alliance with Germany in October 1879 and in May 1882. In October 1882 Italy joined this partnership in the Triple Alliance largely because of Italy&#x27;s imperial rivalries with France. Tensions between Russia and Austria–Hungary remained high, so Bismarck replaced the League of the Three Emperors with the Reinsurance Treaty with Russia to keep the Habsburgs from recklessly starting a war over Pan-Slavism. The Sandžak-Raška / Novibazar region was under Austro-Hungarian occupation between 1878 and 1909, when it was returned to the Ottoman Empire, before being ultimately divided between kingdoms of Montenegro and Serbia.

On the heels of the Great Balkan Crisis, Austro-Hungarian forces occupied Bosnia and Herzegovina in August 1878 and the monarchy eventually annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina in October 1908 as a common holding of Cisleithania and Transleithania under the control of the Imperial &amp; Royal finance ministry rather than attaching it to either territorial government. The annexation in 1908 led some in Vienna to contemplate combining Bosnia and Herzegovina with Croatia to form a third Slavic component of the monarchy. The deaths of Franz Joseph&#x27;s brother, Maximilian (1867), and his only son, Rudolf, made the Emperor&#x27;s nephew, Franz Ferdinand, heir to the throne. The Archduke was rumoured to have been an advocate for this trialism as a means to limit the power of the Hungarian aristocracy.

A proclamation issued on the occasion of its annexation to the Habsburg monarchy in October 1908 promised these lands constitutional institutions, which should secure to their inhabitants full civil rights and a share in the management of their own affairs by means of a local representative assembly. In performance of this promise a constitution was promulgated in 1910.

The principal players in the Bosnian Crisis of 1908–09 were the foreign ministers of Austria and Russia, Alois Lexa von Aehrenthal and Alexander Izvolsky. Both were motivated by political ambition; the first would emerge successful, and the latter would be broken by the crisis. Along the way, they would drag Europe to the brink of war in 1909. They would also divide Europe into the two armed camps that would go to war in July 1914.

Aehrenthal had started with the assumption that the Slavic minorities could never come together, and the Balkan League would never cause any damage to Austria. He turned down an Ottoman proposal for an alliance that would include Austria, Turkey, and Romania. However, his policies alienated the Bulgarians, who turned instead to Russia and Serbia. Although Austria had no intention to embark on additional expansion to the south, Aehrenthal encouraged speculation to that effect, expecting that it would paralyze the Balkan states. Instead, it incited them to feverish activity to create a defensive block to stop Austria. A series of grave miscalculations at the highest level thus significantly strengthened Austria&#x27;s enemies.

In 1914, Slavic militants in Bosnia rejected Austria&#x27;s plan to fully absorb the area; they assassinated the Austrian heir and precipitated World War I.

===1914–1918: World War I===
====Prelude====


The 28 June 1914 assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, excessively intensified the existing traditional religion-based ethnic hostilities in Bosnia. However, in Sarajevo itself, Austrian authorities encouraged violence against the Serb residents, which resulted in anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo, in which Catholic Croats and Bosnian Muslims killed two and damaged numerous Serb-owned buildings. Writer Ivo Andrić referred to the violence as the &quot;Sarajevo frenzy of hate.&quot; Violent actions against ethnic Serbs were organized not only in Sarajevo but also in many other larger Austro-Hungarian cities in modern-day Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Austro-Hungarian authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina imprisoned and extradited approximately 5,500 prominent Serbs, 700 to 2,200 of whom died in prison. Four hundred sixty Serbs were sentenced to death and a predominantly Muslim special militia known as the &quot;Schutzkorps&quot; was established and carried out the persecution of Serbs.

Some members of the government, such as Minister of Foreign Affairs Count Leopold Berchtold and Army Commander Count Franz Conrad von Hötzendorf, had wanted to confront the resurgent Serbian nation for some years in a preventive war, but the Emperor and Hungarian prime minister István Tisza were opposed. The foreign ministry of Austro-Hungarian Empire sent ambassador László Szőgyény to Potsdam, where he inquired about the standpoint of the German emperor, Wilhelm II, on 5 July and received a supportive response.

The leaders of Austria–Hungary therefore decided to confront Serbia militarily before it could incite a revolt; using the assassination as an excuse, they presented a list of ten demands called the July Ultimatum, expecting Serbia would never accept. When Serbia accepted nine of the ten demands but only partially accepted the remaining one, Austria–Hungary declared war. Franz Joseph I finally followed the urgent counsel of his top advisers.

Over the course of July and August 1914, these events caused the start of World War I, as Russia mobilized in support of Serbia, setting off a series of counter-mobilizations. In support of his German ally, on Thursday, 6 August 1914, Emperor Franz Joseph signed the declaration of war on Russia. Italy initially remained neutral, despite its alliance with Austria–Hungary. In 1915, it switched to the side of the Entente powers, hoping to gain territory from its former ally.

====Wartime foreign policy====

The Austro-Hungarian Empire played a relatively passive diplomatic role in the war, as it was increasingly dominated and controlled by Germany. The only goal was to punish Serbia and try to stop the ethnic breakup of the Empire, and it completely failed. Starting in late 1916 the new Emperor Karl removed the pro-German officials and opened peace overtures to the Allies, whereby the entire war could be ended by compromise, or perhaps Austria would make a separate peace from Germany. The main effort was vetoed by Italy, which had been promised large slices of Austria for joining the Allies in 1915. Austria was only willing to turn over the Trentino region but nothing more. Karl was seen as a defeatist, which weakened his standing at home and with both the Allies and Germany.

====Theaters of operations====
The Austro-Hungarian Empire conscripted 7.8 million soldiers during the war. General von Hötzendorf was the Chief of the Austro-Hungarian General Staff. Franz Joseph I, who was much too old to command the army, appointed Archduke Friedrich von Österreich-Teschen as Supreme Army Commander (Armeeoberkommandant), but asked him to give Von Hötzendorf freedom to take any decisions. Von Hötzendorf remained in effective command of the military forces until Emperor Karl I took supreme command himself in late 1916 and dismissed Conrad von Hötzendorf in 1917. Meanwhile, economic conditions on the home front deteriorated rapidly. The empire depended on agriculture, and agriculture depended on the heavy labor of millions of men who were now in the army. Food production fell, the transportation system became overcrowded, and industrial production could not successfully handle the overwhelming need for munitions. Germany provided a great deal of help, but it was not enough. Furthermore, the political instability of the multiple ethnic groups within the empire now ripped apart any hope for national consensus in support of the war. Increasingly there was a demand for breaking up the empire and setting up autonomous national states based on historic, language-based cultures. The new emperor sought peace terms from the Allies, but his initiatives were vetoed by Italy.

=====Homefront=====
The heavily rural empire did have a small industrial base, but its major contributions were manpower and food. Nevertheless, Austria–Hungary was more urbanized (25%) than some of its opponents in the war, like the Russian Empire (13.4%), Serbia (13.2%) or Romania (18.8%). Furthermore, the Austro-Hungarian Empire had also more industrialized economy and higher GDP per capita than the Kingdom of Italy, which was economically the far most developed actual opponent of the Empire.

On the home front, food grew scarcer and scarcer, as did heating fuel. Hungary, with its heavy agricultural base, was somewhat better fed. The army conquered productive agricultural areas in Romania and elsewhere, but refused to allow food shipments to civilians back home. Morale fell every year, and the diverse nationalities gave up on the empire and looked for ways to establish their own nation states.

Inflation soared, from an index of 129 in 1914 to 1589 in 1918, wiping out the cash savings of the middle class. In terms of war damage to the economy, the war consumed about 20 percent of the gross domestic product. The dead soldiers amounted to about four percent of the 1914 labor force, and the wounded ones to another six percent. Compared to the major countries in the war, the death and casualty rates were toward the high end regarding the present-day territory of Austria.

By summer 1918, &quot;Green Cadres&quot; of army deserters formed armed bands in the hills of Croatia-Slavonia, and civil authority disintegrated. By late October, violence and massive looting erupted, and there were efforts to form peasant republics. However, the Croatian political leadership was focused on creating a new state (Yugoslavia) and worked with the advancing Serbian army to impose control and end the uprisings.

=====Serbian front 1914–1916=====
At the start of the war, the army was divided into two: the smaller part attacked Serbia, while the larger part fought against the formidable Imperial Russian Army. The invasion of Serbia in 1914 was a disaster: by the end of the year, the Austro-Hungarian Army had taken no territory, but had lost 227,000 out of a total force of 450,000 men. However, in the autumn of 1915, the Serbian Army was defeated by the Central Powers, which led to the occupation of Serbia. Near the end of 1915, in a massive rescue operation involving more than 1,000 trips made by Italian, French and British steamers, 260,000 Serb soldiers were transported to Brindisi and Corfu, where they waited for the chance of the victory of Allied powers to reclaim their country. Corfu hosted the Serbian government in exile after the collapse of Serbia and served as a supply base for the Greek front. In April 1916 a large number of Serbian troops were transported in British and French naval vessels from Corfu to mainland Greece. The contingent numbering over 120,000 relieved a much smaller army at the Macedonian front and fought alongside British and French troops.

=====Russian front 1914–1917=====

On the Eastern front, the war started out equally poorly. The government accepted the Polish proposal of establishing the Supreme National Committee as the Polish central authority within the empire, responsible for the formation of the Polish Legions, an auxiliary military formation within the Austro-Hungarian Army. The Austro-Hungarian Army was defeated at the Battle of Lemberg and the great fortress city of Przemyśl was besieged and fell in March 1915. The Gorlice–Tarnów Offensive started as a minor German offensive to relieve the pressure of the Russian numerical superiority on the Austro-Hungarians, but the cooperation of the Central Powers resulted in huge Russian losses and the total collapse of the Russian lines and their long retreat into Russia. The Russian Third Army disintegrated. In summer 1915, the Austro-Hungarian Army, under a unified command with the Germans, participated in the successful Gorlice–Tarnów Offensive. From June 1916, the Russians focused their attacks on the Austro-Hungarian Army in the Brusilov Offensive, recognizing the latter&#x27;s numerical inferiority. By the end of September 1916, Austria–Hungary mobilized and concentrated new divisions, and the successful Russian advance was halted and slowly repelled; but the Austrian armies took heavy losses (about 1 million men) and never recovered. Nevertheless, the huge losses in men and materiel inflicted on the Russians during the offensive contributed greatly to the Russian Revolution of 1917 and caused an economic crash in the Russian Empire.

The Act of 5 November 1916 was then proclaimed to the Poles jointly by the Emperors Wilhelm II of Germany and Franz Joseph of Austria-Hungary. This act promised the creation of the Kingdom of Poland out of the territory of Congress Poland, envisioned by its authors as a puppet state controlled by the Central Powers, with the nominal authority vested in the Regency Council. The origin of that document was the dire need to draft new recruits from German-occupied Poland for the war with Russia. Following the Armistice of 11 November 1918 ending the World War I, in spite of the previous initial total dependence of the kingdom on its sponsors, it ultimately served against their intentions as the cornerstone proto state of the nascent Second Polish Republic, the latter composed also of territories never intended by the Central Powers to be ceded to Poland.

The Battle of Zborov (1917) was the first significant action of the Czechoslovak Legions, which fought for the independence of Czechoslovakia against the Austro-Hungarian Army.

=====Italian front 1915–1918=====

In May 1915, Italy attacked Austria–Hungary. Italy was the only military opponent of Austria–Hungary which had a similar degree of industrialization and economic level; moreover, her army was numerous (≈1,000,000 men were immediately fielded), but suffered from poor leadership, training and organization. Chief of Staff Luigi Cadorna marched his army towards the Isonzo River, hoping to seize Ljubljana, and to eventually threaten Vienna. However, the Royal Italian Army were halted on the river, where four battles took place over five months (23 June – 2 December 1915). The fight was extremely bloody and exhausting for both sides.

On 15 May 1916, Austrian Chief of Staff Conrad von Hötzendorf launched the &quot;Strafexpedition&quot; (&quot;punitive expedition&quot;): the Austrians broke through the front and occupied the Asiago plateau. The Italians managed to resist and in a counteroffensive seized Gorizia on 9 August. Nonetheless, they had to stop on the Carso, a few kilometres away from the border. At this point, several months of indecisive trench warfare ensued (analogous to the Western front). As the Russian Empire collapsed as a result of the Bolshevik Revolution and the Russians ended their involvement in the war, Germans and Austrians were able to transfer much of their manpower to the Western and Southern fronts from the erstwhile Eastern fighting.

On 24 October 1917, Austrians (now enjoying decisive German support) attacked at Caporetto using new infiltration tactics; although they advanced more than in the direction of Venice and gained considerable supplies, they were halted and could not cross the Piave River. Italy, although suffering massive casualties, recovered from the blow, and a coalition government under Vittorio Emanuele Orlando was formed. Italy also enjoyed the support of the Entente: by 1918, large amounts of war materials and a few auxiliary American, British, and French divisions arrived in the Italian battle zone. Cadorna was replaced by General Armando Diaz; under his command, the Italians retook the initiative and won the decisive Second Battle of the Piave River (15–23 June 1918), in which some 60,000 Austrian and 43,000 Italian soldiers were killed. The final battle at Vittorio Veneto was lost by 31 October 1918 and the armistice was signed at Villa Giusti on 3 November.

=====Romanian front 1916–1917=====

On 27 August 1916, Romania declared war against Austria–Hungary. The Romanian Army crossed the borders of eastern Hungary (Transylvania), but despite initial successes, by November 1916, the Austro-Hungarian, German, Bulgarian, and Ottoman armies had defeated the Romanian and Russian armies, and occupied the southern part of Romania (including Oltenia, Muntenia and Dobruja). Within three months of the war, the Central Powers approached Bucharest, the Romanian capital. On 6 December, Bucharest was captured, and part of the population moved to the unoccupied Romanian territory, in Moldavia, together with the Romanian government, royal court and public authorities, which relocated to Iași. In 1917, after several defensive victories (managing to stop the German-Austro-Hungarian advance), with Russia&#x27;s withdrawal from the war following the October Revolution, Romania was forced to drop out of the war.

====Role of Hungary====
Although the Kingdom of Hungary comprised only 42% of the population of Austria–Hungary, the thin majority – more than 3.8 million soldiers – of the Austro-Hungarian armed forces were conscripted from the Kingdom of Hungary during the First World War. Roughly 600,000 soldiers were killed in action, and 700,000 soldiers were wounded in the war.

Austria–Hungary held on for years, as the Hungarian half provided sufficient supplies for the military to continue to wage war. This was shown in a transition of power after which the Hungarian prime minister, Count István Tisza, and foreign minister, Count István Burián, had decisive influence over the internal and external affairs of the monarchy. By late 1916, food supply from Hungary became intermittent and the government sought an armistice with the Entente powers. However, this failed as Britain and France no longer had any regard for the integrity of the monarchy because of Austro-Hungarian support for Germany.

====Analysis of defeat====
The setbacks that the Austrian army suffered in 1914 and 1915 can be attributed to a large extent by the incompetence of the Austrian high command. After attacking Serbia, its forces soon had to be withdrawn to protect its eastern frontier against Russia&#x27;s invasion, while German units were engaged in fighting on the Western Front. This resulted in a greater than expected loss of men in the invasion of Serbia. Furthermore, it became evident that the Austrian high command had had no plans for possible continental war and that the army and navy were also ill-equipped to handle such a conflict.

In the last two years of the war the Austro-Hungarian armed forces lost all ability to act independently of Germany. As of 7 September 1916, the German emperor was given full control of all the armed forces of the Central Powers and Austria-Hungary effectively became a satellite of Germany. The Austrians viewed the German army favorably; on the other hand, by 1916 the general belief in Germany was that Germany, in its alliance with Austria–Hungary, was &quot;shackled to a corpse&quot;. The operational capability of the Austro-Hungarian army was seriously affected by supply shortages, low morale and a high casualty rate, and by the army&#x27;s composition of multiple ethnicities with different languages and customs.

===1918: Demise, disintegration, dissolution===

By 1918, the economic situation had deteriorated and governmental failure on the homefront ended popular support for the war. The Austro-Hungarian monarchy collapsed with dramatic speed in the autumn of 1918. Leftist and pacifist political movements organized strikes in factories, and uprisings in the army had become commonplace. As the war went on, the ethnic unity declined; the Allies encouraged breakaway demands from minorities and the Empire faced disintegration. With apparent Allied victory approaching, nationalist movements seized ethnic resentment to erode social unity. The military breakdown of the Italian front marked the start of the rebellion for the numerous ethnicities who made up the multiethnic Empire, as they refused to keep on fighting for a cause that now appeared senseless. The Emperor had lost much of his power to rule, as his realm disintegrated.

On 14 October 1918, Foreign Minister Baron István Burián von Rajecz asked for an armistice based on President Woodrow Wilson&#x27;s Fourteen Points and two days later Emperor Karl I issued a proclamation (&quot;Imperial Manifesto of 16 October 1918&quot;) altering the empire into a federal union to give ethnic groups decentralization and representation. However, on 18 October, United States Secretary of State Robert Lansing replied that autonomy for the nationalities – the tenth of the Fourteen Points – was no longer enough. In fact, a Czechoslovak provisional government had joined the Allies on 14 October. The South Slavs in both halves of the monarchy had already declared in favor of uniting with Serbia in a large South Slav state in the 1917 Corfu Declaration signed by members of the Yugoslav Committee. The Croatians had begun disregarding orders from Budapest earlier in October. Lansing&#x27;s response was, in effect, the death certificate of Austria–Hungary.

During the Italian battles, the Czechoslovaks and Southern Slavs declared their independence. With defeat in the war imminent after the Italian offensive in the Battle of Vittorio Veneto on 24 October, Czech politicians peacefully took over command in Prague on 28 October (later declared the birth of Czechoslovakia) and followed up in other major cities in the next few days. On 30 October, the Slovaks did the same. On 29 October, the Slavs in both portions of what remained of Austria–Hungary proclaimed the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs and declared that their ultimate intention was to unite with Serbia and Montenegro in a large South Slav state. On the same day, the Czechs and Slovaks formally proclaimed the establishment of Czechoslovakia as an independent state.

On 17 October 1918, the Hungarian Parliament voted in favour of terminating the union with Austria. The most prominent opponent of continued union with Austria, Count Mihály Károlyi, seized power in the Aster Revolution on 31 October. Charles was all but forced to appoint Károlyi as his Hungarian prime minister. One of Károlyi&#x27;s first acts was to formally repudiate the compromise agreement on 31 October, effectively terminating the personal union with Austria and thus officially dissolving the Austro-Hungarian state.

By the end of October, there was nothing left of the Habsburg realm but its majority-German Danubian and Alpine provinces, and Karl&#x27;s authority was being challenged even there by the German-Austrian state council. Karl&#x27;s last Austrian prime minister, Heinrich Lammasch, concluded that Karl&#x27;s position was untenable. Lammasch persuaded Karl that the best course was to relinquish, at least temporarily, his right to exercise sovereign authority. On 11 November, Karl issued a carefully worded proclamation in which he recognized the Austrian people&#x27;s right to determine the form of the state and &quot;relinquish(ed) every participation&quot; in Austrian state affairs. On the day after he announced his withdrawal from Austrian politics, the German-Austrian National Council proclaimed the Republic of German Austria. Károlyi followed suit on 16 November, proclaiming the Hungarian Democratic Republic.

==Government==


The Compromise of 1867 turned the Habsburg domains into a real union between the Austrian Empire (&quot;Lands Represented in the Imperial Council&quot;, or Cisleithania) in the western and northern half and the Kingdom of Hungary (&quot;Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen&quot;, or Transleithania) in the eastern half.

The government of Austria, which had ruled the monarchy until 1867, became the government of the Austrian part, and another government was formed for the Hungarian part. The common government (officially designated Ministerial Council for Common Affairs, or in German) formed for the few matters of common national security - the Common Army, Navy, foreign policy and the imperial household, and the customs union. Although the two halves shared a common monarch and both foreign relations and defense were managed jointly, all other state functions were to be handled separately as there was no common citizenship.

Hungary and Austria maintained separate parliaments, each with its own prime minister: the Diet of Hungary (commonly known as the National Assembly) and the Imperial Council () in Cisleithania. Each parliament had its own executive government, appointed by the monarch.

After 1878, Bosnia and Herzegovina came under Austro-Hungarian military and civilian rule until it was fully annexed in 1908, provoking the Bosnian crisis with the Great Powers and Austria-Hungary&#x27;s Balkan neighbors, Serbia and Montenegro.

Relations during the half-century after 1867 between the two parts of the dual monarchy featured repeated disputes over shared external tariff arrangements and over the financial contribution of each government to the common treasury. These matters were determined by the Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867, in which common expenditures were allocated 70% to Austria and 30% to Hungary. This division had to be renegotiated every ten years. There was political turmoil during the build-up to each renewal of the agreement. By 1907, the Hungarian share had risen to 36.4%. The disputes culminated in the early 1900s in a prolonged constitutional crisis. It was triggered by disagreement over which language to use for command in Hungarian army units and deepened by the advent to power in Budapest in April 1906 of a Hungarian nationalist coalition. Provisional renewals of the common arrangements occurred in October 1907 and in November 1917 on the basis of the &quot;status quo&quot;. The negotiations in 1917 ended with the dissolution of the Dual Monarchy.

==Demographics==

In July 1849, the Hungarian Revolutionary Parliament proclaimed and enacted ethnic and minority rights (the next such laws were in Switzerland), but these were overturned after the Russian and Austrian armies crushed the Hungarian Revolution. After the Kingdom of Hungary reached the Compromise with the Habsburg Dynasty in 1867, one of the first acts of its restored Parliament was to pass a Law on Nationalities (Act Number XLIV of 1868). It was a liberal piece of legislation and offered extensive language and cultural rights. It did not recognize non-Hungarians to have rights to form states with any territorial autonomy.

Article 19 of the 1867 &quot;Basic State Act&quot; (&quot;Staatsgrundgesetz&quot;), valid only for the Cisleithanian (Austrian) part of Austria–Hungary, said:
 The implementation of this principle led to several disputes, as it was not clear which languages could be regarded as &quot;customary&quot;. The Germans, the traditional bureaucratic, capitalist and cultural elite, demanded the recognition of their language as a customary language in every part of the empire. German nationalists, especially in the Sudetenland (part of Bohemia), looked to Berlin in the new German Empire.

The Hungarian Minority Act of 1868 gave the minorities (Slovaks, Romanians, Serbs, et al.) individual (but not also communal) rights to use their language in offices, schools (although in practice often only in those founded by them and not by the state), courts and municipalities (if 20% of the deputies demanded it). Beginning with the 1879 Primary Education Act and the 1883 Secondary Education Act, the Hungarian state made more efforts to reduce the use of non-Magyar languages, in strong violation of the 1868 Nationalities Law. After 1875, all Slovak language schools higher than elementary were closed, including the only three high schools (gymnasiums) in Revúca (Nagyrőce), Turčiansky Svätý Martin (Turócszentmárton) and Kláštor pod Znievom (Znióváralja).

Language was, as a proxy for ethnicity, one of the most contentious issues in Austro-Hungarian politics. All governments faced difficult and divisive hurdles in deciding on the languages of government and of instruction. The minorities sought the widest opportunities for education in their own languages, as well as in the &quot;dominant&quot; languages—Hungarian and German. By the &quot;Ordinance of 5 April 1897&quot;, the Austrian Prime Minister Count Kasimir Felix Badeni gave Czech equal standing with German in the internal government of Bohemia; this led to a crisis because of nationalist German agitation throughout the empire. The Crown dismissed Badeni.
Italian was regarded as an old &quot;culture language&quot; (&quot;&quot;) by German intellectuals and had always been granted equal rights as an official language of the Empire, but the Germans had difficulty in accepting the Slavic languages as equal to their own. On one occasion Count A. Auersperg (Anastasius Grün) entered the Diet of Carniola carrying what he claimed to be the whole corpus of Slovene literature under his arm; this was to demonstrate that the Slovene language could not be substituted for German as the language of higher education.

The following years saw official recognition of several languages, at least in Austria. Since 1867, laws awarded Croatian equal status with Italian in Dalmatia. Beginning in 1882, there was a Slovene majority in the Diet of Carniola and in the capital Laibach (Ljubljana); they replaced German with Slovene as their primary official language. Galicia designated Polish instead of German in 1869 as the customary language of government.

As of June 1907, all public and private schools in Hungary were obliged to ensure that after the fourth grade, the pupils could express themselves fluently in Hungarian. This led to the further closing of minority schools, devoted mostly to the Slovak and Rusyn languages. The two kingdoms sometimes divided their spheres of influence. According to Misha Glenny in his book, &quot;The Balkans, 1804–1999&quot;, the Austrians responded to Hungarian support of Czechs by supporting the Croatian national movement in Zagreb. In recognition that he reigned in a multi-ethnic country, Emperor Franz Joseph spoke (and used) German, Hungarian and Czech fluently, and Croatian, Serbian, Polish and Italian to some degree.

The language disputes were most fiercely fought in Bohemia, where the Czech speakers formed a majority and sought equal status for their language to German. The Czechs had lived primarily in Bohemia since the 6th century and German immigrants had begun settling the Bohemian periphery in the 13th century. The constitution of 1627 made the German language a second official language and equal to Czech. German speakers lost their majority in the Bohemian Diet in 1880 and became a minority to Czech speakers in the cities of Prague and Pilsen (while retaining a slight numerical majority in the city of Brno (Brünn)). The old Charles University in Prague, hitherto dominated by German speakers, was divided into German and Czech-speaking faculties in 1882.

At the same time, Hungarian dominance faced challenges from the local majorities of Romanians in Transylvania and in the eastern Banat, Slovaks in today&#x27;s Slovakia, and Croats and Serbs in the crown lands of Croatia and of Dalmatia (today&#x27;s Croatia), in Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the provinces known as the Vojvodina (today&#x27;s northern Serbia). The Romanians and the Serbs began to agitate for union with their fellow nationalists and language speakers in the newly founded states of Romania (1859–1878) and Serbia.

Hungary&#x27;s leaders were generally less willing than their Austrian counterparts to share power with their subject minorities, but they granted a large measure of autonomy to Croatia in 1868. To some extent, they modeled their relationship to that kingdom on their own compromise with Austria of the previous year. In spite of nominal autonomy, the Croatian government was an economic and administrative part of Hungary, which the Croatians resented. In the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina many advocated the idea of a trialist Austro-Hungaro-Croatian monarchy; among the supporters of the idea were Archduke Leopold Salvator, Archduke Franz Ferdinand and emperor and king Charles I who during his short reign supported the trialist idea only to be vetoed by the Hungarian government and Count István Tisza. The count finally signed the trialist proclamation after heavy pressure from the king on 23 October 1918.

===Ethnic relations===
In Istria, the Istro-Romanians, a small ethnic group composed by around 2,600 people in the 1880s, suffered severe discrimination. The Croats of the region, who formed the majority, tried to assimilate them, while the Italian minority supported them in their requests for self-determination. In 1888, the possibility of opening the first school for the Istro-Romanians teaching in the Romanian language was discussed in the Diet of Istria. The proposal was very popular among them. The Italian deputies showed their support, but the Croat ones opposed it and tried to show that the Istro-Romanians were in fact Slavs. During Austro-Hungarian rule, the Istro-Romanians lived under poverty conditions, and those living in the island of Krk were fully assimilated by 1875.

Around 1900, Jews numbered about two million in the whole territory of the Austro-Hungarian Empire; their position was ambiguous. The populist and antisemitic politics of the Christian Social Party are sometimes viewed as a model for Adolf Hitler&#x27;s Nazism. Antisemitic parties and movements existed, but the governments of Vienna and Budapest did not initiate pogroms or implement official antisemitic policies. They feared that such ethnic violence could ignite other ethnic minorities and escalate out of control. The antisemitic parties remained on the periphery of the political sphere due to their low popularity among voters in the parliamentary elections.

In that period, the majority of Jews in Austria–Hungary lived in small towns (&quot;shtetls&quot;) in Galicia and rural areas in Hungary and Bohemia; however, they had large communities and even local majorities in the downtown districts of Vienna, Budapest, Prague, Kraków and Lwów. Of the pre-World War I military forces of the major European powers, the Austro-Hungarian army was almost alone in its regular promotion of Jews to positions of command. While the Jewish population of the lands of the Dual Monarchy was about 5%, Jews made up nearly 18% of the reserve officer corps. Thanks to the modernity of the constitution and to the benevolence of emperor Franz Joseph, the Austrian Jews came to regard the era of Austria–Hungary as a golden era of their history. By 1910 about 900,000 religious Jews made up approximately 5% of the population of Hungary and about 23% of Budapest&#x27;s citizenry. In the Austro-Hungarian Empire the generally fiercely patriotic Hungarian Jews were securing the tenuous Hungarian majority in the Kingdom of Hungary. Jews accounted for 54% of commercial business owners, 85% of financial institution directors and owners in banking, and 62% of all employees in commerce, 20% of all general grammar school students, and 37% of all commercial scientific grammar school students, 31.9% of all engineering students, and 34.1% of all students in human faculties of the universities. Jews accounted for 48.5% of all physicians, and 49.4% of all lawyers/jurists in Hungary. Note: The numbers of Jews were reconstructed from religious censuses. They did not include the people of Jewish origin who had converted to Christianity, or the number of atheists. Among many Hungarian parliament members of Jewish origin, the most famous Jewish members in Hungarian political life were Vilmos Vázsonyi as Minister of Justice, Samu Hazai as Minister of War, János Teleszky as minister of finance, János Harkányi as minister of trade, and József Szterényi as minister of trade.

==Education==
===Universities in Cisleithania===

The first university in the Austrian half of the Empire (Charles University) was founded by Emperor Charles IV in Prague in 1347, the second oldest university was the Jagiellonian University established in Kraków by the King of Poland Casimir III the Great in 1364, while the third oldest (University of Vienna) was founded by Duke Rudolph IV in 1365.

The higher educational institutions were predominantly German, but beginning in the 1870s, language shifts began to occur. These establishments, which in the middle of the 19th century had had a predominantly German character, underwent in Galicia a conversion into Polish national institutions, in Bohemia and Moravia a separation into German and Czech ones. Thus Germans, Czechs and Poles were provided for. But now the smaller nations also made their voices heard: the Ruthenians, Slovenes and Italians. The Ruthenians demanded at first, in view of the predominantly Ruthenian character of rural East Galicia, a national partition of the Polish University of Lwów. Since the Poles were at first unyielding, Ruthenian demonstrations and strikes of students arose, and the Ruthenians were no longer content with the reversion of a few separate professorial chairs, and with parallel courses of lectures. By a pact concluded on 28 January 1914 the Poles promised a Ruthenian university; but owing to the war the question lapsed. The Italians could hardly claim a university of their own on grounds of population (in 1910 they numbered 783,000), but they claimed it all the more on grounds of their ancient culture. All parties were agreed that an Italian faculty of laws should be created; the difficulty lay in the choice of the place. The Italians demanded Trieste; but the Government was afraid to let this Adriatic port become the centre of an irredenta; moreover the Southern Slavs of the city wished it kept free from an Italian educational establishment. Bienerth in 1910 brought about a compromise; namely, that it should be founded at once, the situation to be provisionally in Vienna, and to be transferred within four years to Italian national territory. The German National Union (Nationalverband) agreed to extend temporary hospitality to the Italian university in Vienna, but the Southern Slav Hochschule Club demanded a guarantee that a later transfer to the coast provinces should not be contemplated, together with the simultaneous foundation of Slovene professorial chairs in Prague and Cracow, and preliminary steps towards the foundation of a Southern Slav university in Laibach. But in spite of the constant renewal of negotiations for a compromise it was impossible to arrive at any agreement, until the outbreak of war left all the projects for a Ruthenian university at Lemberg, a Slovene one in Laibach, and a second Czech one in Moravia, unrealized.

===Universities in Transleithania===

In the year 1276, the university of Veszprém was destroyed by the troops of Péter Csák and it was never rebuilt. A university was established by Louis I of Hungary in Pécs in 1367. Sigismund established a university at Óbuda in 1395. Another, Universitas Istropolitana, was established 1465 in Pozsony (now Bratislava in Slovakia) by Mattias Corvinus. None of these medieval universities survived the Ottoman wars. Nagyszombat University was founded in 1635 and moved to Buda in 1777 and it is called Eötvös Loránd University today. The world&#x27;s first institute of technology was founded in Selmecbánya, Kingdom of Hungary (since 1920 Banská Štiavnica, now Slovakia) in 1735. Its legal successor is the University of Miskolc in Hungary. The Budapest University of Technology and Economics (BME) is considered the oldest institute of technology in the world with university rank and structure. Its legal predecessor the Institutum Geometrico-Hydrotechnicum was founded in 1782 by Emperor Joseph II.

The high schools included the universities, of which Hungary possessed five, all maintained by the state: at Budapest (founded in 1635), at Kolozsvár (founded in 1872), and at Zagreb (founded in 1874). Newer universities were established in Debrecen in 1912, and Pozsony university was reestablished after a half millennium in 1912. They had four faculties: theology, law, philosophy and medicine (the university at Zagreb was without a faculty of medicine). There were in addition ten high schools of law, called academies, which in 1900 were attended by 1,569 pupils. The Polytechnicum in Budapest, founded in 1844, which contained four faculties and was attended in 1900 by 1,772 pupils, was also considered a high school. There were in Hungary in 1900 forty-nine theological colleges, twenty-nine Catholic, five Greek Uniat, four Greek Orthodox, ten Protestant and one Jewish. Among special schools the principal mining schools were at Selmeczbánya, Nagyág and Felsőbánya; the principal agricultural colleges at Debreczen and Kolozsvár; and there was a school of forestry at Selmeczbánya, military colleges at Budapest, Kassa, Déva and Zagreb, and a naval school at Fiume. There were in addition a number of training institutes for teachers and a large number of schools of commerce, several art schools – for design, painting, sculpture, and music.

==Economy==

The heavily rural Austro-Hungarian economy slowly modernised after 1867. Railroads opened up once-remote areas, and cities grew. Many small firms promoted capitalist way of production. Technological change accelerated industrialization and urbanization. The first Austrian stock exchange (the Wiener Börse) was opened in 1771 in Vienna, the first stock exchange of the Kingdom of Hungary (the Budapest Stock Exchange) was opened in Budapest in 1864. The central bank (Bank of issue) was founded as Austrian National Bank in 1816. In 1878, it transformed into Austro-Hungarian National Bank with principal offices in both Vienna and Budapest. The central bank was governed by alternating Austrian or Hungarian governors and vice-governors. Austria-Hungary also became the world&#x27;s third-largest manufacturer and exporter of electric home appliances, electric industrial appliances, and power generation apparatus for power plants, after the United States and the German Empire, and it constructed Europe&#x27;s second-largest railway network, after the German Empire. In 2000, a study estimated that GDP in constant national prices in 1913 was 19,140.8 million for Cisleithania and 10,971.6 million for Transleithania, a combined 30,112.4 million krone. According to a 2005 study, GDP (PPP) in 1913 was 105,515 million 1990 Int$, the fifth-largest in Europe.

The gross national product per capita grew roughly 1.76% per year from 1870 to 1913. That level of growth compared very favorably to that of other European nations such as Britain (1%), France (1.06%), and Germany (1.51%). However, in a comparison with Germany and Britain, the Austro-Hungarian economy as a whole still lagged considerably, as sustained modernization had begun much later. Like the German Empire, that of Austria–Hungary frequently employed liberal economic policies and practices. In 1873, the old Hungarian capital Buda and Óbuda (Ancient Buda) were officially merged with the third city, Pest, thus creating the new metropolis of Budapest. The dynamic Pest grew into Hungary&#x27;s administrative, political, economic, trade and cultural hub. Many of the state institutions and the modern administrative system of Hungary were established during this period. Economic growth centered on Vienna and Budapest, the Austrian lands (areas of modern Austria), the Alpine region and the Bohemian lands. In the later years of the 19th century, rapid economic growth spread to the central Hungarian plain and to the Carpathian lands. As a result, wide disparities of development existed within the empire. In general, the western areas became more developed than the eastern ones. The Kingdom of Hungary became the world&#x27;s second-largest flour exporter after the United States. The large Hungarian food exports were not limited to neighbouring Germany and Italy: Hungary became the most important foreign food supplier of the large cities and industrial centres of the United Kingdom. Galicia, which has been described as the poorest province of Austro-Hungary, experienced near-constant famines, resulting in 50,000 deaths a year. The Istro-Romanians of Istria were also poor, as pastoralism lost strength and agriculture was not productive.

However, by the end of the 19th century, economic differences gradually began to even out as economic growth in the eastern parts of the monarchy consistently surpassed that in the western. The strong agriculture and food industry of the Kingdom of Hungary with the centre of Budapest became predominant within the empire and made up a large proportion of the export to the rest of Europe. Meanwhile, western areas, concentrated mainly around Prague and Vienna, excelled in various manufacturing industries. This division of labour between the east and west, besides the existing economic and monetary union, led to an even more rapid economic growth throughout Austria–Hungary by the early 20th century. However, since the turn of the twentieth century, the Austrian half of the Monarchy could preserve its dominance within the empire in the sectors of the Industrial Revolution, but Hungary had a better position in the modern industries of the Second Industrial Revolution, in these modern sectors of the second industrial revolution (like machine building industry and electric industry) the Austrian competition could not become dominant.

==Infrastructure==
===Telecommunications===
====Telegraph====
The first telegraph connection (Vienna—Brno—Prague) had started operation in 1847. In Hungarian territory the first telegraph stations were opened in Pressburg (&quot;Pozsony&quot;, today&#x27;s Bratislava) in December 1847 and in Buda in 1848. The first telegraph connection between Vienna and Pest–Buda (later Budapest) was constructed in 1850, and Vienna–Zagreb in 1850.

Austria subsequently joined a telegraph union with German states. In the Kingdom of Hungary, 2,406 telegraph post offices operated in 1884. By 1914 the number of telegraph offices reached 3,000 in post offices and further 2,400 were installed in the railway stations of the Kingdom of Hungary.

====Telephone====
The first telephone exchange was opened in Zagreb (8 January 1881), the second was in Budapest (1 May 1881), and the third was opened in Vienna (3 June 1881). Initially telephony was available in the homes of individual subscribers, companies and offices. Public telephone stations appeared in the 1890s, and they quickly became widespread in post offices and railway stations. Austria–Hungary had 568 million telephone calls in 1913; only two Western European countries had more phone calls: the German Empire and the United Kingdom. The Austro-Hungarian Empire was followed by France with 396 million telephone calls and Italy with 230 million phone calls. In 1916, there were 366 million telephone calls in Cisleithania, among them 8.4 million long distant calls. All telephone exchanges of the cities, towns and larger villages in Transleithania were linked until 1893. By 1914, more than 2000 settlements had telephone exchange in Kingdom of Hungary.

====Electronic audio broadcasting====

The Telefon Hírmondó (Telephone Herald) news and entertainment service was introduced in Budapest in 1893. Two decades before the introduction of radio broadcasting, people could listen to political, economic and sports news, cabaret, music and opera in Budapest daily. It operated over a special type of telephone exchange system.

===Rail transport===

By 1913, the combined length of the railway tracks of the Austrian Empire and Kingdom of Hungary reached . In Western Europe only Germany had more extended railway network (); the Austro-Hungarian Empire was followed by France (), the United Kingdom (), Italy () and Spain ().

==== Railways in Transleithania====
The first Hungarian steam locomotive railway line was opened on 15 July 1846 between Pest and Vác. In 1890 most large Hungarian private railway companies were nationalized as a consequence of the poor management of private companies, except the strong Austrian-owned Kaschau-Oderberg Railway (KsOd) and the Austrian-Hungarian Southern Railway (SB/DV). They also joined the zone tariff system of the MÁV (Hungarian State Railways). By 1910, the total length of the rail networks of Hungarian Kingdom reached , the Hungarian network linked more than 1,490 settlements. Nearly half (52%) of the empire&#x27;s railways were built in Hungary, thus the railroad density there became higher than that of Cisleithania. This has ranked Hungarian railways the 6th most dense in the world (ahead of Germany and France).

Electrified commuter railways: A set of four electric commuter rai lines were built in Budapest, the BHÉV: Ráckeve line (1887), Szentendre line (1888), Gödöllő line (1888), Csepel line (1912)

====Tramway lines in the cities====
Horse-drawn tramways appeared in the first half of the 19th century. Between the 1850s and 1880s many were built : Vienna (1865), Budapest (1866), Brno (1869), Trieste (1876). Steam trams appeared in the late 1860s. The electrification of tramways started in the late 1880s. The first electrified tramway in Austria–Hungary was built in Budapest in 1887.

Electric tramway lines in the Austrian Empire:
* Austria: Gmunden (1894); Linz, Vienna (1897); Graz (1898); Trieste (1900); Ljubljana (1901); Innsbruck (1905); Unterlach, Ybbs an der Donau (1907); Salzburg (1909); Klagenfurt, Sankt Pölten (1911); Piran (1912)
* Austrian Littoral: Pula (1904).
* Bohemia: Prague (1891); Teplice (1895); Liberec (1897); Ústí nad Labem, Plzeň, Olomouc (1899); Moravia, Brno, Jablonec nad Nisou (1900); Ostrava (1901); Mariánské Lázně (1902); Budějovice, České Budějovice, Jihlava (1909)
* Austrian Silesia: Opava (Troppau) (1905), Cieszyn (Cieszyn) (1911)
* Dalmatia: Dubrovnik (1910)
* Galicia: Lviv (1894), Bielsko-Biała (1895); Kraków (1901); Tarnów, Cieszyn (1911)

Electric tramway lines in the Kingdom of Hungary:
* Hungary: Budapest (1887); Pressburg/Pozsony/Bratislava (1895); Szabadka/Subotica (1897), Szombathely (1897), Miskolc (1897); Temesvár/Timișoara (1899); Sopron (1900); Szatmárnémeti/Satu Mare (1900); Nyíregyháza (1905); Nagyszeben/Sibiu (1905); Nagyvárad/Oradea (1906); Szeged (1908); Debrecen (1911); Újvidék/Novi Sad (1911); Kassa/Košice (1913); Pécs (1913)
* Croatia: Fiume (1899); Pula (1904); Opatija – Lovran (1908); Zagreb (1910); Dubrovnik (1910).

====Underground====
The Budapest Metro Line 1 (originally the &quot;Franz Joseph Underground Electric Railway Company&quot;) is the second oldest underground railway in the world (the first being the London Underground&#x27;s Metropolitan Line and the third being Glasgow), and the first on the European mainland. It was built from 1894 to 1896 and opened on 2 May 1896. In 2002, it was listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The M1 line became an IEEE Milestone due to the radically new innovations in its era: &quot;Among the railway&#x27;s innovative elements were bidirectional tram cars; electric lighting in the subway stations and tram cars; and an overhead wire structure instead of a third-rail system for power&quot;.

===Inland waterways and river regulation===
The first Danubian steamer company, Donaudampfschiffahrtsgesellschaft (DDSG), was the world&#x27;s largest inland shipping company until the collapse of Austria-Hungary.

In 1900 the engineer C. Wagenführer drew up plans to link the Danube and the Adriatic Sea by a canal from Vienna to Trieste. It was born from the desire of Austria–Hungary to have a direct link to the Adriatic Sea but was never constructed.

====Lower Danube and the Iron Gates====

In 1831 a plan had already been drafted to make the passage navigable, at the initiative of the Hungarian politician István Széchenyi. Finally Gábor Baross, Hungary&#x27;s &quot;Iron Minister&quot;, succeeded in financing this project. The riverbed rocks and the associated rapids made the gorge valley an infamous passage for shipping. In German, the passage is still known as the Kataraktenstrecke, even though the cataracts are gone. Near the actual &quot;Iron Gates&quot; strait the Prigrada rock was the most important obstacle until 1896: the river widened considerably here and the water level was consequently low. Upstream, the Greben rock near the &quot;Kazan&quot; gorge was notorious.

====Tisza River====

The length of the Tisza river in Hungary used to be . It flowed through the Great Hungarian Plain, which is one of the largest flat areas in central Europe. Since plains can cause a river to flow very slowly, the Tisza used to follow a path with many curves and turns, which led to many large floods in the area.

After several small-scale attempts, István Széchenyi organised the &quot;regulation of the Tisza&quot; (Hungarian: a Tisza szabályozása) which started on 27 August 1846, and substantially ended in 1880. The new length of the river in Hungary was ( total), with of &quot;dead channels&quot; and of new riverbed. The resultant length of the flood-protected river comprises (out of of all Hungarian protected rivers).

===Shipping and ports===
The most important seaport was Trieste (today part of Italy), where the Austrian merchant marine was based. Two major shipping companies (Austrian Lloyd and Austro-Americana) and several shipyards were located there. From 1815 to 1866, Venice had been part of the Habsburg empire. The loss of Venice prompted the development of the Austrian merchant marine. By 1913, the commercial marine of Austria, comprised 16,764 vessels with a tonnage of 471,252, and crews number-ing 45,567. Of the total (1913) 394 of 422,368 tons were steamers, and 16,370 of 48,884 tons were sailing vessels The Austrian Lloyd was one of the biggest ocean shipping companies of the time. Prior to the beginning of World War I, the company owned 65 middle-sized and large steamers. The Austro-Americana owned one third of this number, including the biggest Austrian passenger ship, the SS &quot;Kaiser Franz Joseph I&quot;. In comparison to the Austrian Lloyd, the Austro-American concentrated on destinations in North and South America. The Austro-Hungarian Navy became much more significant than previously, as industrialization provided sufficient revenues to develop it. Pola (Pula, today part of Croatia) was especially significant for the navy.

The most important seaport for the Hungarian part of the monarchy was Fiume (Rijeka, today part of Croatia), where the Hungarian shipping companies, such as the Adria, operated. The commercial marine of the Kingdom of Hungary in 1913 comprised 545 vessels of 144,433 tons, and crews numbering 3,217. Of the total number of vessels 134,000 of 142,539 tons were steamers, and 411 of 1,894 tons were sailing vessels.

==Military==
The Austro-Hungarian Army was under the command of Archduke Albrecht, Duke of Teschen (1817–1895), an old-fashioned bureaucrat who opposed modernization. The military system of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy was similar in both states, and rested since 1868 upon the principle of the universal and personal obligation of the citizen to bear arms. Its military force was composed of the Common Army; the special armies, namely the Austrian Landwehr, and the Hungarian &quot;Honvéd&quot;, which were separate national institutions, and the Landsturm or levy-en masse. As stated above, the common army stood under the administration of the joint minister of war, while the special armies were under the administration of the respective ministries of national defence. The yearly contingent of recruits for the army was fixed by the military bills voted on by the Austrian and Hungarian parliaments and was generally determined on the basis of the population, according to the last census returns. It amounted in 1905 to 103,100 men, of which Austria furnished 59,211 men, and Hungary 43,889. Besides 10,000 men were annually allotted to the Austrian Landwehr, and 12,500 to the Hungarian Honved. The term of service was two years (three years in the cavalry) with the colours, seven or eight in the reserve and two in the Landwehr; in the case of men not drafted to the active army the same total period of service was spent in various special reserves.

The common minister of war was the head for the administration of all military affairs, except those of the Austrian Landwehr and of the Hungarian Honved, which were committed to the ministries for national defence of the two respective states. But the supreme command of the army was nominally vested in the monarch, who had the power to take all measures regarding the whole army. In practice, the emperor&#x27;s nephew Archduke Albrecht was his chief military advisor and made the policy decisions.

The Austro-Hungarian Navy was mainly a coast defence force, and also included a flotilla of monitors for the Danube. It was administered by the naval department of the ministry of war.

==Successor states==
There were two legal successor states of the former Austro–Hungarian monarchy:
* German Austria (which became the Republic of Austria)
* Hungarian Democratic Republic (which after a few other short-lived intermediaries became the Kingdom of Hungary)

The 1919 Treaties of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (between the victors of World War I and Austria) and Trianon (between the victors and Hungary) regulated the new borders of Austria and Hungary, reducing them to small-sized and landlocked states. The Entente not only assumed without question that the minority peoples wished to leave Austria and Hungary, but allowed them to claim vast territories containing sizeable German- and Hungarian-speaking populations. With this in mind, in regard to areas without a decisive national majority, the Entente powers ruled in many cases in favour of the newly emancipated independent nation-states. The Republic of Austria lost roughly 60% of the old Austrian Empire&#x27;s territory. It also had to drop its plans for union with Germany, as it was not allowed to unite with Germany without League approval. Hungary, however, was severely disrupted by the loss of 72% of its territory, 64% of its population and most of its natural resources. The Hungarian Democratic Republic was short-lived and was temporarily replaced by the communist Hungarian Soviet Republic. Romanian troops ousted Béla Kun and his communist government during the Hungarian–Romanian War of 1919.

In the summer of 1919, a Habsburg, Archduke Joseph August, became regent, but was forced to stand down after only two weeks when it became apparent the Allies would not recognise him. Finally, in March 1920, royal powers were entrusted to a regent, Miklós Horthy, who had been the last commanding admiral of the Austro-Hungarian Navy and had helped organize the counter-revolutionary forces. It was this government that signed the Treaty of Trianon under protest on 4 June 1920 at the Grand Trianon Palace in Versailles, France. The restored Kingdom of Hungary lost roughly 72% of the pre-war territory of the Kingdom of Hungary.

===Habsburg banishment===
Austria had passed the &quot;Habsburg Law&quot;, which both dethroned the Habsburgs and banished all Habsburgs from Austrian territory. While Karl was banned from ever returning to Austria again, other Habsburgs could return if they gave up all claims to the defunct throne. In March and again in October 1921, ill-prepared attempts by Karl to regain the throne in Budapest collapsed. The initially wavering Horthy, after receiving threats of intervention from the Allied Powers and the Little Entente, refused his cooperation. Soon afterward, the Hungarian government nullified the Pragmatic Sanction, effectively dethroning the Habsburgs. Subsequently, the British took custody of Karl and removed him and his family to the Portuguese island of Madeira, where he died the following year.

==Territorial legacy==
===Immediately after World War I===


The following states were formed, re-established or expanded at the dissolution of the former Austro–Hungarian monarchy:
* German Austria (which became the Republic of Austria)
* First Hungarian Republic which became the Hungarian Soviet Republic, subsequently briefly restored and replaced by the Hungarian Republic, ultimately transformed into the Kingdom of Hungary
* First Czechoslovak Republic, later &quot;Czechoslovakia&quot;
* Second Polish Republic, contested by the short-lived proto-states of Tarnobrzeg Republic and Polish Soviet Socialist Republic
* State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs and the Kingdom of Serbia, both later absorbed into the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes
* Greater Romania
* Kingdom of Italy
* Republic of China (former Austro-Hungarian concession of Tianjin)
* the short-lived Ruthenian (Ukrainian and Rusyn) proto-states of West Ukrainian People&#x27;s Republic (later absorbed into Ukrainian People&#x27;s Republic), Hutsul Republic, Lemko Republic, Komancza Republic and the Galician Soviet Socialist Republic; all were ultimately absorbed mostly into Poland, but also into Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Romania and Yugoslavia.

The Principality of Liechtenstein, which had formerly looked to Vienna for protection and whose ruling house held sizable real estate in Cisleithania, formed a customs and defense union with Switzerland, and adopted the Swiss currency instead of the Austrian. In April 1919, Vorarlberg – the westernmost province of Austria – voted by a large majority to join Switzerland; however, both the Swiss and the Allies disregarded this result.

===Present===
The following present-day countries and parts of countries were within the boundaries of Austria–Hungary when the empire was dissolved. Some other provinces of Europe had been part of the Habsburg monarchy at one time before 1867.

Empire of Austria (Cisleithania):
* Austria (except Burgenland without Sopron)
* Czech Republic (except the Hlučínsko area)
* Slovenia (except Prekmurje)
* Italy (Trentino, South Tyrol, parts of the province of Belluno and small portions of Friuli-Venezia Giulia)
* Croatia (Dalmatia, Istria)
* Poland (voivodeships of Lesser Poland, Subcarpathia, southernmost part of Silesia (Bielsko and Cieszyn))
* Ukraine (oblasts of Lviv, Ivano-Frankivsk, Ternopil (except its northern corner) and most of the oblast of Chernivtsi)
* Romania (county of Suceava)
* Montenegro (bay of Boka Kotorska, the coast and the immediate hinterland around the cities of Budva, Petrovac and Sutomore)

Kingdom of Hungary (Transleithania):
* Hungary
* Slovakia
* Austria (Burgenland except Sopron)
* Slovenia (Prekmurje)
* Croatia (Croatian Baranja and Međimurje county, Fiume as &quot;corpus separatum&quot; along with Slavonia and Central Croatia were not part of Hungary proper, the latter two were part of the sovereign Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia)
* Ukraine (oblast of Zakarpattia)
* Romania (region of Transylvania, Partium and parts of Banat, Crișana, and Maramureș)
* Serbia (autonomous province of Vojvodina and northern Belgrade region)
* Poland (Polish parts of Orava and Spiš)

Austro-Hungarian Condominium
* Bosnia and Herzegovina (the villages of Zavalje, Mali Skočaj and Veliki Skočaj including the immediate surrounding area west of the city of Bihać)
* Montenegro (Sutorina – western part of the Municipality of Herceg Novi between present borders with Croatia (SW) and Bosnia and Herzegovina (NW), Adriatic coast (E) and the township of Igalo (NE))
* Sandžak-Raška region, Austro-Hungarian occupied 1878 until withdrawal in 1908 whilst formally part of the Ottoman Empire
* The Empire treated Bosnia-Herzegovina in much the same way the other powers treated their overseas colonies

Other possessions of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy
* People&#x27;s Republic of China (former Austro-Hungarian concession of Tianjin)

==See also==
* Aftermath of World War I
* Austrian nobility
* Corporative federalism, a form of administration adopted by the Austro-Hungarian Empire
* Diplomatic history of World War I
* Austro-Hungarian entry into World War I
* Ethnic composition of Austria–Hungary
* Former countries in Europe after 1815
* Hungarian nobility
* Lands of the Bohemian Crown (1867–1918)
* United States of Greater Austria

==Notes==
==References==
=== Sources ===

* 
* 



* 
* 

* ; highly detailed history; emphasis on ethnicity




* 
* 
* 


* ; politics and diplomacy


* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* online
* 
* 
* Good, David. &quot;The Economic Rise of the Habsburg Empire&quot; (1984)
* Herman, Arthur. &quot;What Life Was Like: At Empire&#x27;s End : Austro-Hungarian Empire 1848–1918&quot; (Time Life, 2000)
* Jelavich, Barbara. &quot;Modern Austria: Empire and Republic, 1815–1986&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 1987, pp. 72–150.
* Johnston, William M. &quot;The Austrian Mind: An Intellectual and Social History, 1848–1938&quot; (University of California Press, 1972)
* Macartney, Carlile Aylmer &quot;The Habsburg Empire, 1790–1918&quot;, New York, Macmillan 1969.
* Mason, John W. &quot;The Dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, 1867–1918&quot; (Routledge, 2014).
* May, Arthur J. &quot;The Hapsburg Monarchy 1867–1914&quot; (Harvard University Press, 1951). online
* Milward, Alan, and S. B. Saul. &quot;The Development of the Economies of Continental Europe 1850–1914&quot; (1977) pp. 271–331. online
* Palmer, Alan. &quot;Twilight of the Habsburgs: The Life and Times of Emperor Francis Joseph&quot;. New York: Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 1995. 
* Redlich, Joseph. &quot;Emperor Francis Joseph Of Austria&quot;. New York: Macmillan, 1929. online free
* Rudolph, Richard L. &quot;Banking and industrialization in Austria-Hungary: the role of banks in the industrialization of the Czech crownlands, 1873–1914&quot; (1976) online
* Sauer, Walter. &quot;Habsburg Colonial: Austria-Hungary&#x27;s Role in European Overseas Expansion Reconsidered&quot;, &quot;Austrian Studies&quot; (2012) 20:5–23 ONLINE 
* Tschuppik, Karl. &quot;The reign of the Emperor Fransis Joseph&quot; (1930) online
* Turnock, David. &quot;Eastern Europe: An Historical Geography: 1815–1945&quot; (1989)
* Usher, Roland G. &quot;Austro-German Relations Since 1866.&quot; &quot;American Historical Review&quot; 23.3 (1918): 577–595 online.
* Várdy, Steven, and Agnes Várdy. &quot;The Austro-Hungarian mind: at home and abroad&quot; (East European Monographs, 1989)
* Vermes, Gabor. &quot;The Impact of the Dual Alliance on the Magyars of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy&quot; &quot;East Central Europe&quot; (1980) vol 7 DOI: 10.1163/187633080x00211
* 

===World war===

* Bassett, Richard. &quot;For God and Kaiser: The Imperial Austrian Army, 1619–1918&quot; (2016)
* 
* 
* Crankshaw, Edward. &quot;The Fall of the House of Habsburg&quot; (Viking, 1963). pp. 449.
* Deak, John, and Jonathan E. Gumz. &quot;How to Break a State: The Habsburg Monarchy&#x27;s Internal War, 1914–1918&quot; &quot;American Historical Review&quot; 122.4 (2017): 1105–1136. online 
* 
* 
* online
* 
* 
* Kronenbitter, Günther. &quot;Pre-war Military Planning (Austria–Hungary).&quot; online 
* Sked, Alan. &quot;Austria–Hungary and the First World War.&quot; &quot;Histoire@ Politique&quot; 1 (2014): 16–49. Online 
* Tunstall, Graydon A. &quot;Austro-Hungarian Army and the First World War&quot; (Cambridge University Press 2021) online review 
* Vermes, Gabor &quot;István Tisza: The Liberal Vision and Conservative Statecraft of a Magyar Nationalist&quot; (Columbia University Press, 1986); online review 
* 

===Primary sources===
* Austro-Hungarian Monarchy. &quot; Austro-Hungarian red book.&quot; (1915) English translations of official documents to justify the war. online
* Gooch, G. P. &quot;Recent Revelations of European Diplomacy&quot; (1940), pp. 103–159 summarizes memoirs of major participants
* Steed, Henry Wickham. &quot;The Hapsburg monarchy&quot; (1919) online detailed contemporary account

===Historiography and memory===
* Boyd, Kelly, ed. &quot;Encyclopedia of Historians and Historical Writers&quot; (Rutledge, 1999) 1:60–63, historiography
* Körner, Axel. &quot;Beyond Nation States: New Perspectives on the Habsburg Empire.&quot; &quot;European History Quarterly&quot; 48.3 (2018): 516–533. online 
* 
* Sked, Alan. &quot;Explaining the Habsburg Empire, 1830–90.&quot; in Pamela Pilbeam, ed., &quot;Themes in Modern European History 1830–1890&quot; (Routledge, 2002) pp. 141–176.
* Sked, Alan. &quot;Austria–Hungary and the First World War.&quot; &quot;Histoire Politique&quot; 1 (2014): 16–49. online free historiography

===In German===
* &quot;&quot;. (ed.: Rudolf Rothaug), K. u. k. Hof-Kartographische Anstalt G. Freytag &amp; Berndt, Vienna, 1911.
==External links==
* Articles relating to Austria–Hungary at the International Encyclopedia of the First World War.
* Habsburg Empire Austrian line
* Microsoft Encarta: The height of the dual monarchy (Archived 31 October 2009)
* The Austro-Hungarian Military
* Heraldry of the Austro-Hungarian Empire
* – extensive list of heads of state, ministers, and ambassadors
* History of Austro-Hungarian currency
* Austria–Hungary, Dual Monarchy
* Map of Europe and the collapse of Austria–Hungary at omniatlas.com
* Mangham, Arthur Neal. The Social Bases of Austrian Politics: The German Electoral Districts of Cisleithania, 1900–1914. Ph.D. thesis 1974
* Austro-Hungarian Land Forces 1848–1918 
* Oldphoto.info – Austro-Hungarian Imperial and Royal Army
* HABSBURG is an email discussion list dealing with the culture and history of the Habsburg monarchy and its successor states in central Europe since 1500, with discussions, syllabi, book reviews, queries, conferences; edited daily by scholars since 1994</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="0" end="15" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="41" end="65" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire,"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="70" end="83" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Dual Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="91" end="108" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Habsburg Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="131" end="154" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="158" end="172" title="Central Europe#Before World War I" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q166877" start="311" end="329" title="Emperor of Austria" label="Emperor of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412254" start="334" end="349" title="King of Hungary" label="King of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="433" end="450" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209601" start="475" end="510" title="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867" label="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="535" end="554" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="661" end="710" title="Dissolution of Austria-Hungary#Dissolution" label="Hungary terminated the union with Austria in 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="855" end="861" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="870" end="883" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q609233" start="1069" end="1088" title="Austro-Hungarian rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnian Condominium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994894" start="1216" end="1229" title="dual monarchy" label="dual monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093720" start="1243" end="1253" title="real union" label="real union"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="1262" end="1274" title="Cisleithania" label="Cisleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="1321" end="1336" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="1342" end="1377" title="Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen" label="Transleithania (Kingdom of Hungary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="1815" end="1842" title="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia" label="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q195384" start="1913" end="1942" title="Croatian–Hungarian Settlement" label="Croatian–Hungarian Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q609233" start="1964" end="2047" title="Austro-Hungarian rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina came under Austro-Hungarian joint military and civilian rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q167246" start="2098" end="2112" title="Bosnian crisis" label="Bosnian crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="2146" end="2160" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2164" end="2175" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="2237" end="2254" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58672" start="2299" end="2308" title="Dissolution of Austria-Hungary" label="dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q701518" start="2357" end="2382" title="armistice of Villa Giusti" label="armistice of Villa Giusti"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="2407" end="2425" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q518101" start="2434" end="2457" title="First Austrian Republic" label="First Austrian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054283" start="2478" end="2508" title="succession of states" label="successors &amp;quot;de jure&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q140359" start="2542" end="2569" title="First Czechoslovak Republic" label="First Czechoslovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="2575" end="2597" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="2607" end="2628" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="2687" end="2705" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="2714" end="2730" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="3260" end="3318" title="Cisleithania" label="The Kingdoms and Lands Represented in the Imperial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="3327" end="3375" title="Lands of the Crown of Saint Stephen" label="Lands of the Holy Hungarian Crown of St. Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="3379" end="3385" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="3390" end="3399" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q265411" start="3547" end="3565" title="Imperial and Royal" label="Imperial and Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721672" start="3840" end="3854" title="Imperial-Royal" label="Imperial-Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="3888" end="3900" title="Cisleithania" label="Cisleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q686971" start="3960" end="3976" title="Lands of the Bohemian Crown" label="Crown of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="4057" end="4071" title="Transleithania" label="Transleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="4114" end="4145" title="Kingdom of Croatia and Slavonia" label="Kingdom of Croatia and Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q195384" start="4254" end="4283" title="Croatian–Hungarian Settlement" label="Croatian–Hungarian Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="4340" end="4348" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178510" start="4777" end="4793" title="Battle of Mohács" label="Battle of Mohács"/>
<link wikidata="Q211395" start="5105" end="5126" title="Treaty of Passarowitz" label="Treaty of Passarowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q690959" start="5238" end="5257" title="Revolutions of 1848 in the Austrian Empire" label="revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="5354" end="5369" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="5383" end="5411" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="5454" end="5461" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q540978" start="5731" end="5765" title="Second Italian War of Independence" label="Second Italian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q209857" start="5822" end="5838" title="Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia" label="Lombardy, Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q252580" start="5840" end="5854" title="Duchy of Modena and Reggio" label="Modena, Reggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="5856" end="5863" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q165040" start="5865" end="5883" title="Duchy of Parma and Piacenza" label="Parma and Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="5905" end="5924" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="5963" end="5983" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q508823" start="6380" end="6391" title="Ferenc Deák (politician)" label="Ferenc Deák"/>
<link wikidata="Q898702" start="6428" end="6438" title="April Laws" label="April Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q313102" start="6485" end="6511" title="Pragmatic Sanction of 1713" label="Pragmatic Sanction of 1713"/>
<link wikidata="Q700757" start="6617" end="6652" title="Diet of Hungary" label="re-established Hungarian parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q210205" start="6656" end="6660" title="Pest, Hungary" label="Pest"/>
<link wikidata="Q51081" start="6919" end="6940" title="Holy Crown of Hungary" label="Holy Crown of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="7141" end="7160" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q168268" start="7178" end="7200" title="Peace of Prague (1866)" label="Peace of Prague (1866)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522713" start="7225" end="7240" title="German question" label="German question"/>
<link wikidata="Q696590" start="7261" end="7283" title="Lesser Germany" label="Lesser German Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q387614" start="7285" end="7320" title="Friedrich Ferdinand von Beust" label="Count Friedrich Ferdinand von Beust"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="7401" end="7418" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="7556" end="7568" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="7707" end="7726" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q182267" start="8658" end="8668" title="Pan-Slavic" label="Pan-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="9027" end="9030" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q194113" start="9109" end="9130" title="Treaty of San Stefano" label="Treaty of San Stefano"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="9435" end="9452" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="9612" end="9622" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131465267" start="10516" end="10532" title="Greater Bulgaria" label="Greater Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944158" start="11262" end="11280" title="defensive alliance" label="defensive alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q153867" start="11380" end="11395" title="Triple Alliance (1882)" label="Triple Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q567712" start="11544" end="11572" title="League of the Three Emperors" label="League of the Three Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q656545" start="11582" end="11600" title="Reinsurance Treaty" label="Reinsurance Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q579132" start="11688" end="11713" title="Sandžak" label="Sandžak-Raška / Novibazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q386496" start="11878" end="11888" title="Kingdom of Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="11893" end="11899" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167246" start="12042" end="12088" title="Austro-Hungarian annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina in October 1908"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12169" end="12206" title="Ministry of Finance (Austria-Hungary)" label="Imperial &amp;amp; Royal finance ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="12462" end="12472" title="Maximilian I of Mexico" label="Maximilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q152923" start="12499" end="12505" title="Rudolf, Crown Prince of Austria" label="Rudolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q43063" start="12539" end="12554" title="Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="Franz Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13109" end="13123" title="Bosnian Crisis#Buchlau Bargain" label="Bosnian Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q542902" start="13185" end="13210" title="Alois Lexa von Aehrenthal" label="Alois Lexa von Aehrenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q463739" start="13215" end="13233" title="Alexander Izvolsky" label="Alexander Izvolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q192050" start="14349" end="14379" title="assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria" label="assassinated the Austrian heir"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="14541" end="14549" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15285397" start="14761" end="14788" title="Anti-Serb riots of Sarajevo" label="anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="14819" end="14834" title="Bosnian Muslims" label="Bosnian Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q47561" start="14896" end="14906" title="Ivo Andrić" label="Ivo Andrić"/>
<link wikidata="Q15276646" start="15419" end="15430" title="Schutzkorps" label="Schutzkorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q93371" start="15564" end="15587" title="Count Leopold Berchtold" label="Count Leopold Berchtold"/>
<link wikidata="Q78521" start="15607" end="15640" title="Count Franz Conrad von Hötzendorf" label="Count Franz Conrad von Hötzendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q336493" start="15775" end="15787" title="István Tisza" label="István Tisza"/>
<link wikidata="Q473847" start="15866" end="15881" title="László Szőgyény-Marich Jr." label="László Szőgyény"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="15885" end="15892" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="15956" end="15966" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3548032" start="16213" end="16227" title="July Ultimatum" label="July Ultimatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="16758" end="16763" title="Italian Empire" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177859" start="16875" end="16889" title="Triple Entente" label="Entente powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="17746" end="17753" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q446711" start="18008" end="18049" title="Archduke Friedrich, Duke of Teschen" label="Archduke Friedrich von Österreich-Teschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="20265" end="20287" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q877228" start="20577" end="20589" title="Green Cadres" label="Green Cadres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="21160" end="21181" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="21658" end="21666" title="Brindisi" label="Brindisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="21671" end="21676" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262377" start="22097" end="22113" title="Macedonian front" label="Macedonian front"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="22205" end="22218" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645068" start="22320" end="22346" title="Supreme National Committee" label="Supreme National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q685455" start="22435" end="22449" title="Polish Legions in World War I" label="Polish Legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q659246" start="22563" end="22580" title="Battle of Galicia" label="Battle of Lemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q698828" start="22612" end="22633" title="Siege of Przemyśl" label="Przemyśl was besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q670489" start="22662" end="22686" title="Gorlice–Tarnów Offensive" label="Gorlice–Tarnów Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q221967" start="23231" end="23249" title="Brusilov Offensive" label="Brusilov Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="23585" end="23593" title="materiel" label="materiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="23668" end="23686" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534916" start="23752" end="23769" title="Act of 5 November" label="Act of 5 November"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="23802" end="23807" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="23832" end="23842" title="Wilhelm II of Germany" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q696908" start="23929" end="23946" title="Kingdom of Poland (1916-1918)" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="23971" end="23986" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="24019" end="24031" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308003" start="24107" end="24122" title="Regency Council (Poland)" label="Regency Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="24228" end="24243" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="war with Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="24259" end="24288" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="Armistice of 11 November 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q23037160" start="24460" end="24471" title="proto state" label="proto state"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="24487" end="24509" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q697697" start="24616" end="24639" title="Battle of Zborov (1917)" label="Battle of Zborov (1917)"/>
<link wikidata="Q605324" start="24680" end="24700" title="Czechoslovak Legions" label="Czechoslovak Legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q112119463" start="25131" end="25145" title="Chief of Staff" label="Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q333809" start="25146" end="25159" title="Luigi Cadorna" label="Luigi Cadorna"/>
<link wikidata="Q202760" start="25189" end="25195" title="Isonzo" label="Isonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257793" start="25278" end="25296" title="Royal Italian Army" label="Royal Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q681517" start="25329" end="25341" title="Battles of the Isonzo" label="four battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q298614" start="25543" end="25558" title="Battle of Asiago" label="Strafexpedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q582956" start="25572" end="25591" title="punitive expedition" label="punitive expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q47066" start="25655" end="25669" title="Asiago plateau" label="Asiago plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q625139" start="25793" end="25798" title="Carso" label="Carso"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="25883" end="25897" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="25923" end="25936" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western front"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="25990" end="26010" title="Bolshevik Revolution" label="Bolshevik Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="26019" end="26062" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk (Russia–Central Powers)" label="Russians ended their involvement in the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q242644" start="26285" end="26294" title="Battle of Caporetto" label="Caporetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q213462" start="26462" end="26467" title="Piave (river)" label="Piave"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="26552" end="26572" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q297793" start="26579" end="26604" title="Vittorio Emanuele Orlando" label="Vittorio Emanuele Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q333778" start="26832" end="26844" title="Armando Diaz" label="Armando Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q662947" start="26921" end="26953" title="Second Battle of the Piave River" label="Second Battle of the Piave River"/>
<link wikidata="Q662961" start="27064" end="27079" title="Battle of Vittorio Veneto" label="Vittorio Veneto"/>
<link wikidata="Q701518" start="27140" end="27152" title="Armistice of Villa Giusti" label="Villa Giusti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558747" start="27274" end="27287" title="Romanian Land Forces" label="Romanian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q208629" start="27551" end="27558" title="Oltenia" label="Oltenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207388" start="27560" end="27568" title="Muntenia" label="Muntenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="27573" end="27580" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="27645" end="27654" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q209754" start="27791" end="27799" title="Western Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="27895" end="27899" title="Iași" label="Iași"/>
<link wikidata="Q522120" start="28750" end="28763" title="István Burián" label="István Burián"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="30067" end="30078" title="German Army (German Empire)" label="German army"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="31516" end="31530" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q157648" start="31538" end="31553" title="Fourteen Points" label="Fourteen Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q361366" start="31819" end="31833" title="Robert Lansing" label="Robert Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="31948" end="31983" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovak provisional government"/>
<link wikidata="Q594231" start="32161" end="32178" title="Corfu Declaration" label="Corfu Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090933" start="32204" end="32222" title="Yugoslav Committee" label="Yugoslav Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="32897" end="32932" title="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="33019" end="33043" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="a large South Slav state"/>
<link wikidata="Q648716" start="33191" end="33211" title="Hungarian Parliament" label="Hungarian Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q346703" start="33334" end="33348" title="Mihály Károlyi" label="Mihály Károlyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q689527" start="33370" end="33386" title="Aster Revolution" label="Aster Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q112023" start="33957" end="33974" title="Heinrich Lammasch" label="Heinrich Lammasch"/>
<link wikidata="Q268970" start="34506" end="34532" title="Republic of German Austria" label="Republic of German Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q516160" start="34588" end="34617" title="Hungarian Democratic Republic" label="Hungarian Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209601" start="34641" end="34659" title="Austro-Hungarian Compromise of 1867" label="Compromise of 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q645719" start="34671" end="34679" title="House of Habsburg-Lorraine" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093720" start="34695" end="34705" title="real union" label="real union"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="34718" end="34733" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="34793" end="34805" title="Cisleithania" label="Cisleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="34848" end="34866" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="34920" end="34934" title="Transleithania" label="Transleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q14161696" start="35288" end="35299" title="Common Army" label="Common Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q159211" start="35301" end="35305" title="Austro-Hungarian Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="35615" end="35626" title="parliament" label="parliaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="35646" end="35660" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q700757" start="35666" end="35681" title="Diet of Hungary" label="Diet of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q697775" start="35732" end="35748" title="Imperial Council (Austria)" label="Imperial Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q609233" start="35858" end="35935" title="Austro-Hungarian rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina came under Austro-Hungarian military and civilian rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q167246" start="35986" end="36000" title="Bosnian crisis" label="Bosnian crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="36068" end="36074" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q779011" start="36079" end="36089" title="Principality of Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q380552" start="36723" end="36744" title="constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161970" start="36821" end="36835" title="Military of Hungary" label="Hungarian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="38313" end="38324" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="39038" end="39050" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="(gymnasiums)"/>
<link wikidata="Q847213" start="39054" end="39060" title="Revúca" label="Revúca"/>
<link wikidata="Q27001" start="39073" end="39096" title="Martin, Slovakia" label="Turčiansky Svätý Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q764320" start="39120" end="39139" title="Kláštor pod Znievom" label="Kláštor pod Znievom"/>
<link wikidata="Q697799" start="39607" end="39633" title="Count Kasimir Felix Badeni" label="Count Kasimir Felix Badeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416790" start="39950" end="39962" title="Social equality" label="equal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="39969" end="39986" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="40050" end="40066" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q79069" start="40106" end="40124" title="Count Anton Alexander von Auersperg" label="Count A. Auersperg"/>
<link wikidata="Q193474" start="40163" end="40171" title="Carniola" label="Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q461183" start="40213" end="40219" title="text corpus" label="corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933509" start="40223" end="40241" title="Slovene literature" label="Slovene literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="40290" end="40306" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene language"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="40532" end="40540" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q437" start="40633" end="40652" title="Ljubljana" label="Laibach (Ljubljana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396442" start="40724" end="40731" title="Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="40850" end="40864" title="private school" label="private school"/>
<link wikidata="Q843725" start="40905" end="40986" title="Magyarization" label="after the fourth grade, the pupils could express themselves fluently in Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q593682" start="41132" end="41152" title="sphere of influence" label="spheres of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859025" start="41167" end="41179" title="Misha Glenny" label="Misha Glenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="41694" end="41700" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="42058" end="42064" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q43453" start="42069" end="42075" title="Plzeň" label="Pilsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="42136" end="42148" title="Brno" label="Brno (Brünn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="42159" end="42187" title="Charles University in Prague" label="Charles University in Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="42375" end="42384" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="42388" end="42400" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="42420" end="42425" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q171336" start="42427" end="42434" title="Slovaks" label="Slovaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="42451" end="42459" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="42465" end="42471" title="Croats" label="Croats"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="42476" end="42481" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="42504" end="42511" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="42612" end="42621" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="42645" end="42651" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="42793" end="42800" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q533558" start="43287" end="43314" title="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia" label="Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q871942" start="43371" end="43403" title="Trialism in Austria-Hungary" label="trialist Austro-Hungaro-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q698051" start="43452" end="43477" title="Archduke Leopold Salvator of Austria" label="Archduke Leopold Salvator"/>
<link wikidata="Q51068" start="43525" end="43534" title="Charles I of Austria" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q336493" start="43646" end="43658" title="István Tisza" label="István Tisza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234139" start="43793" end="43799" title="Margraviate of Istria" label="Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295763" start="43805" end="43820" title="Istro-Romanians" label="Istro-Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275057" start="44214" end="44228" title="Diet of Istria" label="Diet of Istria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175034" start="44284" end="44292" title="deputies" label="deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="44470" end="44477" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059" start="44524" end="44527" title="Krk" label="Krk"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="44695" end="44703" title="populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="44708" end="44719" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q692131" start="44736" end="44758" title="Christian Social Party (Austria)" label="Christian Social Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="44795" end="44807" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="44815" end="44821" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="44926" end="44933" title="pogroms" label="pogroms"/>
<link wikidata="Q766875" start="45000" end="45015" title="ethnic violence" label="ethnic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="45035" end="45052" title="minority group" label="ethnic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q609042" start="45314" end="45321" title="shtetls" label="shtetls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396442" start="45332" end="45339" title="Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="45508" end="45512" title="Lwów" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="46266" end="46284" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462335" start="47039" end="47054" title="Vilmos Vázsonyi" label="Vilmos Vázsonyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q257322" start="47079" end="47089" title="Samu Hazai" label="Samu Hazai"/>
<link wikidata="Q513058" start="47110" end="47124" title="János Teleszky" label="János Teleszky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47149" end="47163" title="János Harkányi" label="János Harkányi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47190" end="47206" title="József Szterényi" label="József Szterényi"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="47337" end="47355" title="Charles University" label="Charles University"/>
<link wikidata="Q155669" start="47372" end="47390" title="Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor Charles IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q189441" start="47447" end="47470" title="Jagiellonian University" label="Jagiellonian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="47486" end="47492" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q53457" start="47515" end="47536" title="Casimir III the Great" label="Casimir III the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="47570" end="47590" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q156404" start="47607" end="47622" title="Rudolf IV, Duke of Austria" label="Duke Rudolph IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q80207" start="48281" end="48299" title="University of Lwów" label="University of Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q53998" start="50293" end="50311" title="Louis I of Hungary" label="Louis I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188634" start="50482" end="50498" title="Mattias Corvinus" label="Mattias Corvinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q762702" start="52704" end="52724" title="Technological change" label="Technological change"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="52737" end="52754" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="52759" end="52771" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q698535" start="52812" end="52824" title="Wiener Börse" label="Wiener Börse"/>
<link wikidata="Q851259" start="52912" end="52935" title="Budapest Stock Exchange" label="Budapest Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="52973" end="52985" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q303713" start="53769" end="53774" title="Austro-Hungarian krone" label="krone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="53803" end="53812" title="GDP (PPP)" label="GDP (PPP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q550207" start="53841" end="53850" title="Int$" label="1990 Int$"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057397" start="53886" end="53908" title="Measures of national income and output" label="gross national product"/>
<link wikidata="Q83857" start="54982" end="54997" title="Great Hungarian Plain" label="Hungarian plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836238" start="55586" end="55593" title="Famines in Austrian Galicia" label="famines"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056738" start="55679" end="55690" title="pastoralism" label="pastoralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q540912" start="55959" end="55972" title="food industry" label="food industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="56018" end="56026" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q207449" start="56255" end="56273" title="division of labour" label="division of labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q825026" start="56322" end="56349" title="economic and monetary union" label="economic and monetary union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="56600" end="56621" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q217200" start="56689" end="56717" title="Second Industrial Revolution" label="Second Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="57099" end="57108" title="Pressburg" label="Pressburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q193478" start="57180" end="57184" title="Buda" label="Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q256132" start="57647" end="57665" title="telephone exchange" label="telephone exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696161" start="58637" end="58653" title="Telefon Hírmondó" label="Telefon Hírmondó"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="59098" end="59112" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q207408" start="59396" end="59399" title="Vác" label="Vác"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="60124" end="60137" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q723245" start="60213" end="60217" title="BHÉV" label="BHÉV"/>
<link wikidata="Q755701" start="60219" end="60226" title="Ráckeve" label="Ráckeve"/>
<link wikidata="Q390798" start="60240" end="60250" title="Szentendre" label="Szentendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q209988" start="60264" end="60271" title="Gödöllő" label="Gödöllő"/>
<link wikidata="Q613220" start="60285" end="60291" title="Csepel" label="Csepel"/>
<link wikidata="Q832003" start="60341" end="60360" title="Horse-drawn tramway" label="Horse-drawn tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="60839" end="60848" title="Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656" start="60978" end="60982" title="Pula" label="Pula"/>
<link wikidata="Q43453" start="61065" end="61070" title="Plzeň" label="Plzeň"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="61088" end="61095" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="61097" end="61101" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q8385" start="61130" end="61137" title="Ostrava" label="Ostrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q523469" start="61146" end="61161" title="Mariánské Lázně" label="Mariánské Lázně"/>
<link wikidata="Q16506" start="61182" end="61198" title="České Budějovice" label="České Budějovice"/>
<link wikidata="Q156080" start="61235" end="61240" title="Opava" label="Opava"/>
<link wikidata="Q321197" start="61259" end="61266" title="Cieszyn" label="Cieszyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="61296" end="61305" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566611" start="61324" end="61328" title="Trams in Lviv" label="Lviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q106583" start="61337" end="61350" title="Bielsko-Biała" label="Bielsko-Biała"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="61494" end="61504" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q170287" start="61522" end="61530" title="Subotica" label="Subotica"/>
<link wikidata="Q42007" start="61539" end="61550" title="Szombathely" label="Szombathely"/>
<link wikidata="Q102397" start="61559" end="61566" title="Miskolc" label="Miskolc"/>
<link wikidata="Q83404" start="61584" end="61593" title="Timișoara" label="Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q168648" start="61602" end="61608" title="Sopron" label="Sopron"/>
<link wikidata="Q185332" start="61631" end="61640" title="Satu Mare" label="Satu Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q171223" start="61649" end="61660" title="Nyíregyháza" label="Nyíregyháza"/>
<link wikidata="Q83324" start="61680" end="61685" title="Sibiu" label="Sibiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q93358" start="61704" end="61710" title="Oradea" label="Oradea"/>
<link wikidata="Q81581" start="61719" end="61725" title="Szeged" label="Szeged"/>
<link wikidata="Q79880" start="61734" end="61742" title="Debrecen" label="Debrecen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630" start="61759" end="61767" title="Novi Sad" label="Novi Sad"/>
<link wikidata="Q25409" start="61782" end="61788" title="Košice" label="Košice"/>
<link wikidata="Q45779" start="61797" end="61801" title="Pécs" label="Pécs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="61820" end="61825" title="Fiume" label="Fiume"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656" start="61834" end="61838" title="Pula" label="Pula"/>
<link wikidata="Q223353" start="61847" end="61854" title="Opatija" label="Opatija"/>
<link wikidata="Q757311" start="61857" end="61863" title="Lovran" label="Lovran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435" start="61872" end="61878" title="Zagreb" label="Zagreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722" start="61887" end="61896" title="Dubrovnik" label="Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q211044" start="61930" end="61944" title="Budapest Metro" label="Budapest Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078111" start="61945" end="61951" title="Line 1 (Budapest Metro)" label="Line 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="62305" end="62311" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="62312" end="62331" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="62355" end="62359" title="IEEE" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q697026" start="62716" end="62749" title="Donaudampfschiffahrtsgesellschaft" label="Donaudampfschiffahrtsgesellschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="62913" end="62919" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="62928" end="62940" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q279397" start="63251" end="63267" title="István Széchenyi" label="István Széchenyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q450178" start="63277" end="63289" title="Gábor Baross" label="Gábor Baross"/>
<link wikidata="Q207376" start="63593" end="63603" title="Iron Gates" label="Iron Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q134350" start="63871" end="63876" title="Tisza" label="Tisza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647" start="65912" end="65918" title="Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="66267" end="66288" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austro-Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q310807" start="66314" end="66348" title="Archduke Albrecht, Duke of Teschen" label="Archduke Albrecht, Duke of Teschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14161696" start="66648" end="66659" title="Common Army" label="Common Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q310254" start="66692" end="66709" title="Imperial-Royal Landwehr" label="Austrian Landwehr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718236" start="66719" end="66747" title="Royal Hungarian Honvéd" label="Hungarian &amp;quot;Honvéd&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q699838" start="66800" end="66809" title="Landsturm" label="Landsturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q159211" start="68221" end="68242" title="Austro-Hungarian Navy" label="Austro-Hungarian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054283" start="68445" end="68461" title="Succession of states" label="successor states"/>
<link wikidata="Q268970" start="68505" end="68519" title="German Austria" label="German Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q518101" start="68538" end="68557" title="First Austrian Republic" label="Republic of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q516160" start="68561" end="68590" title="Hungarian Democratic Republic" label="Hungarian Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="68654" end="68672" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q192924" start="68696" end="68717" title="Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye (1919)" label="Saint-Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q181902" start="68771" end="68778" title="Treaty of Trianon" label="Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q518101" start="69312" end="69331" title="First Austrian Republic" label="Republic of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q243652" start="69748" end="69773" title="Hungarian Soviet Republic" label="Hungarian Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q151646" start="69798" end="69806" title="Béla Kun" label="Béla Kun"/>
<link wikidata="Q252298" start="69847" end="69877" title="Hungarian–Romanian War of 1919" label="Hungarian–Romanian War of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q78535" start="69915" end="69937" title="Archduke Joseph August of Austria" label="Archduke Joseph August"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="70121" end="70127" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q117144" start="70129" end="70142" title="Miklós Horthy" label="Miklós Horthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="70177" end="70184" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q8049" start="70365" end="70385" title="Grand Trianon" label="Grand Trianon Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="70389" end="70399" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="70413" end="70440" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="restored Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q316002" start="70566" end="70578" title="Habsburg Law" label="Habsburg Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382589" start="70881" end="70910" title="Charles I of Austria&amp;#x27;s attempts to retake the throne of Hungary" label="regain the throne in Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q733951" start="71024" end="71038" title="Little Entente" label="Little Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="71284" end="71291" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q268970" start="71512" end="71526" title="German Austria" label="German Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q518101" start="71545" end="71564" title="First Austrian Republic" label="Republic of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q516160" start="71568" end="71592" title="First Hungarian Republic" label="First Hungarian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q243652" start="71610" end="71635" title="Hungarian Soviet Republic" label="Hungarian Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985296" start="71687" end="71705" title="Hungarian Republic (1919–1920)" label="Hungarian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q600018" start="71739" end="71757" title="Kingdom of Hungary (1920–1946)" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q140359" start="71760" end="71787" title="First Czechoslovak Republic" label="First Czechoslovak Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="71824" end="71846" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23037160" start="71877" end="71888" title="proto-state" label="proto-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q303836" start="71893" end="71912" title="Tarnobrzeg Republic" label="Tarnobrzeg Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24948646" start="71917" end="71949" title="Polish Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Polish Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q718374" start="71952" end="71987" title="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs" label="State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="71996" end="72013" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="72044" end="72081" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q581325" start="72084" end="72099" title="Greater Romania" label="Greater Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="72102" end="72118" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="72121" end="72138" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q10940053" start="72147" end="72185" title="Austro-Hungarian concession of Tianjin" label="Austro-Hungarian concession of Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23037160" start="72237" end="72248" title="proto-state" label="proto-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q457167" start="72253" end="72290" title="West Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="West Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q243610" start="72312" end="72344" title="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q950101" start="72347" end="72362" title="Hutsul Republic" label="Hutsul Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308885" start="72364" end="72378" title="Lemko Republic" label="Lemko Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510537" start="72380" end="72397" title="Komancza Republic" label="Komancza Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q61385" start="72406" end="72440" title="Galician Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Galician Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="72559" end="72588" title="Liechtenstein" label="Principality of Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="72746" end="72757" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38981" start="72830" end="72840" title="Vorarlberg" label="Vorarlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="73239" end="73256" title="Austrian Empire" label="Empire of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q533534" start="73258" end="73270" title="Cisleithania" label="Cisleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q43210" start="73291" end="73301" title="Burgenland" label="Burgenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q168648" start="73310" end="73316" title="Sopron" label="Sopron"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="73320" end="73334" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q560718" start="73347" end="73356" title="Hlučín Region" label="Hlučínsko"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="73365" end="73373" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="73382" end="73391" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q16289" start="73402" end="73410" title="Trentino" label="Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="73412" end="73423" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q16126" start="73438" end="73457" title="province of Belluno" label="province of Belluno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250" start="73480" end="73501" title="Friuli-Venezia Giulia" label="Friuli-Venezia Giulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="73505" end="73512" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54159" start="73558" end="73571" title="Lesser Poland Voivodeship" label="Lesser Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54175" start="73573" end="73585" title="Subcarpathian Voivodeship" label="Subcarpathia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54181" start="73608" end="73615" title="Silesian Voivodeship" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q164193" start="73661" end="73665" title="Lviv Oblast" label="Lviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q178269" start="73667" end="73682" title="Ivano-Frankivsk Oblast" label="Ivano-Frankivsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q173407" start="73684" end="73692" title="Ternopil Oblast" label="Ternopil"/>
<link wikidata="Q168856" start="73748" end="73758" title="Chernivtsi Oblast" label="Chernivtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181209" start="73781" end="73788" title="Suceava County" label="Suceava"/>
<link wikidata="Q207468" start="73811" end="73824" title="Bay of Kotor" label="Boka Kotorska"/>
<link wikidata="Q174237" start="73886" end="73891" title="Budva" label="Budva"/>
<link wikidata="Q990088" start="73893" end="73901" title="Petrovac (Montenegro)" label="Petrovac"/>
<link wikidata="Q685112" start="73906" end="73914" title="Sutomore" label="Sutomore"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="73917" end="73935" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q696970" start="73937" end="73951" title="Transleithania" label="Transleithania"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="73956" end="73963" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="73966" end="73974" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43210" start="73986" end="73996" title="Burgenland" label="Burgenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q168648" start="74004" end="74010" title="Sopron" label="Sopron"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="74014" end="74022" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215695" start="74024" end="74033" title="Prekmurje" label="Prekmurje"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="74037" end="74044" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q790230" start="74055" end="74062" title="Baranya (region)" label="Baranja"/>
<link wikidata="Q58330" start="74067" end="74083" title="Međimurje County" label="Međimurje county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473814" start="74085" end="74090" title="Corpus separatum (Fiume)" label="Fiume"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="74134" end="74142" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q190665" start="74147" end="74162" title="Central Croatia" label="Central Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170213" start="74288" end="74299" title="Zakarpattia Oblast" label="Zakarpattia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="74322" end="74334" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q649520" start="74336" end="74343" title="Partium" label="Partium"/>
<link wikidata="Q170143" start="74357" end="74362" title="Banat" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q268034" start="74364" end="74371" title="Crișana" label="Crișana"/>
<link wikidata="Q10975458" start="74377" end="74386" title="Maramureș" label="Maramureș"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="74390" end="74396" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44749" start="74421" end="74430" title="Vojvodina" label="Vojvodina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="74444" end="74452" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028412" start="74487" end="74492" title="Orava (region)" label="Orava"/>
<link wikidata="Q205530" start="74497" end="74501" title="Spiš" label="Spiš"/>
<link wikidata="Q609233" start="74504" end="74532" title="Austro-Hungarian rule in Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Austro-Hungarian Condominium"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="74535" end="74557" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116044" start="74575" end="74582" title="Zavalje" label="Zavalje"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116276" start="74584" end="74595" title="Mali Skočaj" label="Mali Skočaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116074" start="74600" end="74613" title="Veliki Skočaj" label="Veliki Skočaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q204434" start="74675" end="74680" title="Bihać" label="Bihać"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="74684" end="74694" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715074" start="74696" end="74704" title="Sutorina" label="Sutorina"/>
<link wikidata="Q193103" start="74743" end="74754" title="Herceg Novi" label="Herceg Novi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="74830" end="74844" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q579132" start="74883" end="74903" title="Sandžak" label="Sandžak-Raška region"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="74989" end="75003" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="75140" end="75165" title="Austro-Hungarian Monarchy" label="Austro-Hungarian Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="75168" end="75199" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q10940053" start="75208" end="75246" title="Austro-Hungarian concession of Tianjin" label="Austro-Hungarian concession of Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519948" start="75264" end="75288" title="Aftermath of World War I" label="Aftermath of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q306045" start="75291" end="75308" title="Austrian nobility" label="Austrian nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172551" start="75311" end="75333" title="Corporative federalism" label="Corporative federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324643" start="75401" end="75434" title="Diplomatic history of World War I" label="Diplomatic history of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q60794000" start="75437" end="75476" title="Austro-Hungarian entry into World War I" label="Austro-Hungarian entry into World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205640" start="75479" end="75516" title="Ethnic and religious composition of Austria-Hungary" label="Ethnic composition of Austria–Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030353" start="75519" end="75556" title="Former countries in Europe after 1815" label="Former countries in Europe after 1815"/>
<link wikidata="Q927915" start="75559" end="75577" title="Hungarian nobility" label="Hungarian nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869895" start="75580" end="75619" title="Lands of the Bohemian Crown (1867–1918)" label="Lands of the Bohemian Crown (1867–1918)"/>
<link wikidata="Q666670" start="75622" end="75654" title="United States of Greater Austria" label="United States of Greater Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041292" start="76323" end="76348" title="Carlile Aylmer Macartney" label="Macartney, Carlile Aylmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="80415" end="80429" title="heads of state" label="heads of state"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2986" wikidata="Q205177" url="?curid=2986" title="Abracadabra">
<text>Abracadabra is a magic word, historically used as an apotropaic incantation on amulets and common today in stage magic. It is of unknown origin.

== Etymology ==

&quot;Abracadabra&quot; is of unknown origin, and is first attested in a second-century work of Serenus Sammonicus.

Some conjectural etymologies are: from phrases in Hebrew that mean &quot;I will create as I speak&quot;, or Aramaic &quot;I create like the word&quot; (), to etymologies that point to similar words in Latin and Greek such as abraxas or to its similarity to the first four letters of the Greek alphabet (alpha-beta-gamma-delta or ΑΒΓΔ). However, &quot;no documentation has been found to support any of the various conjectures&quot;.

The historian Don Skemer suggests that it might originate from the Hebrew phrase &quot;ha brachah dabarah&quot; (name of the blessed), said to be a magical phrase.

The Aramaic linguist Steve Caruso argues that &quot;Abracadabra&quot; can neither be Aramaic nor Hebrew, and suggests that the popularisation of the mistaken etymology is a result of an extended discussion on an early internet message board, which credits rabbi Lawrence Kushner with publishing a modern etymology.

==History==
The first known mention of the word was in the second century AD in a book called (sometimes known as ) by Serenus Sammonicus, physician to the Roman emperor Caracalla, who in chapter 52 prescribed that malaria sufferers wear an amulet containing &quot;Abracadabra&quot; written in the form of a triangle.

The power of the amulet, he claimed, makes lethal diseases go away. Other Roman emperors, including Geta and Severus Alexander, were followers of the medical teachings of Serenus Sammonicus and may have used the incantation as well.

It was used as a magical formula by the Gnostics of the sect of Basilides in invoking the aid of beneficent spirits against disease and misfortune. It is found on Abraxas stones, which were worn as amulets. Subsequently, its use spread beyond the Gnostics.

A Jewish codex from 16th century Italy titled (The Tree of Knowledge) and described as a collection of magical spells contains the word &quot;Abracadabra&quot;, referring to an amulet. It was described as a &quot;cure from heavens&quot; for &quot;all sorts of fever[s]&quot;, consumption, and fire. 

The Puritan minister Increase Mather dismissed the word as bereft of power. Daniel Defoe wrote dismissively about Londoners who posted the word on their doorways to ward off sickness during the Great Plague of London.

In the early 1800s, the word was used as an example of what magicians would say. &quot;Abracadabra&quot; is now more commonly used in the performance of stage magic as a magic word at the culmination of a trick.

Aleister Crowley adapted the word &quot;Abracadabra&quot; into the word Abrahadabra in &quot;The Book of the Law&quot;, the central sacred text of Thelema. 

==See also==
* — Spell from the &quot;Harry Potter&quot; series
*
*

==References==
==External links==

* &quot;Abracadabra&quot; Robert Todd Carroll, &quot;Skeptic&#x27;s Dictionary&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1135882" start="17" end="27" title="magic word" label="magic word"/>
<link wikidata="Q620591" start="53" end="63" title="Apotropaic magic" label="apotropaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999796" start="64" end="75" title="incantation" label="incantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="79" end="86" title="amulets" label="amulets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596819" start="107" end="118" title="stage magic" label="stage magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q933792" start="259" end="277" title="Serenus Sammonicus" label="Serenus Sammonicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="330" end="336" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="388" end="395" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207730" start="505" end="512" title="abraxas" label="abraxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504287" start="1140" end="1156" title="Lawrence Kushner" label="Lawrence Kushner"/>
<link wikidata="Q933792" start="1313" end="1331" title="Serenus Sammonicus" label="Serenus Sammonicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="1333" end="1342" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="1350" end="1363" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="1364" end="1373" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="1409" end="1416" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183089" start="1613" end="1617" title="Geta (emperor)" label="Geta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769" start="1622" end="1639" title="Severus Alexander" label="Severus Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781430" start="1764" end="1779" title="magical formula" label="magical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="1787" end="1795" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnostics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185815" start="1803" end="1820" title="Basilideans" label="sect of Basilides"/>
<link wikidata="Q207730" start="1910" end="1917" title="Abraxas" label="Abraxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2038" end="2043" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632251" start="2327" end="2342" title="Increase Mather" label="Increase Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q40946" start="2382" end="2394" title="Daniel Defoe" label="Daniel Defoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q917048" start="2500" end="2522" title="Great Plague of London" label="Great Plague of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135882" start="2695" end="2705" title="magic word" label="magic word"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="2738" end="2754" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668717" start="2810" end="2821" title="Abrahadabra" label="Abrahadabra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169632" start="2831" end="2850" title="The Book of the Law" label="The Book of the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="2885" end="2892" title="Thelema" label="Thelema"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="2934" end="2946" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q73356" start="3026" end="3045" title="Robert Todd Carroll" label="Robert Todd Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292040" start="3053" end="3078" title="Skeptic&amp;#x27;s Dictionary" label="Skeptic&amp;#x27;s Dictionary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2987" wikidata="Q193515" url="?curid=2987" title="Acts of Union 1707">
<text>The Acts of Union refer to two acts of Parliament, one by the Parliament of Scotland in March 1707, followed shortly thereafter by an equivalent act of the Parliament of England. They put into effect the International Treaty of Union agreed on 22 July 1706, which politically joined the Kingdom of England and Kingdom of Scotland into a single &quot;political state&quot;, the Kingdom of Great Britain, with Queen Anne as sovereign of both Kingdoms. The English and Scottish acts of ratification took effect on 1 May 1707, creating the new kingdom, with its parliament based in the Palace of Westminster. 

The two countries had shared a monarch since the &quot;personal&quot; Union of the Crowns in 1603, when James VI of Scotland inherited the English throne from his cousin Elizabeth I to become (in addition) &#x27;James I of England&#x27;, styled James VI and I. Attempts had been made to try to unite the two separate countries, in 1606, 1667, and in 1689 (following the 1688 Dutch invasion of England, and subsequent deposition of James II of England by his daughter Mary and her husband William of Orange), but it was not until the early 18th century that both nations via separate groups of English and Scots Royal Commissioners and their respective political establishments, &quot;though not the Scots people&quot;, came to support the idea of an international &quot;Treaty of political, monetary and trade Union&quot;, albeit for different reasons.

==Political background==
Prior to 1603, England and Scotland had different monarchs, but when Elizabeth I died without children, she was succeeded as King of England by her distant relative, James VI of Scotland. After her death, the two Crowns were held in personal union by James (reigning as James VI and I), who announced his intention to unite the two realms.

The 1603 Union of England and Scotland Act established a joint Commission to agree terms, but Parliament of England was concerned this would lead to an absolutist structure similar to that of Scotland. James was forced to withdraw his proposals, but used the royal prerogative to take the title &quot;King of Great Britain&quot;. 

Attempts to revive the project of union in 1610 were met with hostility. English opponents such as Sir Edwin Sandys argued that changing the name of England &quot;were as to make a conquest of our name, which was more than ever the Dane or Norman could do&quot;. Instead, James set about creating a unified Church of Scotland and England, as the first step towards a centralised, Unionist state. 

However, despite both being nominally Episcopal in structure, the two were very different in doctrine; the Church of Scotland, or kirk, was Calvinist in doctrine, and viewed many Church of England practices as little better than Catholicism. As a result, attempts to impose religious policy by James and his son Charles I ultimately led to the 1639–1651 Wars of the Three Kingdoms. The 1639–1640 Bishops&#x27; Wars confirmed the primacy of the Scots kirk, and established a Covenanter government in Scotland. The Scots remained neutral when the First English Civil War began in 1642, before becoming concerned at the impact on Scotland of an English Royalist victory. Presbyterian leaders like Argyll viewed union as a way to ensure free trade between England and Scotland, and preserve a Scots Presbyterian kirk.

Under the 1643 Solemn League and Covenant, the Scots Parliament agreed to provide military support to its English counterpart in return for a united Presbyterian church, but did not explicitly commit to political union. As the war progressed, Scots and English Presbyterians increasingly viewed the English Independents, and associated radical groups like the Levellers, as a bigger threat than the Royalists. Both Royalists and Presbyterians agreed monarchy was divinely ordered, but disagreed on the nature and extent of Royal authority over the church. When Charles I surrendered in 1646, an English pro-Royalist faction known as the Engagers allied with their former enemies to restore him to the English throne.
After defeat in the 1647–1648 Second English Civil War, Scotland was occupied by English troops, which were withdrawn once those whom Cromwell held responsible had been replaced by the Kirk Party. In December 1648, Pride&#x27;s Purge paved the way for the Trial of Charles I in England by excluding MPs who opposed it. Following the execution of Charles I in January 1649, and establishment of the Commonwealth of England, the Scots Kirk Party proclaimed Charles II King of Scots and England and, in the 1650 Treaty of Breda, resolved to restore him to the English throne. Instead, defeat in the Anglo-Scottish War resulted in Scotland&#x27;s incorporation into the Commonwealth in 1653, largely driven by Cromwell&#x27;s determination to break the power of the Scots kirk. The 1652 Tender of Union was followed on 12 April 1654 by &quot;An Ordinance by the Protector for the Union of England and Scotland,&quot; creating the Commonwealth of England and Scotland. It was ratified by the Second Protectorate Parliament on 26 June 1657, creating a single Parliament in Westminster, with 30 representatives each from Scotland and Ireland added to the existing English members.

===1660–1707===

While integration into the Commonwealth established free trade between Scotland and England, the economic benefits were diminished by the costs of military occupation. Both Scotland and England associated union with heavy taxes and military rule; it had little popular support in either Country, and the union was dissolved after the Restoration of Charles II in 1660.

The Scottish economy was badly damaged by the (protectionist) English Navigation Acts of 1660 and 1663 and England&#x27;s wars with the Dutch Republic, Scotland&#x27;s major export market. An Anglo-Scots Trade Commission was set up in January 1668 but the English had no interest in making concessions, as the Scots had little to offer in return. In 1669, Charles II revived talks on &quot;political union&quot;; his motives may have been to weaken Scotland&#x27;s commercial and political links with the Dutch, still seen as an enemy and complete the work of his grandfather James I and VI. On the Scottish side, the proposed union received parliamentary support, boosted by the desire to ensure free trade. Continued opposition meant these negotiations were abandoned by the end of 1669.

Following the 1688 invasion of England by a Dutch fleet and army led by Prince William of Orange and his wife Mary (daughter of James II), and their deposition of James II as King of England, a Scottish Convention of the Estates (a sister body to the Parliament of Scotland) met in Edinburgh in April 1689 to agree a new Constitutional settlement for Scotland. The Convention of the Estates issued an address to William and Mary &quot;as both kingdomes are united in one head and soveraigne so they may become one body pollitick, one nation to be represented in one parliament&quot;, reserving &quot;our church government, as it shall be established at the tyme of the union&quot;. William and Mary were supportive of the idea but it was opposed both by the Presbyterian majority in Scotland and the English Parliament. Episcopacy in Scotland was abolished in 1690, alienating a significant part of the political class; it was this element that later formed the bedrock of opposition to Union.

The 1690s were a time of economic hardship in Europe as a whole and Scotland in particular, a period now known as the Seven ill years which led to strained relations with England. In 1698, the Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies received a charter to raise capital through public subscription. The Company invested in the Darién scheme, an ambitious plan funded almost entirely by Scottish investors to build a colony on the Isthmus of Panama for trade with East Asia. The scheme was a disaster; the losses of over £150,000 severely impacted the Scottish commercial system.

==Political motivations==

The International Treaty, and English and Scots acts of ratification of Union may be seen within a wider European context of increasing state centralisation during the late 17th and early 18th centuries, including the monarchies of France, Sweden, Denmark-Norway and Spain. While there were exceptions, such as the Dutch Republic or the Republic of Venice, the trend was clear.

The dangers of the monarch using one parliament against the other first became apparent in 1647 and 1651. It resurfaced during the 1679 to 1681 Exclusion Crisis, caused by English resistance to the Catholic James II (of England, VII of Scots) succeeding his brother Charles II. James was sent to Edinburgh in 1681 as Lord High Commissioner; in August, the Parliament of Scotland passed the Succession Act, confirming the divine right of kings, the rights of the natural heir &quot;regardless of religion&quot;, the duty of all to swear allegiance to that king, and the Independence of the Scots Crown. It then went beyond ensuring James&#x27;s succession to the Scots throne by explicitly stating the aim was to make his exclusion from the English throne impossible without &quot;the fatall and dreadfull consequences of a civil war&quot;.

The issue reappeared during the 1688 Dutch invasion and (subsequently entitled as &quot;the Glorious Revolution&quot;). The English Convention Parliament generally supported replacing King James II with his Protestant daughter Mary, holding to their &quot;legal fiction&quot; that James, by fleeing to France, had abandoned his English subjects and &quot;abdicated&quot;. They resisted, however, making her Dutch husband William of Orange joint ruler. They gave way &quot;fearing the return of James&quot; only when William threatened to take his troops and fleet and return to the Netherlands, and Mary refused to rule without him. 

In Scotland, it became a Constitutional issue. The fact that James VII of Scots had not been present in the Scotland meant that the question of abdication need not arise. On 4 April 1689 a Convention of the Three Estates of Scotland (sister body to the Parliament of Scotland) declared that James VII &quot;had acted irregularly&quot; by assuming regal power (government) &quot;without ever taking the Coronation Oath required by Scots Law&quot;. Thus, he had &quot;FOREFALTED [forfeited] the Right to the Scots Crown, and the Scots Throne is become vacant&quot;. This was a fundamental difference; if the Parliament of Scotland could decide James VII had &quot;Forfaulted&quot; his Scots throne by actions having, in the words of the &quot;Claim of Right&quot; act 1689 &quot;Invaded the fundamentall Constitution of the Kingdome and altered it from a legall limited monarchy To ane arbitrary despotick power&quot;. &quot;Scots monarchs derived legitimacy from the Convention of the Estates&quot;, later declared a Parliament of Scotland, not God, thus ending the principle of divine right of kings.

Enshrined in the Union with England Act 1707:
Conflict over control of the kirk between Presbyterians and Episcopalians and William&#x27;s position as a fellow Calvinist put him in a much stronger position. He originally insisted on retaining Episcopacy, and the Committee of the Articles, an unelected body that controlled what legislation Parliament could debate. Both would have given the Crown far greater control than in England but he withdrew his demands due to the 1689–1692 Jacobite Rising. 

William&#x27;s attempts to have the Claim of Right amended were directed through the &quot;Court faction&quot; which began arguing from 1699 onwards that:

# The Convention of the Estates was not a parliament so the act did not really count as binding and 
# the Convention of the Estates was a parliament and so parliament could just rewrite it.

A year and a half after William&#x27;s death, the Parliament of Scotland &quot;put a period on the end of that sentence&quot; by passing an act which recognised the standing of the Convention of the Estates as a parliament in its own right and made it &quot;high treason&quot; to impugn its authority or to so much as suggest attempting to alter the Claim of Right.

Here is the Claim of Right understood and upheld for its secular constitutional provisions quite as much as for its religious provisions.

=== English perspective ===
The English succession was provided for by the English Act of Settlement 1701, which ensured that the monarch of England would be a Protestant member of the House of Hanover. Until the union of parliaments, the Scottish throne might be inherited by a different successor after Queen Anne, who had said in her first speech to the English parliament that a union was &quot;very necessary&quot;. The Scottish Act of Security 1704, however, was passed after the English parliament, without consultation with Scotland, had designated Electoress Sophia of Hanover (granddaughter of James I and VI) as Anne&#x27;s successor, if Anne died childless. The Act of Security granted the Parliament of Scotland, the three Estates, the right to choose a successor and explicitly required a choice different from the English monarch unless the English were to grant free trade and navigation. Then the Alien Act 1705 was passed in the English parliament, designating Scots in England as &quot;foreign nationals&quot; and blocking about half of all Scottish trade by boycotting exports to England or its colonies, unless Scotland came back to negotiate a Union. To encourage a union, &quot;honours, appointments, pensions and even arrears of pay and other expenses were distributed to clinch support from Scottish peers and MPs&quot;.

=== Scottish perspective ===
The Scottish economy was severely impacted by privateers during the 1688–1697 Nine Years&#x27; War and the 1701 War of the Spanish Succession, with the Royal Navy focusing on protecting English ships. This compounded the economic pressure caused by the Darien scheme, and the seven ill years of the 1690s, when 5–15% of the population died of starvation. The Scottish Parliament was promised financial assistance, protection for its maritime trade, and an end to economic restrictions on trade with England.

The votes of the Court party, influenced by Queen Anne&#x27;s favourite, James Douglas, 2nd Duke of Queensberry, combined with the majority of the Squadrone Volante, were sufficient to ensure passage of the treaty. Article 15 granted £398,085 and ten shillings sterling to Scotland, a sum known as The Equivalent, to offset future liability towards the English national debt, which at the time was £18 million, but as Scotland had no national debt, most of the sum was used to compensate the investors in the Darien scheme, with 58.6% of the fund allocated to its shareholders and creditors.

The role played by bribery has long been debated. £20,000 was distributed by David Boyle, 1st Earl of Glasgow, of which 60% went to the Duke of Queensberry, the Queen&#x27;s Commissioner in Parliament. Another negotiator, John Campbell, 2nd Duke of Argyll was given an English dukedom.

Robert Burns is commonly quoted in support of the argument of corruption: &quot;We&#x27;re bought and sold for English Gold, Such a Parcel of Rogues in a Nation.&quot; As historian Christopher Whatley points out, this was actually a 17th-century Scots folk song; but he agrees money was paid, though suggests the economic benefits were supported by most Scots MPs, with the promises made for benefits to peers and MPs, even if it was reluctantly. Professor Sir Tom Devine agreed that promises of &quot;favours, sinecures, pensions, offices and straightforward cash bribes became indispensable to secure government majorities&quot;.

As for representation going forwards, Scotland was, in the new united parliament, only to get 45 MPs, one more than Cornwall, and only 16 (unelected) peers in the House of Lords.

The Union was carried by members of the Scottish elite against the wishes of the great majority. Sir George Lockhart of Carnwath, the only Scottish negotiator to oppose Union, noted &quot;the whole nation appears against (it)&quot;. Another negotiator, Sir John Clerk of Penicuik, who was an ardent Unionist, observed it was &quot;contrary to the inclinations of at least three-fourths of the Kingdom&quot;. As the seat of the Scottish Parliament, demonstrators in Edinburgh feared the impact of its loss on the local economy. Elsewhere, there was widespread concern about the independence of the kirk, and possible tax rises.

As the treaty passed through the Parliament of Scotland, opposition was voiced by petitions from shires, burghs, presbyteries and parishes. The Convention of Royal Burghs claimed:

Not one petition in favour of Union was received by Parliament. On the day the treaty was signed, the carillonneur in St Giles Cathedral, Edinburgh, rang the bells to the tune of &quot;Why should I be so sad on my wedding day?&quot; Threats of widespread civil unrest resulted in Parliament imposing martial law.

Virtually all of the print discourses of 1699–1706 spoke against incorporating union, creating the conditions for wide spread rejection of the treaty in 1706 and 1707. Country party tracts condemned English influence within the existing framework of the Union of the Crowns and asserted the need to renegotiate this union. During this period, the Darien failure, the succession issue and the Worcester seizure all provided opportunities for Scottish writers to attack the Court Party as unpatriotic and reaffirm the need to fight for true interests of Scotland.

According to Scottish historian William Ferguson, the Acts of Union were a &quot;political job&quot; by England that was achieved by economic incentives, patronage and bribery to secure the passage of the Union treaty in the Scottish Parliament in order satisfy English political imperatives, with the union being unacceptable to the Scottish people, including both the Jacobites and Covenanters. The differences between Scottish were &quot;subsumed by the same sort of patriotism or nationalism that first appeared in the Declaration of Arbroath of 1320.&quot; Ferguson highlights the well-timed payments of salary arrears to members of Parliament as proof of bribery and argues that the Scottish people had been betrayed by their Parliament.

===Ireland===
Ireland, though a kingdom under the same crown, was not included in the union. It remained a separate kingdom, unrepresented in Parliament, and was legally subordinate to Great Britain until the Renunciation Act 1783.

In July 1707 each House of the Parliament of Ireland passed a congratulatory address to Queen Anne, praying that &quot;May God put it in your royal heart to add greater strength and lustre to your crown, by a still more comprehensive Union&quot;. The British government did not respond to the invitation and an equal union between Great Britain and Ireland was out of consideration until the 1790s. The union with Ireland finally came about on 1 January 1801.

==Treaty and passage of the 1707 acts==
Deeper political integration had been a key policy of Queen Anne from the time she acceded to the throne in 1702. Under the aegis of the Queen and her ministers in both kingdoms, the parliaments of England and Scotland (the ) agreed to participate in fresh negotiations for a union treaty in 1705.

Both countries appointed 31 commissioners to conduct the negotiations. Most of the Scottish commissioners favoured union, and about half were government ministers and other officials. At the head of the list was the Duke of Queensberry, and the Lord Chancellor of Scotland, the Earl of Seafield. The English commissioners included the Lord High Treasurer, Sidney Godolphin, 1st Earl of Godolphin, the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, William Cowper, Baron Cowper, and a large number of Whigs who supported union. Tories were not in favour of union and only one was represented among the commissioners.

Negotiations between the English and Scottish commissioners took place between 16 April and 22 July 1706 at the Cockpit in London. Each side had its own particular concerns. Within a few days, and with only one face to face meeting of all 62 commissioners, England had gained a guarantee that the Hanoverian dynasty would succeed Queen Anne to the Scottish crown, and Scotland received a guarantee of access to colonial markets, in the hope that they would be placed on an equal footing in terms of trade.

After negotiations ended in July 1706, the acts had to be ratified by both Parliaments. In Scotland, about 100 of the 227 members of the Parliament of Scotland were supportive of the Court Party. For extra votes the pro-court side could rely on about 25 members of the Squadrone Volante, led by the James Graham, 4th Marquess of Montrose and John Ker, 1st Duke of Roxburghe. Opponents of the court were generally known as the Country party, and included various factions and individuals such as the James Hamilton, 4th Duke of Hamilton, John Hamilton, Lord Belhaven and Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun, who spoke forcefully and passionately against the union, when the Scottish Parliament began its debate on the act on 3 October 1706, but the deal had already been done. The Court party enjoyed significant funding from England and the Treasury and included many who had accumulated debts following the Darien Disaster.

The act ratifying the Treaty of Union was finally carried in the Parliament of Scotland by 110 votes to 69 on 16 January 1707, with a number of key amendments. News of the ratification and of the amendments was received in Westminster, where the Act was passed quickly through both Houses and received the royal assent on 6 March. Though the English Act was later in date, it bore the year &#x27;1706&#x27; while Scotland&#x27;s was &#x27;1707&#x27;, as the legal year in England began only on 25 March.

In Scotland, the Duke of Queensberry was largely responsible for the successful passage of the Union act by the Parliament of Scotland. In Scotland, he was greeted by stones and eggs but in England he was cheered for his action. He had personally received around half of the funding awarded by the Westminster Treasury. In April 1707, he travelled to London to attend celebrations at the royal court, and was greeted by groups of noblemen and gentry lined along the road. From Barnet, the route was lined with crowds of cheering people, and once he reached London a huge crowd had formed. On 17 April, the Duke was gratefully received by the Queen at Kensington Palace and the Acts came into effect on 1 May 1707. A day of thanksgiving was declared in England and Ireland but not in Scotland, where the bells of St Giles rang out the tune of &quot;why should I be so sad on my wedding day&quot;.

==Provisions==
The Treaty of Union, agreed between representatives of the Parliament of England and the Parliament of Scotland in 1706, consisted of 25 articles, 15 of which were economic in nature. In Scotland, each article was voted on separately and several clauses in articles were delegated to specialised subcommittees. Article 1 of the treaty was based on the political principle of an incorporating union and this was secured by a majority of 116 votes to 83 on 4 November 1706. To minimise the opposition of the Church of Scotland, an Act was also passed to secure the Presbyterian establishment of the Church, after which the Church stopped its open opposition, although hostility remained at lower levels of the clergy. The treaty as a whole was finally ratified on 16 January 1707 by a majority of 110 votes to 69.

The two Acts incorporated provisions for Scotland to send representative peers from the Peerage of Scotland to sit in the House of Lords. It guaranteed that the Church of Scotland would remain the established church in Scotland, that the Court of Session would &quot;remain in all time coming within Scotland&quot;, and that Scots law would &quot;remain in the same force as before&quot;. Other provisions included the restatement of the Act of Settlement 1701 and the ban on Roman Catholics from taking the throne. It also created a customs union and monetary union.

The Act provided that any &quot;laws and statutes&quot; that were &quot;contrary to or inconsistent with the terms&quot; of the Act would &quot;cease and become void&quot;.

===Related acts===

The Scottish Parliament also passed the Protestant Religion and Presbyterian Church Act 1707 guaranteeing the status of the Presbyterian Church of Scotland. The English Parliament passed a similar Act, 6 Ann. c. 8.

Soon after the Union, the Act 6 Ann. c. 40later named the Union with Scotland (Amendment) Act 1707united the Privy Council of England and Privy Council of Scotland and decentralised Scottish administration by appointing justices of the peace in each shire to carry out administration. In effect it took the day-to-day government of Scotland out of the hands of politicians and into those of the College of Justice.

On 18 December 1707 the Act for better Securing the Duties of East India Goods was passed which extended the monopoly of the East India Company to Scotland.

In the year following the Union, the Treason Act 1708 abolished the Scottish law of treason and extended the corresponding English law across Great Britain.

== Evaluations ==
Scotland benefited, says historian G.N. Clark, gaining &quot;freedom of trade with England and the colonies&quot; as well as &quot;a great expansion of markets&quot;. The agreement guaranteed the permanent status of the Presbyterian church in Scotland, and the separate system of laws and courts in Scotland. Clark argued that in exchange for the financial benefits and bribes that England bestowed, what it gained was

of inestimable value. Scotland accepted the Hanoverian succession and gave up her power of threatening England&#x27;s military security and complicating her commercial relations ... The sweeping successes of the eighteenth-century wars owed much to the new unity of the two nations.

By the time Samuel Johnson and James Boswell made their tour in 1773, recorded in &quot;A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland&quot;, Johnson noted that Scotland was &quot;a nation of which the commerce is hourly extending, and the wealth increasing&quot; and in particular that Glasgow had become one of the greatest cities of Britain.

== Economic perspective ==

According to the Scottish historian Christopher Smout, prior to the Union of the Crowns the Scottish economy had been flourishing completely independently of the English one, with little to no interaction between each other. Developing a closer economic partnership with England was unsustainable, and Scotland&#x27;s main trade partner was continental Europe, especially the Netherlands, where Scotland could trade its wool and fish for luxurious imports such as iron, spices or wine. Scotland and England were generally hostile to each other and were often at war, and the alliance with France gave Scotland privileges that further encouraged developing cultural and economic ties with the continent rather than England. The union of 1603 only served the political and dynastic ambitions of King James and was detrimental to Scotland economically – exports that Scotland offered were largely irrelevant to English economy, and while the Privy Council of Scotland did keep its ability to manage internal economic policy, the foreign policy of Scotland was now in English hands. This limited Scotland&#x27;s hitherto expansive trade with continental Europe, and forced it into English wars.

While the Scottish economy already suffered because of English wars with France and Spain in the 1620s, the civil wars in England had a particularly disastrous effect on Scotland and left it relatively impoverished as a result. The economy would slowly recover afterwards, but at the cost of being increasingly dependent on trade with England. A power struggle developed between Scotland and England in the 1680s, as Scotland recovered from the political turmoil and set on its own economic ambitions, which London considered a threat to its dominant and well-established position. English wars with continental powers undermined Scottish trade with France and the Netherlands, countries that used to be the Scotland&#x27;s main trade partners before the union, and the English Navigation Acts severely limited Scottish ability to trade by sea, and made the Scottish ambitions to expand the trade beyond Europe unachievable. Opinion in Scotland at the time was that England was sabotaging Scottish economic expansion.

In the years leading to 1707, Scottish economy was lagging behind not only from the impact of wars, but also because of chronic deflation and industrial underdevelopment. Scotland remained a predominantly agrarian society, and the lack of manpower caused by previous conflicts contributed to an underwhelming agricultural output, which intermittently escalated into local food shortages or famines. In turn, the overreliance of Scottish landowners on foreign goods led to a deficit of financial capital, as gold and silver were exported overseas and deflation occurred. The Scottish Parliament attempted to combat the issue by attracting foreign investment - duty on ship building materials was lifted, taxes on new manufacturing stocks were cut, and customs on textile and linen goods were removed.

Scotland grew increasingly dependent on its linen industry, which became the biggest source of employment after agriculture and constituted one-third of Scottish industry. Continental linen industries could outcompete Scotland, and protectionist tariffs implemented by Scotland led to tariff wars as European countries closed their markets to Scotland. In this situation, England became the largest foreign market for Scottish linen; however, while the tariffs in place shielded Scotland from the much larger English industry, England also retaliated against them. This forced Scotland to seek economic alternatives. At the time, trade with colonies was rapidly growing in importance in Europe, and trade with colonies was very attractive to Scotland, given its pastoral economy. American colonies had a high demand of agricultural goods such as leather skins of goats and sheep, which would have provided Scotland a valuable source of income. Search for colonial trade, along with the frustration caused by economic and political rivalry with England, led to the Darien scheme - an unsuccessful attempt to establish a Scottish colony in the Gulf of Darién.
The scheme was sabotaged by England in various ways - it was seen as a threat to the privileged position of the East India Company, prompting England to ensure the plan&#x27;s failure via political and diplomatic overtures to prevent the Netherlands and Hamburg from investing into the scheme and denying assistance. In what was dubbed the &quot;affair of Hamburgh&quot; in Scotland, William III of England persuaded European powers against buying stocks in the scheme; William commented on Darien:

English actions against the Darien scheme were also motivated by other factors – the decline in the East India Company&#x27;s stock values, concerns of Darien causing a labour shortage in the Colony of Jamaica, and the scheme being seen as a threat to &quot;the general peace of Christendom&quot;, as Catholic Spain laid a territorial claim to the area.}

The failure of the Darien scheme led to a financial crisis in Scotland. The high cost of its project exacerbated the deflation in Scotland. The Bank of Scotland had dangerously low reserves, and in early 1700s a run on the bank occurred, along with temporary suspension of business. Ultimately, the Scottish bank managed to stay solvent, although the persisting deflation and low reserves largely contributed to the feeling of Scottish economy being in a precarious position. Economist Aida Ramos argues that the Darien scheme could have succeeded if it was to receive support from either England or Spain, and that it lacked the capability to create a threat to England or its interests. According to Ramos, the English intervention against the scheme was to meet the expansionary aims of England, as to ensure both its colonial dominance as well as the annexation of Scotland.

By 1703, the Scottish government was highly disillusioned with the union, and many believed that the only way to let the Scottish economy flourish was to separate from England. John Clerk of Eldin declared that &quot;the Scots had become England&#x27;s slaves, since they were denied not only their rights as fellow-Britons but their rights under the Law of Nations&quot;, and writer David Black wrote: &quot;England affords us but little of what is necessary, yet they drain us more than any nation&quot;. The anti-English sentiment led to accusation of King William orchestrating the 1699 Glencoe Massacre, and in 1703 the Scottish Parliament started adopting legislation to counter the English aggression - the first was the Act Anent Peace and War, which was to guarantee that the Scottish foreign policy would be independent of England. Scotland would try to establish further autonomy from England with the Act of Security 1704, which provoked a retaliation from England - Scottish ministers were bribed, and Alien Act 1705 was passed. According to the Alien Act, unless Scotland appointed commissioners to negotiate for union by Christmas, every Scot in England would be treated as an alien, leading to the confiscation of their English estates. Additionally, Scottish wares were to be banned from England. Christopher Smout notes that England desired to expand its influence by annexing Scotland:

The act sparked vehement anti-English sentiment in Scotland, and made the already hostile Scottish public more opposed to England:

The Scottish economy was now facing a crisis, and the parliament was polarised into pro-union and anti-union factions, with the former led by Daniel Defoe. The unionists stressed how important trade with England is to the Scottish economy, and seen trade with continental Europe as not beneficial. They argued that the Scottish economy could survive by trading with England, and sanctions that would result from the Alien Act would collapse the economy. For Defoe, joining the union would not only prevent the Alien Act, but also remove additional limitations and regulations and lead Scotland to prosperity. Anti-unionists questioned the English goodwill and criticised the unionist faction for submitting to the English blackmail. They argued that Scotland could make a recovery by trading with the Netherlands, Spain and Norway, allowing Scotland to diversify its own industries as well. They argued that the union would make Scotland unable to conduct independent trade policy, meaning that any possibility to remove the flaws in Scottish economy would be gone forever, which would turn Scotland into a &quot;mere satellite of the richer kingdom&quot;. 

Ultimately, Scottish ministers voted in favour of the union, despite the lack of public support, with the overwhelming majority of the Scottish population at the time protesting vociferously against any union with England. Many Scots considered themselves to have been betrayed by their own elites, and that the union bill was able to pass only thanks to English bribery. In the first few decades after the union, England did not end up becoming the main trading partner of Scotland, as other European powers became the primary source of imported goods for Scotland. For at least the first 40 years after the union, Scotland persisted in its traditional trade patterns, and the economic situation of Scotland was not as dire as that described in the months leading up to the Acts of Union.

== 300th anniversary ==

A commemorative two-pound coin was issued to mark the tercentennial—300th anniversary—of the Union, which occurred two days before the Scottish Parliament general election on 3 May 2007.

The Scottish Government held a number of commemorative events through the year including an education project led by the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland, an exhibition of Union-related objects and documents at the National Museums of Scotland and an exhibition of portraits of people associated with the Union at the National Galleries of Scotland.

== Scottish voting records ==


== See also ==
* Acts of Union 1800 (Kingdom of Great Britain with Kingdom of Ireland)
**Kingdom of Ireland
* English independence
* List of treaties
* &quot;MacCormick v Lord Advocate&quot;
* Parliament of the United Kingdom
* Political union
* Real union
* Scottish independence
* Unionism in Scotland
* Welsh independence

==Notes==
==References==
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== Further reading ==
* Defoe, Daniel. &quot;A Tour thro&#x27; the Whole Island of Great Britain&quot;, 1724–1727
* Defoe, Daniel. &quot;The Letters of Daniel Defoe&quot;, GH Healey editor. Oxford: 1955.
* Fletcher, Andrew (Saltoun). &quot;An Account of a Conversation&quot;
* Lockhart, George, &quot;The Lockhart Papers&quot;, 1702–1728

== External links ==
* Union with England Act and Union with Scotland Act – Full original text
* Treaty of Union and the Darien Experiment, University of Guelph, McLaughlin Library, Library and Archives Canada
* 
* Union with England Act 1707, from Records of the Parliaments of Scotland
* Image of original act from the Parliamentary Archives website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="4" end="17" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="31" end="49" title="acts of Parliament" label="acts of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="62" end="84" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="156" end="177" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="218" end="233" title="Treaty of Union" label="Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="287" end="305" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="310" end="329" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="377" end="401" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="408" end="418" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739604" start="554" end="568" title="Parliament of Great Britain" label="its parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="582" end="603" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="677" end="696" title="Union of the Crowns" label="Union of the Crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="711" end="731" title="James VI of Scotland" label="James VI of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="777" end="788" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="852" end="866" title="James VI and I" label="James VI and I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="977" end="1007" title="William III of England#Invasion of England" label="1688 Dutch invasion of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260782" start="1024" end="1034" title="List of deposed politicians" label="deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="1038" end="1057" title="James II of England" label="James II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="1074" end="1078" title="Mary II of England" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="1095" end="1112" title="William III of England" label="William of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="1501" end="1508" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="1513" end="1521" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="1555" end="1566" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="1652" end="1672" title="James VI of Scotland" label="James VI of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="1719" end="1733" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="1756" end="1770" title="James VI and I" label="James VI and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886584" start="1836" end="1869" title="Union of England and Scotland Act 1603" label="Union of England and Scotland Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="1921" end="1942" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="1979" end="1989" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolutist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375091" start="2086" end="2103" title="royal prerogative in the United Kingdom" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346806" start="2262" end="2274" title="Edwin Sandys (1561–1629)" label="Edwin Sandys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="2595" end="2604" title="Episcopal polity" label="Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="2664" end="2682" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="2697" end="2706" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="2736" end="2753" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="2869" end="2878" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="2911" end="2937" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q807843" start="2953" end="2971" title="Bishops&amp;#x27; Wars" label="Bishops&amp;#x27; Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138040" start="3031" end="3041" title="Covenanter" label="Covenanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142505" start="3102" end="3125" title="First English Civil War" label="First English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q977300" start="3251" end="3257" title="Archibald Campbell, 1st Marquess of Argyll" label="Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500894" start="3387" end="3413" title="Solemn League and Covenant" label="Solemn League and Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188651" start="3671" end="3691" title="English Independents" label="English Independents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367657" start="3732" end="3741" title="Levellers" label="Levellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341726" start="4009" end="4017" title="Engagers" label="Engagers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025332" start="4119" end="4143" title="Second English Civil War" label="Second English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415503" start="4274" end="4284" title="Kirk Party" label="Kirk Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787448" start="4304" end="4322" title="Pride&amp;#x27;s Purge" label="Pride&amp;#x27;s Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631941" start="4345" end="4363" title="Trial of Charles I" label="Trial of Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088700" start="4422" end="4444" title="execution of Charles I" label="execution of Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="4487" end="4510" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="4544" end="4554" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374127" start="4598" end="4613" title="Treaty of Breda (1650)" label="Treaty of Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540197" start="4685" end="4703" title="Anglo-Scottish war (1650–1652)" label="Anglo-Scottish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699619" start="4872" end="4887" title="Tender of Union" label="Tender of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443485" start="5076" end="5106" title="Second Protectorate Parliament" label="Second Protectorate Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="5615" end="5626" title="English Restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q318785" start="5721" end="5736" title="Navigation Acts" label="Navigation Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q755170" start="5758" end="5777" title="Anglo-Dutch Wars" label="England&amp;#x27;s wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="5787" end="5801" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6456" end="6469" title="Glorious Revolution#Invasion" label="1688 invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="6521" end="6538" title="William III of England" label="William of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="6543" end="6556" title="Mary II of England" label="his wife Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166282" start="6636" end="6670" title="Convention of the Estates of Scotland" label="Scottish Convention of the Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934103" start="7555" end="7570" title="Seven ill years" label="Seven ill years"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990278" start="7630" end="7682" title="Company of Scotland" label="Company of Scotland Trading to Africa and the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166080" start="7776" end="7789" title="Darién scheme" label="Darién scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="7879" end="7896" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="8288" end="8294" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="8296" end="8302" title="Swedish Empire" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="8304" end="8318" title="Denmark-Norway" label="Denmark-Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q107419889" start="8323" end="8328" title="History of Spain (1700-1808)" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="8393" end="8411" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383566" start="8579" end="8595" title="Exclusion Crisis" label="Exclusion Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="8642" end="8647" title="James II of England" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679372" start="8752" end="8774" title="Lord High Commissioner to the Parliament of Scotland" label="Lord High Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="9368" end="9387" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166236" start="9408" end="9429" title="Convention Parliament (1689)" label="Convention Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="9503" end="9507" title="Mary II" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="9697" end="9714" title="William III of England" label="William of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="10118" end="10143" title="Three Estates of Scotland" label="Three Estates of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="11101" end="11114" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="11119" end="11132" title="Episcopalians" label="Episcopalians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="11276" end="11301" title="Committee of the Articles" label="Committee of the Articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q48785102" start="11496" end="11511" title="Jacobite rising of 1689" label="Jacobite Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q316537" start="12452" end="12474" title="Act of Settlement 1701" label="Act of Settlement 1701"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="12554" end="12570" title="House of Hanover" label="House of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="12674" end="12684" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q343054" start="12803" end="12823" title="Act of Security 1704" label="Act of Security 1704"/>
<link wikidata="Q57224" start="12937" end="12954" title="Sophia of Hanover" label="Sophia of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="13071" end="13093" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q657326" start="13099" end="13112" title="Estates of the realm" label="three Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647029" start="13283" end="13297" title="Alien Act 1705" label="Alien Act 1705"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="13791" end="13800" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152218" start="13823" end="13843" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="13857" end="13886" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="13897" end="13907" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166080" start="13998" end="14011" title="Darien scheme" label="Darien scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934103" start="14021" end="14036" title="seven ill years" label="seven ill years"/>
<link wikidata="Q335636" start="14327" end="14365" title="James Douglas, 2nd Duke of Queensberry" label="James Douglas, 2nd Duke of Queensberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581911" start="14401" end="14418" title="Squadrone Volante (Scotland)" label="Squadrone Volante"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732363" start="14552" end="14566" title="The Equivalent" label="The Equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231625" start="14924" end="14956" title="David Boyle, 1st Earl of Glasgow" label="David Boyle, 1st Earl of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679372" start="15008" end="15047" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Commissioner in Parliament" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Commissioner in Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q335974" start="15069" end="15102" title="John Campbell, 2nd Duke of Argyll" label="John Campbell, 2nd Duke of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q11009654" start="15116" end="15131" title="Peerage of England" label="English dukedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="15134" end="15146" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113411" start="15315" end="15334" title="Christopher Whatley" label="Christopher Whatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815571" start="15595" end="15605" title="Tom Devine" label="Tom Devine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541793" start="16044" end="16075" title="George Lockhart (politician)" label="Sir George Lockhart of Carnwath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527670" start="16200" end="16226" title="Sir John Clerk, 2nd Baronet" label="Sir John Clerk of Penicuik"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827847" start="16719" end="16745" title="Convention of Royal Burghs" label="Convention of Royal Burghs"/>
<link wikidata="Q505174" start="16858" end="16870" title="carillonneur" label="carillonneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547466" start="16874" end="16892" title="St Giles Cathedral" label="St Giles Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="17056" end="17067" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790169" start="17462" end="17479" title="Thomas Green (captain)" label="Worcester seizure"/>
<link wikidata="Q111941379" start="17665" end="17681" title="William Ferguson (historian)" label="William Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="18003" end="18012" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138040" start="18017" end="18028" title="Covenanters" label="Covenanters"/>
<link wikidata="Q598496" start="18156" end="18179" title="Declaration of Arbroath" label="Declaration of Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="18392" end="18399" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q29378841" start="18587" end="18608" title="Irish Appeals Act 1783" label="Renunciation Act 1783"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889821" start="18642" end="18663" title="Parliament of Ireland" label="Parliament of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="19014" end="19032" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="union with Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="19166" end="19176" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158810" start="19656" end="19683" title="Lord Chancellor of Scotland" label="Lord Chancellor of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q336713" start="19689" end="19705" title="James Ogilvy, 4th Earl of Findlater" label="Earl of Seafield"/>
<link wikidata="Q944583" start="19746" end="19765" title="Lord High Treasurer" label="Lord High Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q947776" start="19767" end="19806" title="Sidney Godolphin, 1st Earl of Godolphin" label="Sidney Godolphin, 1st Earl of Godolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869896" start="19812" end="19841" title="Lord Keeper of the Great Seal" label="Lord Keeper of the Great Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612782" start="19843" end="19871" title="William Cowper, 1st Earl Cowper" label="William Cowper, Baron Cowper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981291" start="20124" end="20131" title="Cockpit-in-Court" label="Cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="20309" end="20319" title="House of Hanover" label="Hanoverian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="20656" end="20678" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177382" start="20702" end="20713" title="Court Party" label="Court Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581911" start="20788" end="20805" title="Squadrone Volante (Scotland)" label="Squadrone Volante"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585405" start="20818" end="20856" title="James Graham, 1st Duke of Montrose" label="James Graham, 4th Marquess of Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q603499" start="20861" end="20892" title="John Ker, 1st Duke of Roxburghe" label="John Ker, 1st Duke of Roxburghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177382" start="20945" end="20958" title="Country Party (Britain)" label="Country party"/>
<link wikidata="Q335625" start="21018" end="21054" title="James Hamilton, 4th Duke of Hamilton" label="James Hamilton, 4th Duke of Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237424" start="21056" end="21084" title="John Hamilton, 2nd Lord Belhaven and Stenton" label="John Hamilton, Lord Belhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846602" start="21089" end="21115" title="Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun" label="Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166080" start="21418" end="21433" title="Darien Disaster" label="Darien Disaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21916" end="21938" title="Lady Day#Non-religious significance" label="began only on 25 March"/>
<link wikidata="Q2884709" start="22418" end="22424" title="Chipping Barnet" label="Barnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q207385" start="22592" end="22609" title="Kensington Palace" label="Kensington Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q682403" start="22857" end="22872" title="Treaty of Union" label="Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="22912" end="22933" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650523" start="22942" end="22964" title="Parliament of Scotland" label="Parliament of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="23359" end="23377" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="23416" end="23428" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155178" start="23724" end="23744" title="Scottish representative peers" label="representative peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q66004929" start="23754" end="23773" title="Peerage of Scotland" label="Peerage of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="23788" end="23802" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="23863" end="23881" title="established church" label="established church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178407" start="23904" end="23920" title="Court of Session" label="Court of Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="23991" end="24000" title="Scots law" label="Scots law"/>
<link wikidata="Q316537" start="24104" end="24126" title="Act of Settlement 1701" label="Act of Settlement 1701"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="24142" end="24157" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q218819" start="24200" end="24213" title="customs union" label="customs union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125321" start="24218" end="24232" title="monetary union" label="monetary union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251617" start="24469" end="24521" title="Protestant Religion and Presbyterian Church Act 1707" label="Protestant Religion and Presbyterian Church Act 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509804" start="24631" end="24637" title="6 Ann." label="6 Ann."/>
<link wikidata="Q6560531" start="24675" end="24681" title="6 Ann. (GB)" label="6 Ann."/>
<link wikidata="Q17019611" start="24703" end="24743" title="Union with Scotland (Amendment) Act 1707" label="Union with Scotland (Amendment) Act 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246345" start="24754" end="24778" title="Privy Council of England" label="Privy Council of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246348" start="24783" end="24808" title="Privy Council of Scotland" label="Privy Council of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146745" start="25040" end="25058" title="College of Justice" label="College of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q85739669" start="25085" end="25139" title="Act for better Securing the Duties of East India Goods" label="Act for better Securing the Duties of East India Goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="25186" end="25204" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019399" start="25256" end="25272" title="Treason Act 1708" label="Treason Act 1708"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25303" end="25310" title="High treason in the United Kingdom#History: after union with Scotland" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542931" start="25430" end="25440" title="George Clark (historian)" label="G.N. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="26111" end="26125" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q335060" start="26130" end="26143" title="James Boswell" label="James Boswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217063" start="26187" end="26231" title="A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland" label="A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="26384" end="26391" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113254" start="26507" end="26524" title="Christopher Smout" label="Christopher Smout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="26539" end="26558" title="Union of the Crowns" label="Union of the Crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="26847" end="26858" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q771662" start="27046" end="27066" title="Auld Alliance" label="alliance with France"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="27269" end="27274" title="James VI and I" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246348" start="27410" end="27435" title="Privy Council of Scotland" label="Privy Council of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="27771" end="27792" title="English Civil War" label="civil wars in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q318785" start="28441" end="28456" title="Navigation Acts" label="Navigation Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166080" start="30547" end="30560" title="Darien scheme" label="Darien scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q683504" start="30625" end="30639" title="Gulf of Darién" label="Gulf of Darién"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="30753" end="30771" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="30895" end="30902" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="31025" end="31047" title="William III of England" label="William III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526023" start="31333" end="31350" title="Colony of Jamaica" label="Colony of Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q627381" start="31641" end="31657" title="Bank of Scotland" label="Bank of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226356" start="32554" end="32573" title="John Clerk of Eldin" label="John Clerk of Eldin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254804" start="32968" end="32984" title="Glencoe Massacre" label="Glencoe Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676656" start="33105" end="33128" title="Act Anent Peace and War" label="Act Anent Peace and War"/>
<link wikidata="Q343054" start="33290" end="33310" title="Act of Security 1704" label="Act of Security 1704"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647029" start="33392" end="33406" title="Alien Act 1705" label="Alien Act 1705"/>
<link wikidata="Q40946" start="34057" end="34069" title="Daniel Defoe" label="Daniel Defoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859441" start="35906" end="35920" title="two-pound coin" label="two-pound coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q953141" start="36025" end="36061" title="2007 Scottish Parliament election" label="Scottish Parliament general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q32521" start="36082" end="36101" title="Scottish Government" label="Scottish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q961004" start="36199" end="36267" title="Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland" label="Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967502" start="36329" end="36357" title="National Museums of Scotland" label="National Museums of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051997" start="36432" end="36462" title="National Galleries of Scotland" label="National Galleries of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q343100" start="36514" end="36532" title="Acts of Union 1800" label="Acts of Union 1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="36586" end="36604" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Kingdom of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378589" start="36607" end="36627" title="English independence" label="English independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q394073" start="36630" end="36646" title="List of treaties" label="List of treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721790" start="36655" end="36681" title="MacCormick v Lord Advocate" label="MacCormick v Lord Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="36690" end="36722" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140229" start="36725" end="36740" title="Political union" label="Political union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093720" start="36743" end="36753" title="Real union" label="Real union"/>
<link wikidata="Q891905" start="36756" end="36777" title="Scottish independence" label="Scottish independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886813" start="36780" end="36800" title="Unionism in Scotland" label="Unionism in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304490" start="36803" end="36821" title="Welsh independence" label="Welsh independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q648227" start="36951" end="37002" title="A Tour thro&amp;#x27; the Whole Island of Great Britain" label="A Tour thro&amp;#x27; the Whole Island of Great Britain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2988" wikidata="Q396266" url="?curid=2988" title="Admiralty (United Kingdom)">
<text>The Admiralty was a department of the Government of the United Kingdom responsible for the command of the Royal Navy until 1964, historically under its titular head, the Lord High Admiral – one of the Great Officers of State. For much of its history, from the early 18th century until its abolition, the role of the Lord High Admiral was almost invariably put &quot;in commission&quot; and exercised by the Lords Commissioner of the Admiralty, who sat on the governing Board of Admiralty, rather than by a single person. The Admiralty was replaced by the Admiralty Board in 1964, as part of the reforms that created the Ministry of Defence and its Navy Department (later Navy Command).

Before the Acts of Union 1707, the Office of the Admiralty and Marine Affairs administered the Royal Navy of the Kingdom of England, which merged with the Royal Scots Navy and then absorbed the responsibilities of the Lord High Admiral of the Kingdom of Scotland with the unification of the Kingdom of Great Britain. The Admiralty was among the most important departments of the British Government, because of the Royal Navy&#x27;s role in the expansion and maintenance of the English overseas possessions in the 17th century, the British Empire in the 18th century, and subsequently.

The modern Admiralty Board, to which the functions of the Admiralty were transferred in 1964, is a committee of the tri-service Defence Council of the United Kingdom. This Admiralty Board meets only twice a year, and the day-to-day running of the Royal Navy is controlled by a Navy Board (not to be confused with the historic Navy Board). It is common for the various authorities now in charge of the Royal Navy to be referred to as simply &#x27;The Admiralty&#x27;.

The title of Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom was vested in the monarch from 1964 to 2011. The title was awarded to Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh by Queen Elizabeth II on his 90th birthday and since his death in 2021 has reverted to the monarch. There also continues to be a Vice-Admiral of the United Kingdom and a Rear-Admiral of the United Kingdom, both of which are honorary offices.

==History==
The office of Admiral of England (later Lord Admiral, and later Lord High Admiral) was created around 1400; there had previously been Admirals of the northern and western seas. King Henry VIII established the Council of the Marine—later to become the Navy Board—in 1546, to oversee administrative affairs of the naval service. Operational control of the Royal Navy remained the responsibility of the Lord High Admiral, who was one of the nine Great Officers of State. This management approach would continue in force in the Royal Navy until 1832.

King Charles I put the office of Lord High Admiral into commission in 1628, and control of the Royal Navy passed to a committee in the form of the Board of Admiralty. The office of Lord High Admiral passed a number of times in and out of commission until 1709, after which the office was almost permanently in commission (the last Lord High Admiral being the future King William IV in the early 19th century).

In this organization a dual system operated the Lord High Admiral (from 1546) then Commissioners of the Admiralty (from 1628) exercised the function of general control (military administration) of the Navy and they were usually responsible for the conduct of any war, while the actual supply lines, support and services were managed by four principal officers, namely, the Treasurer, Comptroller, Surveyor and Clerk of the Acts, responsible individually for finance, supervision of accounts, Shipbuilding and maintenance of ships, and record of business. These principal officers came to be known as the Navy Board responsible for &#x27;civil administration&#x27; of the navy, from 1546 to 1832.

This structure of administering the navy lasted for 285 years, however, the supply system was often inefficient and corrupt its deficiencies were due as much to its limitations of the times they operated in. The various functions within the Admiralty were not coordinated effectively and lacked inter-dependency with each other, with the result that in 1832, Sir James Graham abolished the Navy Board and merged its functions within those of the Board of Admiralty. At the time this had distinct advantages; however, it failed to retain the principle of distinctions between the Admiralty and supply, and a lot of bureaucracy followed with the merger.

In 1860 saw big growth in the development of technical crafts, the expansion of more admiralty branches that really began with age of steam that would have an enormous influence on the navy and naval thought. Between 1860 and 1908, there was no real study of strategy and of staff work conducted within the naval service; it was practically ignored. All the Navy&#x27;s talent flowed to the great technical universities. This school of thought for the next 50 years was exclusively technically based. The first serious attempt to introduce a sole management body to administer the naval service manifested itself in the creation of the Admiralty Navy War Council in 1909.

Following this, a new advisory body called the Admiralty War Staff was then instituted in 1912, headed by the Chief of the War Staff who was responsible for administering three new sub-divisions responsible for operations, intelligence and mobilisation. The new War Staff had hardly found its feet and it continually struggled with the opposition to its existence by senior officers they were categorically opposed to a staff. The deficiencies of the system within this department of state could be seen in the conduct of the Dardanelles campaign. There were no mechanisms in place to answer the big strategic questions. A Trade Division was created in 1914. Sir John Jellicoe came to the Admiralty in 1916. He re-organized the war staff as following: Chief of War Staff, Operations, Intelligence, Signal Section, Mobilisation, Trade.

It was not until 1917 that the admiralty department was again properly reorganized and began to function as a professional military staff. In May 1917, the term &quot;Admiralty War Staff&quot; was renamed and that department and its functional role were superseded by a new &quot;Admiralty Naval Staff&quot;; in addition, the newly created office of Chief of the Naval Staff was merged in the office of the First Sea Lord. Also appointed was a new post, that of Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff, and an Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff; all were given seats on the Board of Admiralty. This for the first time gave the naval staff direct representation on the board; the presence of three senior naval senior members on the board ensured the necessary authority to carry through any operation of war. The Deputy Chief of Naval Staff would direct all operations and movements of the fleet, while the Assistant Chief of Naval Staff would be responsible for mercantile movements and anti-submarine operations.

The office of Controller would be re-established to deal with all questions relating to supply; on 6 September 1917, a Deputy First Sea Lord, was added to the Board who would administer operations abroad and deal with questions of foreign policy. In October 1917, the development of the staff was carried one step further by the creation of two sub-committees of the Board—the Operations Committee and the Maintenance Committee. The First Lord of the Admiralty was chairman of both committees, and the Operations Committee consisted of the First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff, the Deputy First Sea Lord, Assistant Chief of Naval Staff, and Fifth Sea Lord.

Full operational control of the Royal Navy was finally handed over to the Chief of Naval Staff (CNS) by an order in Council, effective October 1917, under which he became responsible for the issuing of orders affecting all war operations directly to the fleet. It also empowered the CNS to issue orders in their own name, as opposed to them previously being issued by the Permanent Secretary of the Admiralty in the name of the Board. In 1964, the Admiralty—along with the War Office and the Air Ministry—were abolished as separate departments of state, and placed under one single new Ministry of Defence. Within the expanded Ministry of Defence are the new Admiralty Board which has a separate Navy Board responsible for the day-to-day running of the Royal Navy, the Army Board and the Air Force Board, each headed by the Secretary of State for Defence.

==Organizational structure==
In the 20th century the structure of the Admiralty Headquarters was predominantly organized into four parts:

# The Board of Admiralty, which directs and controls the whole machine chaired by a civilian government minister the First Lord of the Admiralty. His chief military adviser was the First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff as the Senior Naval Lord to the board.
# The Admiralty Naval Staff, advised and assisted the Board in chief strategic and operational planning, in the distributing of fleets and the allocating of assets to major naval commands and stations and in formulating official policy on tactical doctrine and requirements in regard to men and material. In order to deliver this the Naval Staff was organised into specialist Divisions and Sections. When the Admiralty unified with the Ministry of Defence in 1964 they were re designated as Directorates of the Naval Staff.
# The Admiralty Departments, which provides the men, ships, aircraft and supplies to carry out the approved policy. The departments are superintended by the various offices of the Sea Lords.
# The Department of the Permanent Secretary which was the general co-ordinating agency, regulating naval finance, providing advice on policy, conducing all correspondence on behalf of the Board and maintaining admiralty records. Its primary component to deliver this is the Admiralty Secretariat, sections of the Secretariat (other than those which provide Common Services) were known as Branches.

Board of Admiralty

When the office of Lord High Admiral was in commission, as it was for most of the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries, until it reverted to the Crown, it was exercised by a Board of Admiralty, officially known as the &quot;Commissioners for Exercising the Office of Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, &amp;c.&quot; (alternatively of England, Great Britain or the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland depending on the period). The Board of Admiralty consisted of a number of Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty. The Lords Commissioners were always a mixture of admirals, known as Naval Lords or Sea Lords and Civil Lords, normally politicians. The quorum of the Board was two commissioners and a secretary. The president of the Board was known as the First Lord of the Admiralty, who was a member of the Cabinet. After 1806, the First Lord of the Admiralty was always a civilian, while the professional head of the navy came to be (and is still today) known as the First Sea Lord.

Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty (1628–1964)

The Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty were the members of The Board of Admiralty, which exercised the office of Lord High Admiral when it was not vested in a single person. The commissioners were a mixture of politicians without naval experience and professional naval officers, the proportion of naval officers generally increasing over time.

Key Officials

First Lord of the Admiralty

The First Lord of the Admiralty or formally the Office of the First Lord of the Admiralty was the British government&#x27;s senior civilian adviser on all naval affairs and the minister responsible for the direction and control of the Admiralty and Marine Affairs Office later the Department of Admiralty.(+) His office was supported by the Naval Secretariat.

First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff

The First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff was the Chief Naval Adviser on the Board of Admiralty to the First Lord and superintended the offices of the sea lords and the admiralty naval staff.

Navy Board

The Navy Board was an independent board from 1546 until 1628 when it became subordinate to, yet autonomous of the Board of Admiralty until 1832. Its principal commissioners of the Navy advised the board in relation to civil administration of the naval affairs. The Navy Board was based at the Navy Office.

Board of Admiralty civilian members responsible other important civil functions
# Office of the Civil Lord of the Admiralty.
# Office of the Additional Civil Lord of the Admiralty.
# Office of the Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty.

Admiralty Naval Staff

It evolved from *Admiralty Navy War Council, (1909–1912) which in turn became the Admiralty War Staff, (1912–1917) before finally becoming the Admiralty Naval Staff in 1917. It was the former senior command, operational planning, policy and strategy department within the British Admiralty. It was established in 1917 and existed until 1964 when the department of the Admiralty was abolished, and the staff departments function continued within the Navy Department of the Ministry of Defence until 1971 when its functions became part of the new Naval Staff, Navy Department of the Ministry of Defence.

Offices of the Naval Staff
# Office of Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff.
# Office of the Vice Chief of the Naval Staff. 
# Offices of the Assistant Chiefs of the Naval Staff.

Admiralty Departments
The Admiralty Departments were distinct and component parts of the Department of Admiralty that were superintended by the various offices of the Sea Lords responsible for them; they were primarily administrative, research, scientific and logistical support organisations. The departments role was to provide the men, ships, aircraft and supplies to carry out the approved policy of the Board of Admiralty and conveyed to them during 20th century by the Admiralty Naval Staff.

Offices of the Sea Lords
# Office of the Deputy First Sea Lord 
# Office of the Second Sea Lord. 
# Office of the Third Sea Lord.
# Office of the Fourth Sea Lord.
# Office of Fifth Sea Lord

Department of the Permanent Secretary

The Secretary&#x27;s Department consisted of members of the civil service it was directed and controlled by a senior civil servant Permanent Secretary to the Board of Admiralty he was not a Lord Commissioner of the Admiralty, he functioned as a member of the board, and attended all of its meetings.

===Organizational structure by time period===
==&quot;Admiralty&quot; as a metonym for &quot;sea power&quot;==
In some cases, the term &quot;admiralty&quot; is used in a wider sense, as meaning &quot;sea power&quot; or &quot;rule over the seas&quot;, rather than in strict reference to the institution exercising such power. For example, the well-known lines from Kipling&#x27;s &quot;Song of the Dead&quot;:

==See also==

* Admiralty administration
* Admiralty buildings
* Admiralty chart
* Admiralty Inlet
* Admiralty Peak
* Navy Department (Ministry of Defence)
* Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom
* List of first lords of the Admiralty
* List of lords commissioners of the Admiralty
* Lord High Admiral of Scotland
* St Boniface&#x27;s Catholic College

== References ==
==Further reading==
* Daniel A. Baugh, &quot;Naval Administration in the Age of Walpole&quot; (Princeton, 1965).
* Sir John Barrow, &quot;An Autobiographical Memoir of Sir John Barrow, Bart., Late of the Admiralty&quot; (London, 1847).
* John Ehrman, &quot;The Navy in the War of William III: Its State and Direction&quot; (Cambridge, 1953).
* C. I. Hamilton, &quot;The Making of the Modern Admiralty: British Naval Policy-Making 1805–1927&quot; (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011).
* C. I. Hamilton, &quot;Selections from the Phinn Committee of Inquiry of October–November 1853 into the State of the Office of Secretary to the Admiralty, in &quot;The Naval Miscellany&quot;, volume V, edited by N. A. M. Rodger, (London: Navy Records Society, London, 1984).
* C. S. Knighton, &quot;Pepys and the Navy&quot; (Stroud: Sutton Publishing, 2003).
* Christopher Lloyd, &quot;Mr Barrow of the Admiralty&quot; (London, 1970).
* Malcolm H. Murfett, &quot;The First Sea Lords: From Fisher to Mountbatten&quot; (Westport: Praeger, 1995).
* Lady Murray, &quot;The Making of a Civil Servant: Sir Oswyn Murray, Secretary of the Admiralty 1917–1936&quot; (London, 1940).
* N.A.M. Rodger, &quot;The Admiralty&quot; (Lavenham, 1979)
* J.C. Sainty, &quot;Admiralty Officials, 1660–1870&quot; (London, 1975)
* Sir Charles Walker, &quot;Thirty-Six Years at the Admiralty&quot; (London, 1933)

== External links ==

* The Admiralty at the &quot;Survey of London&quot; online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="4" end="13" title="Admiralty (United Kingdom)" label="Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500378" start="20" end="30" title="Departments of the Government of the United Kingdom" label="department"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="38" end="70" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="Government of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="106" end="116" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153574" start="170" end="187" title="Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom" label="Lord High Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q110267513" start="201" end="224" title="Great Officers of State" label="Great Officers of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q28450623" start="266" end="278" title="Admiralty in the 18th century" label="18th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333895" start="407" end="442" title="Lords Commissioner of the Admiralty" label="Lords Commissioner of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333895" start="469" end="487" title="Board of Admiralty" label="Board of Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519420" start="555" end="570" title="Admiralty Board (United Kingdom)" label="Admiralty Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="620" end="639" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119875" start="648" end="663" title="Navy Department (Ministry of Defence)" label="Navy Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982619" start="671" end="683" title="Navy Command (Ministry of Defence)" label="Navy Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="698" end="716" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="722" end="764" title="Admiralty (United Kingdom)" label="Office of the Admiralty and Marine Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q104848453" start="782" end="792" title="History of the Royal Navy (before 1707)" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="800" end="818" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q666275" start="842" end="858" title="Royal Scots Navy" label="Royal Scots Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782467" start="905" end="922" title="Lord High Admiral of Scotland" label="Lord High Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="930" end="949" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="978" end="1002" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="1066" end="1084" title="British Government" label="British Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q617219" start="1164" end="1192" title="English overseas possessions" label="English overseas possessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q28450608" start="1193" end="1212" title="Admiralty in the 17th century" label="in the 17th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1218" end="1232" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28450623" start="1240" end="1252" title="Admiralty in the 18th century" label="18th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519420" start="1284" end="1299" title="Admiralty Board (United Kingdom)" label="Admiralty Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993771" start="1401" end="1438" title="Defence Council of the United Kingdom" label="Defence Council of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225280" start="1550" end="1560" title="Navy Board (1964–present)" label="Navy Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891147" start="1599" end="1609" title="Navy Board" label="Navy Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="1812" end="1819" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="1864" end="1896" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="1900" end="1918" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556878" start="2026" end="2060" title="Vice-Admiral of the United Kingdom" label="Vice-Admiral of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995864" start="2067" end="2101" title="Rear-Admiral of the United Kingdom" label="Rear-Admiral of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153574" start="2216" end="2233" title="Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom" label="Lord High Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058772" start="2302" end="2310" title="Admiral of the North" label="northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q37859701" start="2315" end="2322" title="Admiral of the West" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="2334" end="2344" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891147" start="2403" end="2413" title="Navy Board" label="Navy Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2506" end="2516" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q110267513" start="2595" end="2618" title="Great Officers of State" label="Great Officers of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="2705" end="2714" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333895" start="2847" end="2865" title="Board of Admiralty" label="Board of Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q130822" start="3071" end="3081" title="William IV of the United Kingdom" label="William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488533" start="3484" end="3493" title="Treasurer of the Navy" label="Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q30611733" start="3495" end="3506" title="Comptroller of the Navy (Navy Board)" label="Comptroller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448550" start="3508" end="3516" title="Surveyor of the Navy" label="Surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29467366" start="3521" end="3538" title="Clerk of the Acts" label="Clerk of the Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q43015" start="3569" end="3576" title="finance" label="finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q508295" start="3593" end="3601" title="account (accountancy)" label="accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q474200" start="3603" end="3615" title="Shipbuilding" label="Shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891147" start="3715" end="3725" title="Navy Board" label="Navy Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q333983" start="4167" end="4183" title="Sir James Graham, 2nd Baronet" label="Sir James Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982034" start="4588" end="4600" title="Naval tactics in the Age of Steam" label="age of steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873395" start="4768" end="4781" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Naval Service" label="naval service"/>
<link wikidata="Q29026279" start="5097" end="5123" title="Admiralty Navy War Council" label="Admiralty Navy War Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451109" start="5181" end="5200" title="Admiralty War Staff" label="Admiralty War Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599056" start="5345" end="5355" title="Operations Division" label="operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q598332" start="5357" end="5369" title="Naval Intelligence Division (United Kingdom)" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599994" start="5374" end="5386" title="Mobilisation Division (Royal Navy)" label="mobilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="5604" end="5623" title="department of state" label="department of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="5660" end="5680" title="Dardanelles campaign" label="Dardanelles campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q39073362" start="5757" end="5771" title="Trade Division (Royal Navy)" label="Trade Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q335028" start="5793" end="5810" title="Sir John Jellicoe" label="Sir John Jellicoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600522" start="5932" end="5946" title="Signal Division (Royal Navy)" label="Signal Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813432" start="6093" end="6107" title="Staff (military)" label="military staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025511" start="6250" end="6271" title="Admiralty Naval Staff" label="Admiralty Naval Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405865" start="6432" end="6463" title="Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808953" start="6472" end="6506" title="Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025511" start="6589" end="6600" title="Admiralty Naval Staff" label="naval staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984931" start="6992" end="7002" title="Third Sea Lord" label="Controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q28408401" start="7097" end="7118" title="Deputy First Sea Lord" label="Deputy First Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447550" start="7622" end="7636" title="Fifth Sea Lord" label="Fifth Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="7746" end="7762" title="order in Council" label="order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q645883" start="7862" end="7876" title="Military operation" label="war operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443516" start="8011" end="8047" title="Permanent Secretary of the Admiralty" label="Permanent Secretary of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="8112" end="8122" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="8131" end="8143" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="8225" end="8244" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519420" start="8298" end="8313" title="Admiralty Board (United Kingdom)" label="Admiralty Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q28225280" start="8335" end="8345" title="Navy Board (1964–present)" label="Navy Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862827" start="8408" end="8418" title="Army Board" label="Army Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828194" start="8427" end="8442" title="Air Force Board" label="Air Force Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747647" start="8463" end="8493" title="Secretary of State for Defence" label="Secretary of State for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333895" start="8641" end="8659" title="Board of Admiralty" label="Board of Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="8752" end="8779" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362267" start="8816" end="8855" title="First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff" label="First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025511" start="8901" end="8922" title="Admiralty Naval Staff" label="Admiralty Naval Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139830" start="9023" end="9095" title="List of fleets and major commands of the Royal Navy" label="fleets and the allocating of assets to major naval commands and stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600259" start="9616" end="9653" title="Department of the Permanent Secretary (Royal Navy)" label="Department of the Permanent Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q29026231" start="9820" end="9837" title="Admiralty Record Office" label="admiralty records"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600259" start="9884" end="9905" title="Admiralty Secretariat" label="Admiralty Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="10163" end="10172" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="10400" end="10407" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="10409" end="10422" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="10430" end="10473" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="10635" end="10642" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333895" start="10654" end="10678" title="Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty" label="Naval Lords or Sea Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q526999" start="10722" end="10728" title="quorum" label="quorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="10825" end="10852" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q112014" start="10878" end="10885" title="Cabinet of the United Kingdom" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362267" start="11039" end="11053" title="First Sea Lord" label="First Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q28450518" start="11733" end="11768" title="Admiralty and Marine Affairs Office" label="Admiralty and Marine Affairs Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981914" start="11839" end="11856" title="Naval Secretary" label="Naval Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740728" start="12400" end="12411" title="Navy Office (Royal Navy)" label="Navy Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600865" start="12496" end="12537" title="Civil Lord of the Admiralty (Royal Navy)" label="Office of the Civil Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q29026698" start="12541" end="12593" title="Additional Civil Lord of the Admiralty" label="Office of the Additional Civil Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12408992" start="12597" end="12665" title="Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty" label="Office of the Parliamentary and Financial Secretary to the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q29026279" start="12708" end="12734" title="Admiralty Navy War Council" label="Admiralty Navy War Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q28451109" start="12773" end="12792" title="Admiralty War Staff" label="Admiralty War Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405865" start="13323" end="13364" title="Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Office of Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405687" start="13368" end="13411" title="Vice Chief of the Naval Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Office of the Vice Chief of the Naval Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808953" start="13416" end="13466" title="Assistant Chief of the Naval Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Offices of the Assistant Chiefs of the Naval Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q28408401" start="13995" end="14030" title="Deputy First Sea Lord" label="Office of the Deputy First Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504955" start="14034" end="14063" title="Second Sea Lord" label="Office of the Second Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984931" start="14068" end="14096" title="Third Sea Lord" label="Office of the Third Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q8565154" start="14100" end="14129" title="Fourth Sea Lord" label="Office of the Fourth Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447550" start="14133" end="14157" title="Fifth Sea Lord" label="Office of Fifth Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600259" start="14202" end="14229" title="Department of the Permanent Secretary (Royal Navy)" label="Secretary&amp;#x27;s Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974879" start="14258" end="14271" title="Civil Service (United Kingdom)" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443516" start="14329" end="14374" title="Permanent Secretary to the Admiralty" label="Permanent Secretary to the Board of Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333895" start="14388" end="14422" title="Lord Commissioner of the Admiralty" label="Lord Commissioner of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="14699" end="14708" title="Naval warfare" label="sea power"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="14863" end="14870" title="Kipling" label="Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683787" start="14925" end="14949" title="Admiralty administration" label="Admiralty administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q114459664" start="14952" end="14971" title="Admiralty buildings" label="Admiralty buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204393" start="14974" end="14989" title="Admiralty chart" label="Admiralty chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q887756" start="14992" end="15007" title="Admiralty Inlet" label="Admiralty Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683776" start="15010" end="15024" title="Admiralty Peak" label="Admiralty Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119875" start="15027" end="15064" title="Navy Department (Ministry of Defence)" label="Navy Department (Ministry of Defence)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153574" start="15067" end="15106" title="Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom" label="Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="15109" end="15145" title="List of first lords of the Admiralty" label="List of first lords of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148884" start="15148" end="15192" title="List of lords commissioners of the Admiralty" label="List of lords commissioners of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782467" start="15195" end="15224" title="Lord High Admiral of Scotland" label="Lord High Admiral of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592674" start="15227" end="15262" title="St Boniface&amp;#x27;s Catholic College" label="St Boniface&amp;#x27;s Catholic College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216323" start="15303" end="15318" title="Daniel A. Baugh" label="Daniel A. Baugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972" start="15400" end="15411" title="Sir John Barrow, 1st Baronet" label="John Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q657301" start="15519" end="15530" title="John Ehrman" label="John Ehrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079272" start="15625" end="15639" title="C. I. Hamilton" label="C. I. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079272" start="15776" end="15790" title="C. I. Hamilton" label="C. I. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661458" start="15987" end="16002" title="N. A. M. Rodger" label="N. A. M. Rodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982680" start="16013" end="16033" title="Navy Records Society" label="Navy Records Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112751" start="16136" end="16153" title="Christopher Lloyd (naval historian)" label="Christopher Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q18819738" start="16375" end="16387" title="Oswyn Murray (civil servant)" label="Oswyn Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661458" start="16450" end="16463" title="N.A.M. Rodger" label="N.A.M. Rodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505497" start="16716" end="16732" title="Survey of London" label="Survey of London"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2991" wikidata="Q1179758" url="?curid=2991" title="Amphibian (disambiguation)">
<text>An [[amphibian]] is a member of the class Amphibia of ectothermic, tetrapod vertebrates

Amphibian may also refer to:
*Amphibian (comics), two superheroes from Marvel Comics
*&quot;Amphibian&quot; (song), by Björk
*Amphibious vehicle, a vehicle that can operate on water or land
**Amphibious aircraft, an aircraft for land, air, and sea
***Loening OL or Loening Amphibian, an amphibious biplane built for the US Army Air Corps and Navy
*Mark IV Amphibian, a type of World War II period British rebreather

==See also==
* Amphibia (disambiguation)
* Amphibious (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1179758" start="3" end="16" title="Amphibian (disambiguation)" label="[[amphibian]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179758" start="89" end="98" title="Amphibian (disambiguation)" label="Amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q371776" start="119" end="137" title="Amphibian (comics)" label="Amphibian (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q616420" start="175" end="203" title="Amphibian (song)" label="&amp;quot;Amphibian&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q474698" start="215" end="233" title="Amphibious vehicle" label="Amphibious vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q474709" start="281" end="300" title="Amphibious aircraft" label="Amphibious aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867857" start="340" end="350" title="Loening OL" label="Loening OL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768168" start="437" end="454" title="Mark IV Amphibian" label="Mark IV Amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q106943114" start="521" end="546" title="Amphibia (disambiguation)" label="Amphibia (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179247" start="549" end="576" title="Amphibious (disambiguation)" label="Amphibious (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2992" wikidata="Q477415" url="?curid=2992" title="Amputation">
<text>Amputation is the removal of a limb or other body part by trauma, medical illness, or surgery. As a surgical measure, it is used to control pain or a disease process in the affected limb, such as malignancy or gangrene. In some cases, it is carried out on individuals as a preventive surgery for such problems. A special case is that of congenital amputation, a congenital disorder, where fetal limbs have been cut off by constrictive bands. In some countries, judicial amputation is currently used to punish people who commit crimes. Amputation has also been used as a tactic in war and acts of terrorism; it may also occur as a war injury. In some cultures and religions, minor amputations or mutilations are considered a ritual accomplishment. When done by a person, the person executing the amputation is an amputator. The oldest evidence of this practice comes from a skeleton found buried in Liang Tebo cave, East Kalimantan, Indonesian Borneo dating back to at least 31,000 years ago, where it was done when the amputee was a young child.

==Types==
=== Leg ===
Lower limb amputations can be divided into two broad categories: minor and major amputations. Minor amputations generally refer to the amputation of digits. Major amputations are commonly below-knee- or above-knee amputations. Common partial foot amputations include the Chopart, Lisfranc, and ray amputations.

Common forms of ankle disarticulations include Pyrogoff, Boyd, and Syme amputations. A less common major amputation is the Van Nes rotation, or rotationplasty, i.e. the turning around and reattachment of the foot to allow the ankle joint to take over the function of the knee.

Types of amputations include:

; partial foot amputation: amputation of the lower limb distal to the ankle joint
; ankle disarticulation: amputation of the lower limb at the ankle joint
; trans-tibial amputation: amputation of the lower limb between the knee joint and the ankle joint, commonly referred to as a below-knee amputation
; knee disarticulation: amputation of the lower limb at the knee joint
; trans-femoral amputation: amputation of the lower limb between the hip joint and the knee joint, commonly referred to an above-knee amputation
; hip disarticulation: amputation of the lower limb at the hip joint
; trans-pelvic disarticulation: amputation of the whole lower limb together with all or part of the pelvis, also known as a hemipelvectomy or hindquarter amputation

===Arm===
Types of upper extremity amputations include:
* partial hand amputation
* wrist disarticulation
* trans-radial amputation, commonly referred to as below-elbow or forearm amputation
* elbow disarticulation
* trans-humeral amputation, commonly referred to as above-elbow amputation
* shoulder disarticulation
* forequarter amputation
A variant of the trans-radial amputation is the Krukenberg procedure in which the radius and ulna are used to create a stump capable of a pincer action.

===Other===

* Facial amputations include but are not limited to:
** amputation of the ears
** amputation of the nose (rhinotomy)
** amputation of the tongue (glossectomy).
** amputation of the eyes (enucleation).
** amputation of the teeth (Dental evulsion). Removal of teeth, mainly incisors, is or was practiced by some cultures for ritual purposes (for instance in the Iberomaurusian culture of Neolithic North Africa).
* Breasts:
** amputation of the breasts (mastectomy).
* Genitals:
** amputation of the testicles (castration).
** amputation of the penis (penectomy).
** amputation of the foreskin (circumcision).
** amputation of the clitoris (clitoridectomy).

Hemicorporectomy, or amputation at the waist, and decapitation, or amputation at the neck, are the most radical amputations.

Genital modification and mutilation may involve amputating tissue, although not necessarily as a result of injury or disease.

Laryngectomy is the amputation of the larynx.

===Self-amputation===
In some rare cases when a person has become trapped in a deserted place, with no means of communication or hope of rescue, the victim has amputated their own limb. The most notable case of this is Aron Ralston, a hiker who amputated his own right forearm after it was pinned by a boulder in a hiking accident and he was unable to free himself for over five days.

Body integrity identity disorder is a psychological condition in which an individual feels compelled to remove one or more of their body parts, usually a limb. In some cases, that individual may take drastic measures to remove the offending appendages, either by causing irreparable damage to the limb so that medical intervention cannot save the limb, or by causing the limb to be severed.

===Urgent===
In surgery, a guillotine amputation is an amputation performed without closure of the skin in an urgent setting. Typical indications include catastrophic trauma or infection control in the setting of infected gangrene. A guillotine amputation is typically followed with a more time-consuming, definitive amputation such as an above or below knee amputation.

==Causes==

===Circulatory disorders===
* Diabetic vasculopathy
* Sepsis with peripheral necrosis
* Peripheral artery disease which can lead to gangrene
* A severe deep vein thrombosis (phlegmasia cerulea dolens) can cause compartment syndrome and gangrene

===Neoplasm===

* Cancerous bone or soft tissue tumors (e.g. osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, epithelioid sarcoma, Ewing&#x27;s sarcoma, synovial sarcoma, sacrococcygeal teratoma, liposarcoma), melanoma

===Trauma===

* Severe limb injuries in which the efforts to save the limb fail or the limb cannot be saved.
* Traumatic amputation (an unexpected amputation that occurs at the scene of an accident, where the limb is partially or entirely severed as a direct result of the accident, for example, a finger that is severed from the blade of a table saw)
* Amputation in utero (Amniotic band)

===Congenital anomalies===
* Deformities of digits and/or limbs (e.g., proximal femoral focal deficiency, Fibular hemimelia)
* Extra digits and/or limbs (e.g., polydactyly)

===Infection===
=== Frostbite ===

Frostbite is a cold-related injury occurring when an area (typically a limb or other extremity) is exposed to extreme low temperatures, causing the freezing of the skin or other tissues. Its pathophysiology involves the formation of ice crystals upon freezing and blood clots upon thawing, leading to cell damage and cell death. Treatment of severe frostbite may require surgical amputation of the affected tissue or limb; if there is deep injury autoamputation may occur.

===Athletic performance===
Sometimes professional athletes may choose to have a non-essential digit amputated to relieve chronic pain and impaired performance.
* Australian Rules footballer Daniel Chick elected to have his left ring finger amputated as chronic pain and injury was limiting his performance.
* Rugby union player Jone Tawake also had a finger removed.
* National Football League safety Ronnie Lott had the tip of his little finger removed after it was damaged in the 1985 NFL season.

=== Criminal penalties ===

* According to Quran 5:38, the punishment for stealing is the amputation of the hand. Under Sharia law, after repeated offense, the foot may also be cut off. This is still in practice today in countries like Brunei, the United Arab Emirates, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, and 11 of the 36 states within Nigeria.
* Cross-amputation is one of the Hudud punishments prescribed under Islamic jurisprudence (Sharia law) and involves cutting off the right hand and left foot of the alleged transgressor. The scriptural authority for the double amputation procedure is in the Quran (&quot;surah&quot; 5.33-34) which stipulates: The severe punishment, for &quot;highway robbery (&quot;hirabah&quot;, &quot;qat&#x27; al-tariq&quot;) and civil disturbance against Islam&quot;, is usually carried out in a single session in public, without anaesthetic and using a sword. The ancient punishment is practised in Islamic countries such as Saudi Arabia; Sudan; Somalia; Mauritania, the Maldives; Iran; Taliban-era Afghanistan and Yemen.
* In 1779, Thomas Jefferson proposed a bill to the Virginia Assembly that ostensibly would have replaced capital punishment with other penalties, including amputation, for certain crimes, although not all were really punishable by death at the time. For the crimes of rape, sodomy, and polygamy (the latter removed from a later version), the punishment was to be castration for men or rhinotomy for women. For intentional maiming, the bill specified literal eye for an eye retribution. The bill never passed, due to the combination of its perceived barbarity in some parts and perceived leniency in others.
* From the 16th century, English law provided for cutting off a hand as punishment for striking someone inside a courtroom. Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s punishments revision bill also intended to repeal this.
* As of 2021, this form of punishment is controversial, as most modern cultures consider it to be morally abhorrent, as it has the effect of permanently disabling a person and constitutes torture. It is thus seen as grossly disproportionate for crimes less than those such as murder.

== Surgery ==

===Method===

Surgeons performing an amputation have to first ligate the supplying artery and vein, so as to prevent hemorrhage (bleeding). The muscles are transected, and finally, the bone is sawed through with an oscillating saw. Sharp and rough edges of bones are filed, skin and muscle flaps are then transposed over the stump, occasionally with the insertion of elements to attach a prosthesis.

Distal stabilisation of muscles is often performed. This allows effective muscle contraction which reduces atrophy, allows functional use of the stump and maintains soft tissue coverage of the remnant bone. The preferred stabilisation technique is myodesis where the muscle is attached to the bone or its periosteum. In joint disarticulation amputations tenodesis may be used where the muscle tendon is attached to the bone. Muscles are attached under similar tension to normal physiological conditions.

An experimental technique known as the &quot;Ewing amputation&quot; aims to improve post-amputation proprioception. Another technique with similar goals, which has been tested in a clinical trial, is Agonist-antagonist Myoneural Interface (AMI).

In 1920,  Dr. Janos Ertl Sr. of Hungary, developed the Ertl procedure in order to return a high number of amputees to the work force. The Ertl technique, an osteomyoplastic procedure for transtibial amputation, can be used to create a highly functional residual limb. Creation of a tibiofibular bone bridge provides a stable, broad tibiofibular articulation that may be capable of some distal weight bearing. Several different modified techniques and fibular bridge fixation methods have been used; however, no current evidence exists regarding comparison of the different techniques.

=== Post-operative management ===
A 2019 Cochrane systematic review aimed to determine whether rigid dressings were more effective than soft dressings in helping wounds heal following transtibial (below the knee) amputations. Due to the limited and very low certainty evidence available, the authors concluded that it was uncertain what the benefits and harms were for each dressing type. They recommended that clinicians consider the pros and cons of each dressing type on a case-by-case basis: rigid dressings may potentially benefit patients who have a high risk of falls; soft dressings may potentially benefit patients who have poor skin integrity.

A 2017 review found that the use of rigid removable dressings (RRD&#x27;s) in trans-tibial amputations, rather than soft bandaging, improved healing time, reduced edema, prevented knee flexion contractures and reduced complications, including further amputation, from external trauma such as falls onto the stump.

Post-operative management, in addition to wound healing, considers maintenance of limb strength, joint range, edema management, preservation of the intact limb (if applicable) and stump desensitization.

== Trauma ==
Traumatic amputation is the partial or total avulsion of a part of a body during a serious accident, like traffic, labor, or combat.

Traumatic amputation of a human limb, either partial or total, creates the immediate danger of death from blood loss.

Orthopedic surgeons often assess the severity of different injuries using the Mangled Extremity Severity Score. Given different clinical and situational factors, they can predict the likelihood of amputation. This is especially useful for emergency physicians to quickly evaluate patients and decide on consultations.

===Causes===

Traumatic amputation is uncommon in humans (1 per 20,804 population per year). Loss of limb usually happens immediately during the accident, but sometimes a few days later after medical complications. Statistically, the most common causes of traumatic amputations are:
* Vehicle accidents (cars, motorcycles, bicycles, trains, etc.)
* Labor accidents (equipment, instruments, cylinders, chainsaws, press machines, meat machines, wood machines, etc.)
* Agricultural accidents, with machines and mower equipment
* Electric shock hazards
* Firearms, bladed weapons, explosives
* Violent rupture of ship rope or industry wire rope
* Ring traction (ring amputation, de-gloving injuries)
* Building doors and car doors
* Animal attacks
* Gas cylinder explosions
* Other rare accidents

===Treatment===
The development of the science of microsurgery over the last 40 years has provided several treatment options for a traumatic amputation, depending on the patient&#x27;s specific trauma and clinical situation:
* 1st choice: Surgical amputation - break - prosthesis
* 2nd choice: Surgical amputation - transplantation of other tissue - plastic reconstruction.
* 3rd choice: Replantation - reconnection - revascularisation of amputated limb, by microscope (after 1969)
* 4th choice: Transplantation of cadaveric hand (after 2000)

===Epidemiology===

* In the United States in 1999, there were 14,420 non-fatal traumatic amputations according to the American Statistical Association. Of these, 4,435 occurred as a result of traffic and transportation accidents and 9,985 were due to labor accidents. Of all traumatic amputations, the distribution percentage is 30.75% for traffic accidents and 69.24% for labor accidents.
* The population of the United States in 1999 was about 300,000,000, so the conclusion is that there is one amputation per 20,804 persons per year. In the group of labor amputations, 53% occurred in laborers and technicians, 30% in production and service workers, 16% in silviculture and fishery workers.
* A study found that in 2010, 22.8% of patients undergoing amputation of a lower extremity in the United States were readmitted to the hospital within 30 days.
* In 2017, an estimated 57.7 million people globally were living with existing traumatic limb injuries. Of these 57.7 million, the leading causes of amputation &quot;were falls (36.2%), road injuries (15.7%), other transportation injuries (11.2%), and mechanical forces (10.4%).&quot;
* On 2 August 2023, an investigation by &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; found that Ukrainian medical amputations in the war came to between 20,000 and 50,000 including both military and civilians. In comparison, during World War One 41,000 British and 67,000 Germans needed amputations.
* In 2024 Gaza was the site of the most child amputees in the history.

==Prevention==
Methods in preventing amputation, limb-sparing techniques, depend on the problems that might cause amputations to be necessary. Chronic infections, often caused by diabetes or decubitus ulcers in bedridden patients, are common causes of infections that lead to gangrene, which, when widespread, necessitates amputation.

There are two key challenges: first, many patients have impaired circulation in their extremities, and second, they have difficulty curing infections in limbs with poor blood circulation.

Crush injuries where there is extensive tissue damage and poor circulation also benefit from hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT). The high level of oxygenation and revascularization speed up recovery times and prevent infections.

A study found that the patented method called Circulator Boot achieved significant results in prevention of amputation in patients with diabetes and arteriosclerosis. Another study found it also effective for healing limb ulcers caused by peripheral vascular disease. The boot checks the heart rhythm and compresses the limb between heartbeats; the compression helps cure the wounds in the walls of veins and arteries, and helps to push the blood back to the heart.

For victims of trauma, advances in microsurgery in the 1970s have made replantations of severed body parts possible.

The establishment of laws, rules, and guidelines, and employment of modern equipment help protect people from traumatic amputations.

==Prognosis==
The individual may experience psychological trauma and emotional discomfort. The stump will remain an area of reduced mechanical stability. Limb loss can present significant or even drastic practical limitations.

A large proportion of amputees (50–80%) experience the phenomenon of phantom limbs; they feel body parts that are no longer there. These limbs can itch, ache, burn, feel tense, dry or wet, locked in or trapped or they can feel as if they are moving. Some scientists believe it has to do with a kind of neural map that the brain has of the body, which sends information to the rest of the brain about limbs regardless of their existence. Phantom sensations and phantom pain may also occur after the removal of body parts other than the limbs, e.g. after amputation of the breast, extraction of a tooth (phantom tooth pain) or removal of an eye (phantom eye syndrome).

A similar phenomenon is unexplained sensation in a body part unrelated to the amputated limb. It has been hypothesized that the portion of the brain responsible for processing stimulation from amputated limbs, being deprived of input, expands into the surrounding brain, (&quot;Phantoms in the Brain&quot;: V.S. Ramachandran and Sandra Blakeslee) such that an individual who has had an arm amputated will experience unexplained pressure or movement on his face or head.

In many cases, the phantom limb aids in adaptation to a prosthesis, as it permits the person to experience proprioception of the prosthetic limb. To support improved resistance or usability, comfort or healing, some type of stump socks may be worn instead of or as part of wearing a prosthesis.

Another side effect can be heterotopic ossification, especially when a bone injury is combined with a head injury. The brain signals the bone to grow instead of scar tissue to form, and nodules and other growth can interfere with prosthetics and sometimes require further operations. This type of injury has been especially common among soldiers wounded by improvised explosive devices in the Iraq War.

Due to technological advances in prosthetics, many amputees live active lives with little restriction. Organizations such as the Challenged Athletes Foundation have been developed to give amputees the opportunity to be involved in athletics and adaptive sports such as amputee soccer.

Nearly half of the individuals who have an amputation due to vascular disease will die within 5 years, usually secondary to the extensive co-morbidities rather than due to direct consequences of amputation. This is higher than the five year mortality rates for breast cancer, colon cancer, and prostate cancer. Of persons with diabetes who have a lower extremity amputation, up to 55% will require amputation of the second leg within two to three years.

==Etymology==
The word amputation is borrowed from Latin &quot;amputātus,&quot; past participle of &quot;amputāre&quot; &quot;to prune back (a plant), prune away, remove by cutting (unwanted parts or features), cut off (a branch, limb, body part),&quot; from &quot;am-,&quot; assimilated variant of &quot;amb-&quot; &quot;about, around&quot; + &quot;putāre&quot; &quot;to prune, make clean or tidy, scour (wool)&quot;. The English word &quot;Poes&quot; was first applied to surgery in the 17th century, possibly first in Peter Lowe&#x27;s &quot;A discourse of the Whole Art of Chirurgerie&quot; (published in either 1597 or 1612); his work was derived from 16th-century French texts and early English writers also used the words &quot;extirpation&quot; (16th-century French texts tended to use &quot;extirper&quot;), &quot;disarticulation&quot;, and &quot;dismemberment&quot; (from the Old French &quot;desmembrer&quot; and a more common term before the 17th century for limb loss or removal), or simply &quot;cutting&quot;, but by the end of the 17th century &quot;amputation&quot; had come to dominate as the accepted medical term.

==Notable cases==
== See also ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Bilguer, Johann Ulrich, (1764), &quot;A dissertation on the inutility of the amputation of limbs&quot;.
* Miller, Brian Craig. &quot;Empty Sleeves: Amputation in the Civil War South&quot; (University of Georgia Press, 2015). xviii, 257 pp.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q477415" start="0" end="10" title="Amputation" label="Amputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190780" start="31" end="35" title="Limb (anatomy)" label="limb"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="58" end="64" title="Physical trauma" label="trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="66" end="81" title="medical illness" label="medical illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="86" end="93" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="196" end="206" title="cancer" label="malignancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="210" end="218" title="gangrene" label="gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773974" start="273" end="291" title="Preventive healthcare" label="preventive surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160408" start="337" end="358" title="congenital amputation" label="congenital amputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="362" end="381" title="congenital disorder" label="congenital disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="389" end="394" title="fetus" label="fetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186361" start="499" end="508" title="punishment" label="to punish"/>
<link wikidata="Q767568" start="695" end="705" title="mutilation" label="mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899" start="915" end="930" title="East Kalimantan" label="East Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="943" end="949" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q154425" start="1218" end="1224" title="toe" label="digits"/>
<link wikidata="Q370538" start="1340" end="1347" title="François Chopart" label="Chopart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394641" start="1349" end="1357" title="Tarsometatarsal articulations" label="Lisfranc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281315" start="1403" end="1418" title="disarticulation" label="disarticulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478424" start="1504" end="1520" title="Van Nes rotation" label="Van Nes rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314029" start="1569" end="1581" title="replantation" label="reattachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q373550" start="2402" end="2416" title="hemipelvectomy" label="hemipelvectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468740" start="2763" end="2785" title="forequarter amputation" label="forequarter amputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790123" start="2834" end="2854" title="Krukenberg procedure" label="Krukenberg procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4310099" start="3059" end="3068" title="rhinotomy" label="rhinotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571908" start="3099" end="3110" title="glossectomy" label="glossectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345833" start="3140" end="3151" title="enucleation of the eye" label="enucleation"/>
<link wikidata="Q108037281" start="3182" end="3197" title="Dental evulsion" label="Dental evulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470903" start="3313" end="3327" title="Iberomaurusian" label="Iberomaurusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408950" start="3339" end="3361" title="Prehistoric Central North Africa" label="Neolithic North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q848318" start="3405" end="3415" title="mastectomy" label="mastectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="3420" end="3428" title="Genitals" label="Genitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q58929" start="3462" end="3472" title="castration" label="castration"/>
<link wikidata="Q967839" start="3503" end="3512" title="penectomy" label="penectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q673203" start="3536" end="3544" title="foreskin" label="foreskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="3546" end="3558" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707435" start="3592" end="3606" title="clitoridectomy" label="clitoridectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604776" start="3610" end="3626" title="Hemicorporectomy" label="Hemicorporectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="3660" end="3672" title="decapitation" label="decapitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309852" start="3736" end="3771" title="Genital modification and mutilation" label="Genital modification and mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472065" start="3863" end="3875" title="Laryngectomy" label="Laryngectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q502868" start="4129" end="4141" title="Aron Ralston" label="Aron Ralston"/>
<link wikidata="Q890069" start="4296" end="4328" title="Body integrity identity disorder" label="Body integrity identity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="4704" end="4711" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="4901" end="4918" title="infected gangrene" label="infected gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q477415" start="5027" end="5057" title="above knee amputation" label="above or below knee amputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="5102" end="5110" title="Diabetes" label="Diabetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="5126" end="5132" title="Sepsis" label="Sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q378681" start="5160" end="5185" title="Peripheral artery disease" label="Peripheral artery disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="5204" end="5212" title="gangrene" label="gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762339" start="5224" end="5244" title="deep vein thrombosis" label="deep vein thrombosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q820818" start="5246" end="5271" title="phlegmasia cerulea dolens" label="phlegmasia cerulea dolens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778968" start="5283" end="5303" title="compartment syndrome" label="compartment syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q549534" start="5379" end="5391" title="osteosarcoma" label="osteosarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076087" start="5393" end="5407" title="chondrosarcoma" label="chondrosarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362453" start="5409" end="5421" title="fibrosarcoma" label="fibrosarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383708" start="5423" end="5442" title="epithelioid sarcoma" label="epithelioid sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138580" start="5444" end="5464" title="Ewing&amp;#x27;s sarcoma" label="Ewing&amp;#x27;s sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619315" start="5466" end="5482" title="synovial sarcoma" label="synovial sarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779119" start="5484" end="5507" title="sacrococcygeal teratoma" label="sacrococcygeal teratoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827425" start="5509" end="5520" title="liposarcoma" label="liposarcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q180614" start="5523" end="5531" title="melanoma" label="melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="5561" end="5569" title="injury" label="injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="5644" end="5653" title="Physical trauma" label="Traumatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q473753" start="5908" end="5921" title="Amniotic band" label="Amniotic band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252853" start="5995" end="6028" title="proximal femoral focal deficiency" label="proximal femoral focal deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411024" start="6030" end="6047" title="Fibular hemimelia" label="Fibular hemimelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q371520" start="6084" end="6095" title="polydactyly" label="polydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350326" start="6133" end="6142" title="Frostbite" label="Frostbite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135939" start="6324" end="6339" title="pathophysiology" label="pathophysiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588755" start="6397" end="6407" title="blood clot" label="blood clot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058184" start="6434" end="6445" title="cell damage" label="cell damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383867" start="6450" end="6460" title="cell death" label="cell death"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826146" start="6580" end="6594" title="autoamputation" label="autoamputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066131" start="6657" end="6665" title="Sportsperson" label="athletes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216799" start="6797" end="6809" title="Daniel Chick" label="Daniel Chick"/>
<link wikidata="Q192298" start="6835" end="6846" title="ring finger" label="ring finger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="6916" end="6927" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183546" start="6935" end="6946" title="Jone Tawake" label="Jone Tawake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="6976" end="7000" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q24994" start="7001" end="7007" title="Safety (American and Canadian football position)" label="safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q726226" start="7008" end="7019" title="Ronnie Lott" label="Ronnie Lott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611428" start="7089" end="7104" title="1985 NFL season" label="1985 NFL season"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7150" end="7160" title="Quran 5:38" label="Quran 5:38"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="7227" end="7237" title="Sharia law" label="Sharia law"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="7343" end="7349" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="7355" end="7375" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="7377" end="7381" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="7383" end="7395" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="7397" end="7402" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="7435" end="7442" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q125634603" start="7446" end="7462" title="Cross-amputation" label="Cross-amputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140189" start="7477" end="7482" title="Hudud" label="Hudud"/>
<link wikidata="Q484181" start="7512" end="7533" title="Fiqh" label="Islamic jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="7701" end="7706" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q186361" start="7764" end="7774" title="punishment" label="punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5768826" start="7809" end="7816" title="hirabah" label="hirabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="8165" end="8181" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q530970" start="8205" end="8222" title="Virginia Assembly" label="Virginia Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="8259" end="8277" title="capital punishment" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q58929" start="8517" end="8527" title="castration" label="castration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4310099" start="8539" end="8548" title="rhinotomy" label="rhinotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389131" start="8564" end="8583" title="Mayhem (crime)" label="intentional maiming"/>
<link wikidata="Q312718" start="8612" end="8626" title="eye for an eye" label="eye for an eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144381" start="9327" end="9333" title="ligature (medicine)" label="ligate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9655" start="9348" end="9354" title="artery" label="artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="9359" end="9363" title="vein" label="vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q166019" start="9382" end="9392" title="hemorrhage" label="hemorrhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="9450" end="9454" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934510" start="9480" end="9495" title="oscillating saw" label="oscillating saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q181802" start="9653" end="9663" title="prosthesis" label="prosthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129066" start="10271" end="10285" title="proprioception" label="proprioception"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="10450" end="10457" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105202" start="11045" end="11053" title="Cochrane (organisation)" label="Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="11054" end="11071" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q977628" start="13607" end="13619" title="microsurgery" label="microsurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314029" start="13945" end="13957" title="Replantation" label="Replantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q467040" start="14220" end="14252" title="American Statistical Association" label="American Statistical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="15288" end="15311" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="15465" end="15478" title="World War One" label="World War One"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="15543" end="15547" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548933" start="15654" end="15677" title="limb-sparing techniques" label="limb-sparing techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q308978" start="15796" end="15812" title="decubitus ulcers" label="decubitus ulcers"/>
<link wikidata="Q731615" start="16223" end="16248" title="Hyperbaric medicine" label="hyperbaric oxygen therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q977628" start="16860" end="16872" title="microsurgery" label="microsurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191062" start="17374" end="17386" title="phantom limb" label="phantom limb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508908" start="17949" end="17969" title="phantom eye syndrome" label="phantom eye syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149841" start="18251" end="18272" title="Phantoms in the Brain" label="Phantoms in the Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q380221" start="18280" end="18297" title="V.S. Ramachandran" label="V.S. Ramachandran"/>
<link wikidata="Q22955714" start="18302" end="18318" title="Sandra Blakeslee" label="Sandra Blakeslee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129066" start="18551" end="18565" title="proprioception" label="proprioception"/>
<link wikidata="Q874265" start="18668" end="18678" title="stump sock" label="stump sock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747886" start="18767" end="18791" title="heterotopic ossification" label="heterotopic ossification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249453" start="19097" end="19124" title="improvised explosive device" label="improvised explosive device"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="19133" end="19141" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068935" start="19273" end="19303" title="Challenged Athletes Foundation" label="Challenged Athletes Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q814517" start="19389" end="19404" title="adaptive sports" label="adaptive sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748578" start="19413" end="19427" title="Amputee football" label="amputee soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281315" start="20708" end="20723" title="disarticulation" label="disarticulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q661297" start="20741" end="20754" title="dismemberment" label="dismemberment"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2994" wikidata="Q175029" url="?curid=2994" title="Anemometer">
<text>In meteorology, an anemometer () is a device that measures wind speed and direction. It is a common instrument used in weather stations. The earliest known description of an anemometer was by Italian architect and author Leon Battista Alberti (1404–1472) in 1450.

==History==

The anemometer has changed little since its development in the 15th century. Alberti is said to have invented it around 1450. In the ensuing centuries numerous others, including Robert Hooke
(1635–1703), developed their own versions, with some mistakenly credited as its inventor. In 1846, Thomas Romney Robinson (1792–1882) improved the design by using four hemispherical cups and mechanical wheels. In 1926, Canadian meteorologist John Patterson (1872–1956) developed a three-cup anemometer, which was improved by Brevoort and Joiner in 1935. In 1991, Derek Weston added the ability to measure wind direction. In 1994, Andreas Pflitsch developed the sonic anemometer.

==Velocity anemometers==

===Cup anemometers===

A simple type of anemometer was invented in 1845 by Rev. Dr. John Thomas Romney Robinson of Armagh Observatory. It consisted of four hemispherical cups on horizontal arms mounted on a vertical shaft. The air flow past the cups in any horizontal direction turned the shaft at a rate roughly proportional to the wind&#x27;s speed. Therefore, counting the shaft&#x27;s revolutions over a set time interval produced a value proportional to the average wind speed for a wide range of speeds. This type of instrument is also called a &quot;rotational&quot; anemometer.

====Four cup====
With a four-cup anemometer, the wind always has the hollow of one cup presented to it, and is blowing on the back of the opposing cup. Since a hollow hemisphere has a drag coefficient of .38 on the spherical side and 1.42 on the hollow side, more force is generated on the cup that presenting its hollow side to the wind. Because of this asymmetrical force, torque is generated on the anemometer&#x27;s axis, causing it to spin.

Theoretically, the anemometer&#x27;s speed of rotation should be proportional to the wind speed because the force produced on an object is proportional to the speed of the gas or fluid flowing past it. However, in practice, other factors influence the rotational speed, including turbulence produced by the apparatus, increasing drag in opposition to the torque produced by the cups and support arms, and friction on the mount point. When Robinson first designed his anemometer, he asserted that the cups moved one-third of the speed of the wind, unaffected by cup size or arm length. This was apparently confirmed by some early independent experiments, but it was incorrect. Instead, the ratio of the speed of the wind and that of the cups, the &quot;anemometer factor&quot;, depends on the dimensions of the cups and arms, and can have a value between two and a little over three. Once the error was discovered, all previous experiments involving anemometers had to be repeated.

====Three cup====
The three-cup anemometer developed by Canadian John Patterson in 1926, and subsequent cup improvements by Brevoort &amp; Joiner of the United States in 1935, led to a cupwheel design with a nearly linear response and an error of less than 3% up to . Patterson found that each cup produced maximum torque when it was at 45° to the wind flow. The three-cup anemometer also had a more constant torque and responded more quickly to gusts than the four-cup anemometer.

====Three cup wind direction====
The three-cup anemometer was further modified by Australian Dr. Derek Weston in 1991 to also measure wind direction. He added a tag to one cup, causing the cupwheel speed to increase and decrease as the tag moved alternately with and against the wind. Wind direction is calculated from these cyclical changes in speed, while wind speed is determined from the average cupwheel speed.

Three-cup anemometers are currently the industry standard for wind resource assessment studies and practice.

===Vane anemometers===
One of the other forms of mechanical velocity anemometer is the &quot;vane anemometer&quot;. It may be described as a windmill or a propeller anemometer. Unlike the Robinson anemometer, whose axis of rotation is vertical, the vane anemometer must have its axis parallel to the direction of the wind and is therefore horizontal. Furthermore, since the wind varies in direction and the axis has to follow its changes, a wind vane or some other contrivance to fulfill the same purpose must be employed.

A &quot;vane anemometer&quot; thus combines a propeller and a tail on the same axis to obtain accurate and precise wind speed and direction measurements from the same instrument. The speed of the fan is measured by a revolution counter and converted to a windspeed by an electronic chip. Hence, volumetric flow rate may be calculated if the cross-sectional area is known.

In cases where the direction of the air motion is always the same, as in ventilating shafts of mines and buildings, wind vanes known as air meters are employed, and give satisfactory results.

===Hot-wire anemometers===

Hot wire anemometers use a fine wire (on the order of several micrometres) electrically heated to some temperature above the ambient. Air flowing past the wire cools the wire. As the electrical resistance of most metals is dependent upon the temperature of the metal (tungsten is a popular choice for hot-wires), a relationship can be obtained between the resistance of the wire and the speed of the air. In most cases, they cannot be used to measure the direction of the airflow, unless coupled with a wind vane.

Several ways of implementing this exist, and hot-wire devices can be further classified as CCA (constant current anemometer), CVA (constant voltage anemometer) and CTA (constant-temperature anemometer). The voltage output from these anemometers is thus the result of some sort of circuit within the device trying to maintain the specific variable (current, voltage or temperature) constant, following Ohm&#x27;s law.

Additionally, PWM (pulse-width modulation) anemometers are also used, wherein the velocity is inferred by the time length of a repeating pulse of current that brings the wire up to a specified resistance and then stops until a threshold &quot;floor&quot; is reached, at which time the pulse is sent again.

Hot-wire anemometers, while extremely delicate, have extremely high frequency-response and fine spatial resolution compared to other measurement methods, and as such are almost universally employed for the detailed study of turbulent flows, or any flow in which rapid velocity fluctuations are of interest.

An industrial version of the fine-wire anemometer is the thermal flow meter, which follows the same concept, but uses two pins or strings to monitor the variation in temperature. The strings contain fine wires, but encasing the wires makes them much more durable and capable of accurately measuring air, gas, and emissions flow in pipes, ducts, and stacks. Industrial applications often contain dirt that will damage the classic hot-wire anemometer.

===Laser Doppler anemometers===
In laser Doppler velocimetry, laser Doppler anemometers use a beam of light from a laser that is divided into two beams, with one propagated out of the anemometer. Particulates (or deliberately introduced seed material) flowing along with air molecules near where the beam exits reflect, or backscatter, the light back into a detector, where it is measured relative to the original laser beam. When the particles are in great motion, they produce a Doppler shift for measuring wind speed in the laser light, which is used to calculate the speed of the particles, and therefore the air around the anemometer.
===Ultrasonic anemometers===

Ultrasonic anemometers, first developed in the 1950s, use ultrasonic sound waves to measure wind velocity. They measure wind speed based on the time of flight of sonic pulses between pairs of transducers.

The time that a sonic pulse takes to travel from one transducer to its pair is inversely proportionate to the speed of sound in air plus the wind velocity in the same direction: formula_1 where formula_2 is the time of flight, formula_3 is the distance between transducers, formula_4 is the speed of sound in air and formula_5 is the wind velocity. In other words, the faster the wind is blowing, the faster the sound pulse travels. To correct for the speed of sound in air (which varies according to temperature, pressure and humidity) sound pulses are sent in both directions and the wind velocity is calculated using the forward and reverse times of flight: formula_6 where formula_7 is the forward time of flight and formula_8 the reverse.

Because ultrasonic anenometers have no moving parts, they need little maintenance and can be used in harsh environments. They operate over a wide range of wind speeds. They can measure rapid changes in wind speed and direction, taking many measurements each second, and so are useful in measuring turbulent air flow patterns.

Their main disadvantage is the distortion of the air flow by the structure supporting the transducers, which requires a correction based upon wind tunnel measurements to minimize the effect. Rain drops or ice on the transducers can also cause inaccuracies.

Since the speed of sound varies with temperature, and is virtually stable with pressure change, ultrasonic anemometers are also used as thermometers.

Measurements from pairs of transducers can be combined to yield a measurement of velocity in 1-, 2-, or 3-dimensional flow. Two-dimensional (wind speed and wind direction) sonic anemometers are used in applications such as weather stations, ship navigation, aviation, weather buoys and wind turbines. Monitoring wind turbines usually requires a refresh rate of wind speed measurements of 3 Hz, easily achieved by sonic anemometers. Three-dimensional sonic anemometers are widely used to measure gas emissions and ecosystem fluxes using the eddy covariance method when used with fast-response infrared gas analyzers or laser-based analyzers.

====Acoustic resonance anemometers====

Acoustic resonance anemometers are a more recent variant of sonic anemometer. The technology was invented by Savvas Kapartis and patented in 1999. Whereas conventional sonic anemometers rely on time of flight measurement, acoustic resonance sensors use resonating acoustic (ultrasonic) waves within a small purpose-built cavity in order to perform their measurement.
Built into the cavity is an array of ultrasonic transducers, which are used to create the separate standing-wave patterns at ultrasonic frequencies. As wind passes through the cavity, a change in the wave&#x27;s property occurs (phase shift). By measuring the amount of phase shift in the received signals by each transducer, and then by mathematically processing the data, the sensor is able to provide an accurate horizontal measurement of wind speed and direction.

Because acoustic resonance technology enables measurement within a small cavity, the sensors tend to be typically smaller in size than other ultrasonic sensors. The small size of acoustic resonance anemometers makes them physically strong and easy to heat, and therefore resistant to icing. This combination of features means that they achieve high levels of data availability and are well suited to wind turbine control and to other uses that require small robust sensors such as battlefield meteorology. One issue with this sensor type is measurement accuracy when compared to a calibrated mechanical sensor. For many end uses, this weakness is compensated for by the sensor&#x27;s longevity and the fact that it does not require recalibration once installed.

==Pressure anemometers==

The first designs of anemometers that measure the pressure were divided into plate and tube classes.

===Plate anemometers===
These are the first modern anemometers. They consist of a flat plate suspended from the top so that the wind deflects the plate. In 1450, the Italian art architect Leon Battista Alberti invented the first such mechanical anemometer; in 1663 it was re-invented by Robert Hooke. Later versions of this form consisted of a flat plate, either square or circular, which is kept normal to the wind by a wind vane. The pressure of the wind on its face is balanced by a spring. The compression of the spring determines the actual force which the wind is exerting on the plate, and this is either read off on a suitable gauge, or on a recorder. Instruments of this kind do not respond to light winds, are inaccurate for high wind readings, and are slow at responding to variable winds. Plate anemometers have been used to trigger high wind alarms on bridges.

===Tube anemometers===


James Lind&#x27;s anemometer of 1775 consisted of a vertically mounted glass U tube containing a liquid manometer (pressure gauge), with one end bent out in a horizontal direction to face the wind flow and the other vertical end capped. Though the Lind was not the first, it was the most practical and best known anemometer of this type. If the wind blows into the mouth of a tube, it causes an increase of pressure on one side of the manometer. The wind over the open end of a vertical tube causes little change in pressure on the other side of the manometer. The resulting elevation difference in the two legs of the U tube is an indication of the wind speed. However, an accurate measurement requires that the wind speed be directly into the open end of the tube; small departures from the true direction of the wind causes large variations in the reading.

The successful metal pressure tube anemometer of William Henry Dines in 1892 utilized the same pressure difference between the open mouth of a straight tube facing the wind and a ring of small holes in a vertical tube which is closed at the upper end. Both are mounted at the same height. The pressure differences on which the action depends are very small, and special means are required to register them. The recorder consists of a float in a sealed chamber partially filled with water. The pipe from the straight tube is connected to the top of the sealed chamber and the pipe from the small tubes is directed into the bottom inside the float. Since the pressure difference determines the vertical position of the float this is a measure of the wind speed.

The great advantage of the tube anemometer lies in the fact that the exposed part can be mounted on a high pole, and requires no oiling or attention for years; and the registering part can be placed in any convenient position. Two connecting tubes are required. It might appear at first sight as though one connection would serve, but the differences in pressure on which these instruments depend are so minute, that the pressure of the air in the room where the recording part is placed has to be considered. Thus, if the instrument depends on the pressure or suction effect alone, and this pressure or suction is measured against the air pressure in an ordinary room in which the doors and windows are carefully closed and a newspaper is then burnt up the chimney, an effect may be produced equal to a wind of 10 mi/h (16 km/h); and the opening of a window in rough weather, or the opening of a door, may entirely alter the registration.

While the Dines anemometer had an error of only 1% at , it did not respond very well to low winds due to the poor response of the flat plate vane required to turn the head into the wind. In 1918 an aerodynamic vane with eight times the torque of the flat plate overcame this problem.

====Pitot tube static anemometers====
Modern tube anemometers use the same principle as in the Dines anemometer, but using a different design. The implementation uses a pitot-static tube, which is a pitot tube with two ports, pitot and static, that is normally used in measuring the airspeed of aircraft. The pitot port measures the dynamic pressure of the open mouth of a tube with pointed head facing the wind, and the static port measures the static pressure from small holes along the side on that tube. The pitot tube is connected to a tail so that it always makes the tube&#x27;s head face the wind. Additionally, the tube is heated to prevent rime ice formation on the tube. There are two lines from the tube down to the devices to measure the difference in pressure of the two lines. The measurement devices can be manometers, pressure transducers, or analog chart recorders.

===Ping-pong ball anemometers===
A common anemometer for basic use is constructed from a ping-pong ball attached to a string. When the wind blows horizontally, it presses on and moves the ball; because ping-pong balls are very lightweight, they move easily in light winds. Measuring the angle between the string-ball apparatus and the vertical gives an estimate of the wind speed.

This type of anemometer is mostly used for middle-school level instruction, which most students make on their own, but a similar device was also flown on the Phoenix Mars Lander.

===Effect of density on measurements===
In the tube anemometer the dynamic pressure is actually being measured, although the scale is usually graduated as a velocity scale. If the actual air density differs from the calibration value, due to differing temperature, elevation or barometric pressure, a correction is required to obtain the actual wind speed. Approximately 1.5% (1.6% above 6,000 feet) should be added to the velocity recorded by a tube anemometer for each 1000 ft (5% for each kilometer) above sea-level.

==Effect of icing==
At airports, it is essential to have accurate wind data under all conditions, including freezing precipitation. Anemometry is also required in monitoring and controlling the operation of wind turbines, which in cold environments are prone to in-cloud icing. Icing alters the aerodynamics of an anemometer and may entirely block it from operating. Therefore, anemometers used in these applications must be internally heated. Both cup anemometers and sonic anemometers are presently available with heated versions.

==Instrument location==
In order for wind speeds to be comparable from location to location, the effect of the terrain needs to be considered, especially in regard to height. Other considerations are the presence of trees, and both natural canyons and artificial canyons (urban buildings). The standard anemometer height in open rural terrain is 10 meters.

==See also==

* Air flow meter
* Anemoi, for the ancient origin of the name of this technology
* Anemoscope, ancient device for measuring or predicting wind direction or weather
* Automated airport weather station
* Night of the Big Wind
* Particle image velocimetry
* Savonius wind turbine
* Wind power forecasting
* Wind run
* Windsock, a simple high-visibility indicator of approximate wind speed and direction

==Notes==
==References==

*Meteorological Instruments, W.E. Knowles Middleton and Athelstan F. Spilhaus, Third Edition revised, University of Toronto Press, Toronto, 1953
*Invention of the Meteorological Instruments, W. E. Knowles Middleton, The Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1969
==External links==
* 
*Description of the development and the construction of an ultrasonic anemometer
*Animation Showing Sonic Principle of Operation (Time of Flight Theory) – Gill Instruments
*Collection of historical anemometer
*Principle of Operation: Acoustic Resonance measurement – FT Technologies
* Thermopedia, &quot;Anemometers (laser doppler)&quot;
* Thermopedia, &quot;Anemometers (pulsed thermal)&quot;
* Thermopedia, &quot;Anemometers (vane)&quot;
* The Rotorvane Anemometer. Measuring both wind speed and direction using a tagged three-cup sensor </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="3" end="14" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q175029" start="19" end="29" title="Anemometer" label="anemometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464943" start="59" end="69" title="wind speed" label="wind speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057900" start="74" end="83" title="wind direction" label="direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q190107" start="119" end="134" title="weather station" label="weather station"/>
<link wikidata="Q182046" start="221" end="242" title="Leon Battista Alberti" label="Leon Battista Alberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q46830" start="456" end="468" title="Robert Hooke" label="Robert Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q706867" start="568" end="590" title="Thomas Romney Robinson" label="Thomas Romney Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14922300" start="711" end="725" title="John Patterson (meteorologist)" label="John Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q706867" start="1059" end="1086" title="Thomas Romney Robinson" label="John Thomas Romney Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q676709" start="1090" end="1108" title="Armagh Observatory" label="Armagh Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1131" end="1144" title="Sphere#Hemisphere" label="hemispherical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778961" start="1746" end="1762" title="drag coefficient" label="drag coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q48103" start="1937" end="1943" title="torque" label="torque"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024046" start="3953" end="3977" title="wind resource assessment" label="wind resource assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="4142" end="4150" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q524738" start="4442" end="4451" title="weather vane" label="wind vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="5387" end="5395" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163647" start="5730" end="5746" title="constant current" label="constant current"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161128" start="5765" end="5781" title="Voltage source" label="constant voltage"/>
<link wikidata="Q41591" start="6035" end="6049" title="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Ohm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q585184" start="6071" end="6093" title="pulse-width modulation" label="pulse-width modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455290" start="6724" end="6742" title="Thermal mass flow meter" label="thermal flow meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420475" start="7153" end="7178" title="laser Doppler velocimetry" label="laser Doppler velocimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="7233" end="7238" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="7599" end="7612" title="Doppler shift" label="Doppler shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="7846" end="7868" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasonic sound waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q215928" start="7980" end="7990" title="transducer" label="transducer"/>
<link wikidata="Q124003" start="8446" end="8460" title="speed of sound" label="speed of sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q646" start="9460" end="9472" title="thermometers" label="thermometers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190107" start="9698" end="9713" title="weather station" label="weather station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922685" start="9743" end="9755" title="weather buoy" label="weather buoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336709" start="10015" end="10030" title="eddy covariance" label="eddy covariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031504" start="10067" end="10088" title="infrared gas analyzer" label="infrared gas analyzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="10093" end="10098" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q182046" start="12072" end="12093" title="Leon Battista Alberti" label="Leon Battista Alberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544534" start="12784" end="12794" title="James Lind (1736–1812)" label="James Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424019" start="12888" end="12897" title="manometer" label="manometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56218" start="15801" end="15818" title="pitot tube" label="pitot-static tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q131099" start="16282" end="16290" title="rime ice" label="rime ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424019" start="16455" end="16464" title="manometer" label="manometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424019" start="16467" end="16486" title="pressure transducer" label="pressure transducer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924391" start="16499" end="16513" title="chart recorder" label="chart recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="16606" end="16620" title="ping-pong ball" label="ping-pong ball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17057" end="17076" title="Phoenix Mars Lander#Meteorological station" label="Phoenix Mars Lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002172" start="18508" end="18522" title="Air flow meter" label="Air flow meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q476682" start="18525" end="18531" title="Anemoi" label="Anemoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027560" start="18589" end="18599" title="Anemoscope" label="Anemoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826440" start="18672" end="18705" title="Automated airport weather station" label="Automated airport weather station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747635" start="18708" end="18729" title="Night of the Big Wind" label="Night of the Big Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756248" start="18732" end="18758" title="Particle image velocimetry" label="Particle image velocimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q629126" start="18761" end="18782" title="Savonius wind turbine" label="Savonius wind turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468404" start="18785" end="18807" title="Wind power forecasting" label="Wind power forecasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024047" start="18810" end="18818" title="Wind run" label="Wind run"/>
<link wikidata="Q216346" start="18821" end="18829" title="Windsock" label="Windsock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2995" wikidata="Q100196" url="?curid=2995" title="Archaeopteryx">
<text>Archaeopteryx (; ), sometimes referred to by its German name, &quot;&quot; ( &quot;Primeval Bird&quot;) is a genus of bird-like dinosaurs. The name derives from the ancient Greek (&quot;archaīos&quot;), meaning &quot;ancient&quot;, and (&quot;ptéryx&quot;), meaning &quot;feather&quot; or &quot;wing&quot;. Between the late 19th century and the early 21st century, &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was generally accepted by palaeontologists and popular reference books as the oldest known bird (member of the group Avialae). Older potential avialans have since been identified, including &quot;Anchiornis&quot;, &quot;Xiaotingia&quot;, &quot;Aurornis&quot;, and Baminornis zhenghensis.

&quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; lived in the Late Jurassic around 150 million years ago, in what is now southern Germany, during a time when Europe was an archipelago of islands in a shallow warm tropical sea, much closer to the equator than it is now. Similar in size to a Eurasian magpie, with the largest individuals possibly attaining the size of a raven, the largest species of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; could grow to about in length. Despite their small size, broad wings, and inferred ability to fly or glide, &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; had more in common with other small Mesozoic dinosaurs than with modern birds. In particular, they shared the following features with the dromaeosaurids and troodontids: jaws with sharp teeth, three fingers with claws, a long bony tail, hyperextensible second toes (&quot;killing claw&quot;), feathers (which also suggest warm-bloodedness), and various features of the skeleton.

These features make &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; a clear candidate for a transitional fossil between non-avian dinosaurs and avian dinosaurs (birds). Thus, &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; plays an important role, not only in the study of the origin of birds, but in the study of dinosaurs. It was named from a single feather in 1861, the identity of which has been controversial. That same year, the first complete specimen of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was announced. Over the years, eleven more fossils of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; have surfaced. Despite variation among these fossils, most experts regard all the remains that have been discovered as belonging to a single species, although this is still debated.

Most of these twelve fossils include impressions of feathers. Because these feathers are of an advanced form (flight feathers), these fossils are evidence that the evolution of feathers began before the Late Jurassic. The type specimen of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was discovered just two years after Charles Darwin published &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot;. &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; seemed to confirm Darwin&#x27;s theories and has since become a key piece of evidence for the origin of birds, the transitional fossils debate, and confirmation of evolution. &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was long considered to be the beginning of the evolutionary tree of birds. However, in recent years, the discovery of several small, feathered dinosaurs has created a mystery for palaeontologists, raising questions about which animals are the ancestors of modern birds and which are their relatives.

== History of discovery ==
Over the years, fourteen body fossil specimens of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; have been found. All of the fossils come from the limestone deposits, quarried for centuries, near , Germany. These quarries excavate sediments from the Solnhofen Limestone formation and related units. The initial specimen was the first dinosaur to be discovered with feathers.

The initial discovery, a single feather, was unearthed in 1860 or 1861 and described in 1861 by . It is now in the Natural History Museum of Berlin. Though it was the initial holotype, there were indications that it might not have been from the same animal as the body fossils. In 2019 it was reported that laser imaging had revealed the structure of the quill (which had not been visible since some time after the feather was described), and that the feather was inconsistent with the morphology of all other &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; feathers known, leading to the conclusion that it originated from another dinosaur. This conclusion was challenged in 2020 as being unlikely; the feather was identified on the basis of morphology as most likely having been an upper major primary covert feather.

The first skeleton, known as the London Specimen (BMNH 37001), was unearthed in 1861 near , Germany, and perhaps given to local physician in return for medical services. He then sold it for £700 (roughly £83,000 in 2020) to the Natural History Museum in London, where it remains. Missing most of its head and neck, it was described in 1863 by Richard Owen as &quot;Archaeopteryx macrura&quot;, allowing for the possibility it did not belong to the same species as the feather. In the subsequent fourth edition of his &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot;, Charles Darwin described how some authors had maintained &quot;that the whole class of birds came suddenly into existence during the eocene period; but now we know, on the authority of Professor Owen, that a bird certainly lived during the deposition of the upper greensand; and still more recently, that strange bird, the &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;, with a long lizard-like tail, bearing a pair of feathers on each joint, and with its wings furnished with two free claws, has been discovered in the oolitic slates of Solnhofen. Hardly any recent discovery shows more forcibly than this how little we as yet know of the former inhabitants of the world.&quot;

The Greek word () means &#x27;ancient, primeval&#x27;. primarily means &#x27;wing&#x27;, but it can also be just &#x27;feather&#x27;. Meyer suggested this in his description. At first he referred to a single feather which appeared to resemble a modern bird&#x27;s remex (wing feather), but he had heard of and been shown a rough sketch of the London specimen, to which he referred as a &quot;&quot; (&quot;skeleton of an animal covered in similar feathers&quot;). In German, this ambiguity is resolved by the term which does not necessarily mean a wing used for flying. was the favoured translation of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; among German scholars in the late nineteenth century. In English, &#x27;ancient pinion&#x27; offers a rough approximation to this.

Since then, twelve specimens have been recovered:

The Berlin Specimen (HMN 1880/81) was discovered in 1874 or 1875 on the Blumenberg near , Germany, by farmer Jakob Niemeyer. He sold this precious fossil for the money to buy a cow in 1876, to innkeeper Johann Dörr, who again sold it to Ernst Otto Häberlein, the son of K. Häberlein. Placed on sale between 1877 and 1881, with potential buyers including O. C. Marsh of Yale University&#x27;s Peabody Museum, it eventually was bought for 20,000 Goldmark by the Berlin&#x27;s Natural History Museum, where it now is displayed. The transaction was financed by Ernst Werner von Siemens, founder of the company that bears his name. Described in 1884 by Wilhelm Dames, it is the most complete specimen, and the first with a complete head. In 1897 it was named by Dames as a new species, &quot;A. siemensii&quot;; though often considered a synonym of &quot;A. lithographica&quot;, several 21st century studies have concluded that it is a distinct species which includes the Berlin, Munich, and Thermopolis specimens.

Composed of a torso, the Maxberg Specimen (S5) was discovered in 1956 near Langenaltheim; it was brought to the attention of professor Florian Heller in 1958 and described by him in 1959. The specimen is missing its head and tail, although the rest of the skeleton is mostly intact. Although it was once exhibited at the Maxberg Museum in Solnhofen, it is currently missing. It belonged to Eduard Opitsch, who loaned it to the museum until 1974. After his death in 1991, it was discovered that the specimen was missing and may have been stolen or sold.

The Haarlem Specimen (TM 6428/29, also known as the &quot;Teylers Specimen&quot;) was discovered in 1855 near , Germany, and described as a &quot;Pterodactylus crassipes&quot; in 1857 by Meyer. It was reclassified in 1970 by John Ostrom and is currently located at the Teylers Museum in Haarlem, the Netherlands. It was the very first specimen found, but was incorrectly classified at the time. It is also one of the least complete specimens, consisting mostly of limb bones, isolated cervical vertebrae, and ribs. In 2017 it was named as a separate genus &quot;Ostromia&quot;, considered more closely related to &quot;Anchiornis&quot; from China.

The Eichstätt Specimen (JM 2257) was discovered in 1951 near Workerszell, Germany, and described by Peter Wellnhofer in 1974. Currently located at the Jura Museum in Eichstätt, Germany, it is the smallest known specimen and has the second-best head. It is possibly a separate genus (&quot;Jurapteryx recurva&quot;) or species (&quot;A. recurva&quot;).

The Solnhofen Specimen (unnumbered specimen) was discovered in the 1970s near Eichstätt, Germany, and described in 1988 by Wellnhofer. Currently located at the Bürgermeister-Müller-Museum in Solnhofen, it originally was classified as &quot;Compsognathus&quot; by an amateur collector, the same mayor Friedrich Müller after which the museum is named. It is the largest specimen known and may belong to a separate genus and species, &quot;Wellnhoferia grandis&quot;. It is missing only portions of the neck, tail, backbone, and head.

The Munich Specimen (BSP 1999 I 50, formerly known as the &quot;Solenhofer-Aktien-Verein Specimen&quot;) was discovered on 3 August 1992 near Langenaltheim and described in 1993 by Wellnhofer. It is currently located at the Paläontologisches Museum München in Munich, to which it was sold in 1999 for 1.9 million Deutschmark. What was initially believed to be a bony sternum turned out to be part of the coracoid, but a cartilaginous sternum may have been present. Only the front of its face is missing. It has been used as the basis for a distinct species, &quot;A. bavarica&quot;, but more recent studies suggest it belongs to &quot;A. siemensii&quot;.
An eighth, fragmentary specimen was discovered in 1990 in the younger Mörnsheim Formation at Daiting, Suevia. Therefore, it is known as the Daiting Specimen, and had been known since 1996 only from a cast, briefly shown at the Naturkundemuseum in Bamberg. The original was purchased by palaeontologist Raimund Albertsdörfer in 2009. It was on display for the first time with six other original fossils of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; at the Munich Mineral Show in October 2009. The Daiting Specimen was subsequently named &quot;Archaeopteryx albersdoerferi&quot; by Kundrat et al. (2018). After a lengthy period in a closed private collection, it was moved to the Museum of Evolution at Knuthenborg Safaripark (Denmark) in 2022, where it has since been on display and also been made available for researchers.

Another fragmentary fossil was found in 2000. It is in private possession and, since 2004, on loan to the Bürgermeister-Müller Museum in Solnhofen, so it is called the Bürgermeister-Müller Specimen; the institute itself officially refers to it as the &quot;Exemplar of the families Ottman &amp; Steil, Solnhofen&quot;. As the fragment represents the remains of a single wing of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;, it is colloquially known as &quot;chicken wing&quot;.

Long in a private collection in Switzerland, the Thermopolis Specimen (WDC CSG 100) was discovered in Bavaria and described in 2005 by Mayr, Pohl, and Peters. Donated to the Wyoming Dinosaur Center in Thermopolis, Wyoming, it has the best-preserved head and feet; most of the neck and the lower jaw have not been preserved. The &quot;Thermopolis&quot; specimen was described on 2 December 2005 &quot;Science&quot; journal article as &quot;A well-preserved &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; specimen with theropod features&quot;; it shows that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; lacked a reversed toe—a universal feature of birds—limiting its ability to perch on branches and implying a terrestrial or trunk-climbing lifestyle. This has been interpreted as evidence of theropod ancestry. In 1988, Gregory S. Paul claimed to have found evidence of a hyperextensible second toe, but this was not verified and accepted by other scientists until the Thermopolis specimen was described. &quot;Until now, the feature was thought to belong only to the species&#x27; close relatives, the deinonychosaurs.&quot; The Thermopolis Specimen was assigned to &quot;Archaeopteryx siemensii&quot; in 2007. The specimen is considered to represent the most complete and best-preserved &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; remains yet.

The discovery of an eleventh specimen was announced in 2011; it was described in 2014. It is one of the more complete specimens, but is missing much of the skull and one forelimb. It is privately owned and has yet to be given a name. Palaeontologists of the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich studied the specimen, which revealed previously unknown features of the plumage, such as feathers on both the upper and lower legs and metatarsus, and the only preserved tail tip.

A twelfth specimen had been discovered by an amateur collector in 2010 at the Schamhaupten quarry, but the finding was only announced in February 2014. It was scientifically described in 2018. It represents a complete and mostly articulated skeleton with skull. It is the only specimen lacking preserved feathers. It is from the Painten Formation and somewhat older than the other specimens.

The existence of a thirteenth specimen (the Chicago specimen) was announced in 2024 by the Field Museum in Chicago, US. One of two specimens in an institution outside Europe, the specimen was originally identified in a private collection in Switzerland, and had been acquired by these collectors in 1990, prior to Germany&#x27;s 2015 ban on exporting &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; specimens. The specimen was acquired by the Field Museum in 2022, and went on public display in 2024 following two years of preparation. The specimen is to be studied by famed paleornithologist Jingmai O&#x27;Connor.

A fourteenth specimen, SMNK-PAL 10,000, was published in January 2025, this one from the Mörnsheim Formation. It preserves the right forelimb, shoulder, and fragments of the other limbs, with various features of the shoulder and forelimb resembling &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; more than any other avialan within the Mörnsheim Formation. However, due to the fragmentary nature of this specimen, it cannot be assigned to a specific species within &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;.

=== Authenticity ===
Beginning in 1985, an amateur group including astronomer Fred Hoyle and physicist Lee Spetner, published a series of papers claiming that the feathers on the Berlin and London specimens of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; were forged. Their claims were repudiated by Alan J. Charig and others at the Natural History Museum in London. Most of their supposed evidence for a forgery was based on unfamiliarity with the processes of lithification; for example, they proposed that, based on the difference in texture associated with the feathers, feather impressions were applied to a thin layer of cement, without realizing that feathers themselves would have caused a textural difference. They also misinterpreted the fossils, claiming that the tail was forged as one large feather, when visibly this is not the case. In addition, they claimed that the other specimens of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; known at the time did not have feathers, which is incorrect; the Maxberg and Eichstätt specimens have obvious feathers.

They also expressed disbelief that slabs would split so smoothly, or that one half of a slab containing fossils would have good preservation, but not the counterslab. These are common properties of Solnhofen fossils, because the dead animals would fall onto hardened surfaces, which would form a natural plane for the future slabs to split along and would leave the bulk of the fossil on one side and little on the other.

Finally, the motives they suggested for a forgery are not strong, and are contradictory; one is that Richard Owen wanted to forge evidence in support of Charles Darwin&#x27;s theory of evolution, which is unlikely given Owen&#x27;s views toward Darwin and his theory. The other is that Owen wanted to set a trap for Darwin, hoping the latter would support the fossils so Owen could discredit him with the forgery; this is unlikely because Owen wrote a detailed paper on the London specimen, so such an action would certainly backfire.

Charig &quot;et al.&quot; pointed to the presence of hairline cracks in the slabs running through both rock and fossil impressions, and mineral growth over the slabs that had occurred before discovery and preparation, as evidence that the feathers were original. Spetner &quot;et al.&quot; then attempted to show that the cracks would have propagated naturally through their postulated cement layer, but neglected to account for the fact that the cracks were old and had been filled with calcite, and thus were not able to propagate. They also attempted to show the presence of cement on the London specimen through X-ray spectroscopy, and did find something that was not rock; it was not cement either, and is most probably a fragment of silicone rubber left behind when moulds were made of the specimen. Their suggestions have not been taken seriously by palaeontologists, as their evidence was largely based on misunderstandings of geology, and they never discussed the other feather-bearing specimens, which have increased in number since then. Charig &quot;et al.&quot; reported a discolouration: a dark band between two layers of limestone – they say it is the product of sedimentation. It is natural for limestone to take on the colour of its surroundings and most limestones are coloured (if not colour banded) to some degree, so the darkness was attributed to such impurities. They also mention that a complete absence of air bubbles in the rock slabs is further proof that the specimen is authentic.

== Description ==

Most of the specimens of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; that have been discovered come from the Solnhofen limestone in Bavaria, southern Germany, which is a , a rare and remarkable geological formation known for its superbly detailed fossils laid down during the early Tithonian stage of the Jurassic period, approximately 150.8–148.5million years ago.

&quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was roughly the size of a raven, with broad wings that were rounded at the ends and a long tail compared to its body length. It could reach up to in body length and in wingspan, with an estimated mass of . &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; feathers, although less documented than its other features, were very similar in structure to modern-day bird feathers. Despite the presence of numerous avian features, &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; had many non-avian theropod dinosaur characteristics. Unlike modern birds, &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; had small teeth, as well as a long bony tail, features which &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; shared with other dinosaurs of the time.

Because it displays features common to both birds and non-avian dinosaurs, &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; has often been considered a link between them. In the 1970s, John Ostrom, following Thomas Henry Huxley&#x27;s lead in 1868, argued that birds evolved within theropod dinosaurs and &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was a critical piece of evidence for this argument; it had several avian features, such as a wishbone, flight feathers, wings, and a partially reversed first toe along with dinosaur and theropod features. For instance, it has a long ascending process of the ankle bone, interdental plates, an obturator process of the ischium, and long chevrons in the tail. In particular, Ostrom found that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was remarkably similar to the theropod family Dromaeosauridae.

Archaeopteryx had three separate digits on each fore-leg each ending with a &quot;claw&quot;. Few birds have such features. Some birds, such as ducks, swans, Jacanas (&quot;Jacana&quot; sp.), and the hoatzin (&quot;Opisthocomus hoazin&quot;), have them concealed beneath their leg-feathers.

=== Plumage ===

Specimens of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; were most notable for their well-developed flight feathers. They were markedly asymmetrical and showed the structure of flight feathers in modern birds, with vanes given stability by a barb-barbule-barbicel arrangement. The tail feathers were less asymmetrical, again in line with the situation in modern birds and also had firm vanes. The thumb did not yet bear a separately movable tuft of stiff feathers.

The body plumage of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; is less well-documented and has only been properly researched in the well-preserved Berlin specimen. Thus, as more than one species seems to be involved, the research into the Berlin specimen&#x27;s feathers does not necessarily hold true for the rest of the species of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;. In the Berlin specimen, there are &quot;trousers&quot; of well-developed feathers on the legs; some of these feathers seem to have a basic contour feather structure, but are somewhat decomposed (they lack barbicels as in ratites). In part they are firm and thus capable of supporting flight.

A patch of pennaceous feathers is found running along its back, which was quite similar to the contour feathers of the body plumage of modern birds in being symmetrical and firm, although not as stiff as the flight-related feathers. Apart from that, the feather traces in the Berlin specimen are limited to a sort of &quot;proto-down&quot; not dissimilar to that found in the dinosaur &quot;Sinosauropteryx&quot;: decomposed and fluffy, and possibly even appearing more like fur than feathers in life (although not in their microscopic structure). These occur on the remainder of the body—although some feathers did not fossilize and others were obliterated during preparation, leaving bare patches on specimens—and the lower neck.

There is no indication of feathering on the upper neck and head. While these conceivably may have been nude, this may still be an artefact of preservation. It appears that most &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; specimens became embedded in anoxic sediment after drifting some time on their backs in the sea—the head, neck and the tail are generally bent downward, which suggests that the specimens had just started to rot when they were embedded, with tendons and muscle relaxing so that the characteristic shape (death pose) of the fossil specimens was achieved. This would mean that the skin already was softened and loose, which is bolstered by the fact that in some specimens the flight feathers were starting to detach at the point of embedding in the sediment. So it is hypothesized that the pertinent specimens moved along the sea bed in shallow water for some time before burial, the head and upper neck feathers sloughing off, while the more firmly attached tail feathers remained.

==== Colouration ====
In 2011, graduate student Ryan Carney and colleagues performed the first colour study on an &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; specimen. Using scanning electron microscopy technology and energy-dispersive X-ray analysis, the team was able to detect the structure of melanosomes in the isolated feather specimen described in 1861. The resultant measurements were then compared to those of 87modern bird species, and the original colour was calculated with a 95% likelihood to be black. The feather was determined to be black throughout, with heavier pigmentation in the distal tip. The feather studied was most probably a dorsal covert, which would have partly covered the primary feathers on the wings. The study does not mean that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was entirely black, but suggests that it had some black colouration which included the coverts. Carney pointed out that this is consistent with what is known of modern flight characteristics, in that black melanosomes have structural properties that strengthen feathers for flight. In a 2013 study published in the &quot;Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry&quot;, new analyses of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;″s feathers revealed that the animal may have had complex light- and dark-coloured plumage, with heavier pigmentation in the distal tips and outer vanes. This analysis of colour distribution was based primarily on the distribution of sulphate within the fossil. An author on the previous &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; colour study argued against the interpretation of such biomarkers as an indicator of eumelanin in the full &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; specimen. Carney and other colleagues also argued against the 2013 study&#x27;s interpretation of the sulphate and trace metals, and in a 2020 study published in &quot;Scientific Reports&quot; demonstrated that the isolated covert feather was entirely matte black (as opposed to black and white, or iridescent) and that the remaining &quot;plumage patterns of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; remain unknown&quot;.

== Classification ==

Today, fossils of the genus &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; are usually assigned to one or two species, &quot;A. lithographica&quot; and &quot;A. siemensii&quot;, but their taxonomic history is complicated. Ten names have been published for the handful of specimens. As interpreted today, the name &quot;A. lithographica&quot; only referred to the single feather described by Meyer. In 1954 Gavin de Beer concluded that the London specimen was the holotype. In 1960, Swinton accordingly proposed that the name &quot;Archaeopteryx lithographica&quot; be placed on the official genera list making the alternative names &quot;Griphosaurus&quot; and &quot;Griphornis&quot; invalid. The ICZN, implicitly accepting De Beer&#x27;s standpoint, did indeed suppress the plethora of alternative names initially proposed for the first skeleton specimens, which mainly resulted from the acrimonious dispute between Meyer and his opponent Johann Andreas Wagner (whose &quot;Griphosaurus problematicus&quot;—&#x27;problematic riddle-lizard&#x27;—was a vitriolic sneer at Meyer&#x27;s &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;). In addition, in 1977, the Commission ruled that the first species name of the Haarlem specimen, &quot;crassipes&quot;, described by Meyer as a pterosaur before its true nature was realized, was not to be given preference over &quot;lithographica&quot; in instances where scientists considered them to represent the same species.

It has been noted that the feather, the first specimen of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; described, does not correspond well with the flight-related feathers of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;. It certainly is a flight feather of a contemporary species, but its size and proportions indicate that it may belong to another, smaller species of feathered theropod, of which only this feather is known so far. As the feather had been designated the type specimen, the name &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; should then no longer be applied to the skeletons, thus creating significant nomenclatorial confusion. In 2007, two sets of scientists therefore petitioned the ICZN requesting that the London specimen explicitly be made the type by designating it as the new holotype specimen, or neotype. This suggestion was upheld by the ICZN after four years of debate, and the London specimen was designated the neotype on 3 October 2011.

Below is a cladogram published in 2013 by Godefroit &quot;et al.&quot;

=== Species ===

It has been argued that all the specimens belong to the same species, &quot;A. lithographica&quot;. Differences do exist among the specimens, and while some researchers regard these as due to the different ages of the specimens, some may be related to actual species diversity. In particular, the Munich, Eichstätt, Solnhofen, and Thermopolis specimens differ from the London, Berlin, and Haarlem specimens in being smaller or much larger, having different finger proportions, having more slender snouts lined with forward-pointing teeth, and the possible presence of a sternum. Due to these differences, most individual specimens have been given their own species name at one point or another. The Berlin specimen has been designated as &quot;Archaeornis siemensii&quot;, the Eichstätt specimen as &quot;Jurapteryx recurva&quot;, the Munich specimen as &quot;Archaeopteryx bavarica&quot;, and the Solnhofen specimen as &quot;Wellnhoferia grandis&quot;.

In 2007, a review of all well-preserved specimens including the then-newly discovered Thermopolis specimen concluded that two distinct species of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; could be supported: &quot;A. lithographica&quot; (consisting of at least the London and Solnhofen specimens), and &quot;A. siemensii&quot; (consisting of at least the Berlin, Munich, and Thermopolis specimens). The two species are distinguished primarily by large flexor tubercles on the foot claws in &quot;A. lithographica&quot; (the claws of &quot;A. siemensii&quot; specimens being relatively simple and straight). &quot;A. lithographica&quot; also had a constricted portion of the crown in some teeth and a stouter metatarsus. A supposed additional species, &quot;Wellnhoferia grandis&quot; (based on the Solnhofen specimen), seems to be indistinguishable from &quot;A. lithographica&quot; except in its larger size.

=== Synonyms ===

If two names are given, the first denotes the original describer of the &quot;species&quot;, the second the author on whom the given name combination is based. As always in zoological nomenclature, putting an author&#x27;s name in parentheses denotes that the taxon was originally described in a different genus.
* Archaeopteryx lithographica Meyer, 1861 
**&quot;Archaeopterix lithographica&quot; Anon., 1861 
** &quot;Griphosaurus problematicus&quot; Wagner, 1862 
** &quot;Griphornis longicaudatus&quot; Owen &quot;vide&quot; Woodward, 1862 
** &quot;Archaeopteryx macrura&quot; Owen, 1862 
** &quot;Archaeopteryx oweni&quot; Petronievics, 1917 
** &quot;Archaeopteryx recurva&quot; Howgate, 1984
** &quot;Jurapteryx recurva&quot; (Howgate, 1984) Howgate, 1985
** &quot;Wellnhoferia grandis&quot; Elżanowski, 2001
* Archaeopteryx siemensii Dames, 1897
**&quot;Archaeornis siemensii&quot; (Dames, 1897) Petronievics, 1917
** &quot;Archaeopteryx bavarica&quot; Wellnhofer, 1993

&quot;&quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; vicensensis&quot; (Anon. &quot;fide&quot; Lambrecht, 1933) is a &quot;nomen nudum&quot; for what appears to be an undescribed pterosaur.

=== Phylogenetic position ===
Modern palaeontology has often classified &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; as the most primitive bird. However, it is not thought to be a true ancestor of modern birds, but rather a close relative of that ancestor. Nonetheless, &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was often used as a model of the true ancestral bird. Several authors have done so. Lowe (1935) and Thulborn (1984) questioned whether &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; truly was the first bird. They suggested that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was a dinosaur that was no more closely related to birds than were other dinosaur groups. Kurzanov (1987) suggested that &quot;Avimimus&quot; was more likely to be the ancestor of all birds than &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;. Barsbold (1983) and Zweers and Van den Berge (1997) noted that many maniraptoran lineages are extremely birdlike, and they suggested that different groups of birds may have descended from different dinosaur ancestors.

The discovery of the closely related &quot;Xiaotingia&quot; in 2011 led to new phylogenetic analyses that suggested that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; is a deinonychosaur rather than an avialan, and therefore, not a &quot;bird&quot; under most common uses of that term. A more thorough analysis was published soon after to test this hypothesis, and failed to arrive at the same result; it found &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; in its traditional position at the base of &quot;Avialae&quot;, while &quot;Xiaotingia&quot; was recovered as a basal dromaeosaurid or troodontid. The authors of the follow-up study noted that uncertainties still exist, and that it may not be possible to state confidently whether or not &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; is a member of Avialae or not, barring new and better specimens of relevant species.

Phylogenetic studies conducted by Senter, &quot;et al.&quot; (2012) and Turner, Makovicky, and Norell (2012) also found &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; to be more closely related to living birds than to dromaeosaurids and troodontids. On the other hand, Godefroit &quot;et al.&quot; (2013) recovered &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; as more closely related to dromaeosaurids and troodontids in the analysis included in their description of &quot;Eosinopteryx brevipenna&quot;. The authors used a modified version of the matrix from the study describing &quot;Xiaotingia&quot;, adding &quot;Jinfengopteryx elegans&quot; and &quot;Eosinopteryx brevipenna&quot; to it, as well as adding four additional characters related to the development of the plumage. Unlike the analysis from the description of &quot;Xiaotingia&quot;, the analysis conducted by Godefroit, &quot;et al.&quot; did not find &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; to be related particularly closely to &quot;Anchiornis&quot; and &quot;Xiaotingia&quot;, which were recovered as basal troodontids instead.

Agnolín and Novas (2013) found &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; and (possibly synonymous) &quot;Wellnhoferia&quot; to be from a clade sister to the lineage including &quot;Jeholornis&quot; and Pygostylia, with Microraptoria, Unenlagiinae, and the clade containing &quot;Anchiornis&quot; and &quot;Xiaotingia&quot; being successively closer outgroups to the Avialae (defined by the authors as the clade stemming from the last common ancestor of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; and Aves). Another phylogenetic study by Godefroit, &quot;et al.&quot;, using a more inclusive matrix than the one from the analysis in the description of &quot;Eosinopteryx brevipenna&quot;, also found &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; to be a member of Avialae (defined by the authors as the most inclusive clade containing &quot;Passer domesticus&quot;, but not &quot;Dromaeosaurus albertensis&quot; or &quot;Troodon formosus&quot;). &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was found to form a grade at the base of Avialae with &quot;Xiaotingia&quot;, &quot;Anchiornis&quot;, and &quot;Aurornis&quot;. Compared to &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;, &quot;Xiaotingia&quot; was found to be more closely related to extant birds, while both &quot;Anchiornis&quot; and &quot;Aurornis&quot; were found to be more distantly so.

Hu &quot;et al&quot;. (2018), Wang &quot;et al&quot;. (2018) and Hartman &quot;et al&quot;. (2019) found &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; to have been a deinonychosaur instead of an avialan. More specifically, it and closely related taxa were considered basal deinonychosaurs, with dromaeosaurids and troodontids forming together a parallel lineage within the group. Because Hartman &quot;et al&quot;. found &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; isolated in a group of flightless deinonychosaurs (otherwise considered &quot;anchiornithids&quot;), they considered it highly probable that this animal evolved flight independently from bird ancestors (and from &quot;Microraptor&quot; and &quot;Yi&quot;). The following cladogram illustrates their hypothesis regarding the position of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;:
The authors, however, found that the &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; being an avialan was only slightly less likely than this hypothesis, and as likely as Archaeopterygidae and Troodontidae being sister clades.

== Palaeobiology ==

=== Flight ===

As in the wings of modern birds, the flight feathers of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; were somewhat asymmetrical and the tail feathers were rather broad. This implies that the wings and tail were used for lift generation, but it is unclear whether &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was capable of flapping flight or simply a glider. The lack of a bony breastbone suggests that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was not a very strong flier, but flight muscles might have attached to the thick, boomerang-shaped wishbone, the platelike coracoids, or perhaps, to a cartilaginous sternum. The sideways orientation of the glenoid (shoulder) joint between scapula, coracoid, and humerus—instead of the dorsally angled arrangement found in modern birds—may indicate that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was unable to lift its wings above its back, a requirement for the upstroke found in modern flapping flight. According to a study by Philip Senter in 2006, &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was indeed unable to use flapping flight as modern birds do, but it may well have used a downstroke-only flap-assisted gliding technique. However, a more recent study solves this issue by suggesting a different flight stroke configuration for non-avian flying theropods.

&quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; wings were relatively large, which would have resulted in a low stall speed and reduced turning radius. The short and rounded shape of the wings would have increased drag, but also could have improved its ability to fly through cluttered environments such as trees and brush (similar wing shapes are seen in birds that fly through trees and brush, such as crows and pheasants). The presence of &quot;hind wings&quot;, asymmetrical flight feathers stemming from the legs similar to those seen in dromaeosaurids such as &quot;Microraptor&quot;, also would have added to the aerial mobility of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;. The first detailed study of the hind wings by Longrich in 2006, suggested that the structures formed up to 12% of the total airfoil. This would have reduced stall speed by up to 6% and turning radius by up to 12%.

The feathers of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; were asymmetrical. This has been interpreted as evidence that it was a flyer, because flightless birds tend to have symmetrical feathers. Some scientists, including Thomson and Speakman, have questioned this. They studied more than 70 families of living birds, and found that some flightless types do have a range of asymmetry in their feathers, and that the feathers of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; fall into this range. The degree of asymmetry seen in &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; is more typical for slow flyers than for flightless birds.

In 2010, Robert L. Nudds and Gareth J. Dyke in the journal &quot;Science&quot; published a paper in which they analysed the rachises of the primary feathers of &quot;Confuciusornis&quot; and &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;. The analysis suggested that the rachises on these two genera were thinner and weaker than those of modern birds relative to body mass. The authors determined that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; and &quot;Confuciusornis&quot;, were unable to use flapping flight. This study was criticized by Philip J. Currie and Luis Chiappe. Chiappe suggested that it is difficult to measure the rachises of fossilized feathers, and Currie speculated that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; and &quot;Confuciusornis&quot; must have been able to fly to some degree, as their fossils are preserved in what is believed to have been marine or lake sediments, suggesting that they must have been able to fly over deep water. Gregory Paul also disagreed with the study, arguing in a 2010 response that Nudds and Dyke had overestimated the masses of these early birds, and that more accurate mass estimates allowed powered flight even with relatively narrow rachises. Nudds and Dyke had assumed a mass of for the Munich specimen &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;, a young juvenile, based on published mass estimates of larger specimens. Paul argued that a more reasonable body mass estimate for the Munich specimen is about . Paul also criticized the measurements of the rachises themselves, noting that the feathers in the Munich specimen are poorly preserved. Nudds and Dyke reported a diameter of for the longest primary feather, which Paul could not confirm using photographs. Paul measured some of the inner primary feathers, finding rachises across. Despite these criticisms, Nudds and Dyke stood by their original conclusions. They claimed that Paul&#x27;s statement, that an adult &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; would have been a better flyer than the juvenile Munich specimen, was dubious. This, they reasoned, would require an even thicker rachis, evidence for which has not yet been presented. Another possibility is that they had not achieved true flight, but instead used their wings as aids for extra lift while running over water after the fashion of the basilisk lizard, which could explain their presence in lake and marine deposits (see Origin of avian flight).

In 2004, scientists analysing a detailed CT scan of the braincase of the London &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; concluded that its brain was significantly larger than that of most dinosaurs, indicating that it possessed the brain size necessary for flying. The overall brain anatomy was reconstructed using the scan. The reconstruction showed that the regions associated with vision took up nearly one-third of the brain. Other well-developed areas involved hearing and muscle coordination. The skull scan also revealed the structure of its inner ear. The structure more closely resembles that of modern birds than the inner ear of non-avian reptiles. These characteristics taken together suggest that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; had the keen sense of hearing, balance, spatial perception, and coordination needed to fly. &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; had a cerebrum-to-brain-volume ratio 78% of the way to modern birds from the condition of non-coelurosaurian dinosaurs such as &quot;Carcharodontosaurus&quot; or &quot;Allosaurus&quot;, which had a crocodile-like anatomy of the brain and inner ear. Newer research shows that while the &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; brain was more complex than that of more primitive theropods, it had a more generalized brain volume among Maniraptora dinosaurs, even smaller than that of other non-avian dinosaurs in several instances, which indicates the neurological development required for flight was already a common trait in the maniraptoran clade.

Recent studies of flight feather barb geometry reveal that modern birds possess a larger barb angle in the trailing vane of the feather, whereas &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; lacks this large barb angle, indicating potentially weak flight abilities.
&quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; continues to play an important part in scientific debates about the origin and evolution of birds. Some scientists see it as a semi-arboreal climbing animal, following the idea that birds evolved from tree-dwelling gliders (the &quot;trees down&quot; hypothesis for the evolution of flight proposed by O. C. Marsh). Other scientists see &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; as running quickly along the ground, supporting the idea that birds evolved flight by running (the &quot;ground up&quot; hypothesis proposed by Samuel Wendell Williston). Still others suggest that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; might have been at home both in the trees and on the ground, like modern crows, and this latter view is what currently is considered best supported by morphological characters. Altogether, it appears that the species was not particularly specialized for running on the ground or for perching. A scenario outlined by Elżanowski in 2002 suggested that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; used its wings mainly to escape predators by glides punctuated with shallow downstrokes to reach successively higher perches, and alternatively, to cover longer distances (mainly) by gliding down from cliffs or treetops.

In March 2018, scientists reported that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; was likely capable of a flight stroke cycle morphologically closer to the grabbing motion of maniraptorans and distinct from that of modern birds. This study on &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;″s bone histology identified biomechanical and physiological adaptations exhibited by modern volant birds that perform intermittent flapping, such as pheasants and other burst flyers.

Some researchers suggested that the feather sheaths of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; shows a center-out, flight related moulting strategy like modern birds. As it was a weak flier, this would have been extremely advantageous in preserving its maximum flight performance. Kiat and colleagues reinterpreted this purported moulting evidence to be problematic and equivocal at best, and considered that these structures more likely represents the calami traces of the fully grown feathers, though the original authors still remained by their conclusion.

=== Growth ===
An histological study by Erickson, Norell, Zhongue, and others in 2009 estimated that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; grew relatively slowly compared to modern birds, presumably because the outermost portions of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; bones appear poorly vascularized; in living vertebrates, poorly vascularized bone is correlated with slow growth rate. They also assume that all known skeletons of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; come from juvenile specimens. Because the bones of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; could not be histologically sectioned in a formal skeletochronological (growth ring) analysis, Erickson and colleagues used bone vascularity (porosity) to estimate bone growth rate. They assumed that poorly vascularized bone grows at similar rates in all birds and in &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;. The poorly vascularized bone of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; might have grown as slowly as that in a mallard (2.5micrometres per day) or as fast as that in an ostrich (4.2micrometres per day). Using this range of bone growth rates, they calculated how long it would take to &quot;grow&quot; each specimen of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; to the observed size; it may have taken at least 970 days (there were 375 days in a Late Jurassic year) to reach an adult size of . The study also found that the avialans &quot;Jeholornis&quot; and &quot;Sapeornis&quot; grew relatively slowly, as did the dromaeosaurid &quot;Mahakala&quot;. The avialans &quot;Confuciusornis&quot; and &quot;Ichthyornis&quot; grew relatively quickly, following a growth trend similar to that of modern birds. One of the few modern birds that exhibit slow growth is the flightless kiwi, and the authors speculated that &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; and the kiwi had similar basal metabolic rate.

=== Daily activity patterns ===
Comparisons between the scleral rings of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; and modern birds and reptiles indicate that it may have been diurnal, similar to most modern birds.

== Palaeoecology ==

The richness and diversity of the Solnhofen limestones in which all specimens of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; have been found have shed light on an ancient Jurassic Bavaria strikingly different from the present day. The latitude was similar to Florida, though the climate was likely to have been drier, as evidenced by fossils of plants with adaptations for arid conditions and a lack of terrestrial sediments characteristic of rivers. Evidence of plants, although scarce, include cycads and conifers while animals found include a large number of insects, small lizards, pterosaurs, and &quot;Compsognathus&quot;.

The excellent preservation of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; fossils and other terrestrial fossils found at Solnhofen indicates that they did not travel far before becoming preserved. The &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; specimens found were therefore likely to have lived on the low islands surrounding the Solnhofen lagoon rather than to have been corpses that drifted in from farther away. &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; skeletons are considerably less numerous in the deposits of Solnhofen than those of pterosaurs, of which seven genera have been found. The pterosaurs included species such as &quot;Rhamphorhynchus&quot; belonging to the Rhamphorhynchidae, the group which dominated the ecological niche currently occupied by seabirds, and which became extinct at the end of the Jurassic. The pterosaurs, which also included &quot;Pterodactylus&quot;, were common enough that it is unlikely that the specimens found are vagrants from the larger islands to the north.

The islands that surrounded the Solnhofen lagoon were low lying, semi-arid, and sub-tropical with a long dry season and little rain. The closest modern analogue for the Solnhofen conditions is said to be Orca Basin in the northern Gulf of Mexico, although it is much deeper than the Solnhofen lagoons. The flora of these islands was adapted to these dry conditions and consisted mostly of low () shrubs. Contrary to reconstructions of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; climbing large trees, these seem to have been mostly absent from the islands; few trunks have been found in the sediments and fossilized tree pollen also is absent.

The lifestyle of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; is difficult to reconstruct and there are several theories regarding it. Some researchers suggest that it was primarily adapted to life on the ground, while other researchers suggest that it was principally arboreal on the basis of the curvature of the claws which has since been questioned. The absence of trees does not preclude &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; from an arboreal lifestyle, as several species of bird live exclusively in low shrubs. Various aspects of the morphology of &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot; point to either an arboreal or ground existence, including the length of its legs and the elongation in its feet; some authorities consider it likely to have been a generalist capable of feeding in both shrubs and open ground, as well as along the shores of the lagoon. It most likely hunted small prey, seizing it with its jaws if it was small enough, or with its claws if it was larger.

== See also ==

* Dinosaur coloration
* Evolution of birds
* Feathered dinosaur
* Origin of birds
* &quot;Ostromia&quot;
* &quot;Rhamphorhynchus&quot;
* Temporal paradox (paleontology)
* &quot;Xiaotingia&quot;

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* G. R. de Beer (1954). &quot;Archaeopteryx lithographica: a study based upon the British Museum specimen&quot;. Trustees of the British Museum, London.
* P. Chambers (2002). &quot;Bones of Contention: The Fossil that Shook Science.&quot; John Murray, London. .
* A. Feduccia (1996). &quot;The Origin and Evolution of Birds&quot;. Yale University Press, New Haven. .
* Heilmann, G. (1926). &quot;The Origin of Birds&quot;. Witherby, London.
* T. H. Huxley. (1871). &quot;Manual of the anatomy of vertebrate animals&quot;. London.
* H. von Meyer (1861). &quot;Archaeopterix lithographica (Vogel-Feder) und Pterodactylus von Solenhofen&quot;. . &quot;1861&quot;: 678–679, plate V. [Article in German]. Full text, Google Books.
* P. Shipman (1998). &quot;Taking Wing: Archaeopteryx and the Evolution of Bird Flight&quot;. Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, London. .
* P. Wellnhofer (2008). &quot;Archaeopteryx – Der Urvogel von Solnhofen&quot; (in German). Verlag Friedrich Pfeil, Munich. .

== External links ==

* All About &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;, from Talk.Origins.
* Use of SSRL X-ray takes &#x27;transformative glimpse&#x27; – A look at chemicals linking birds and dinosaurs
* &quot;Archaeopteryx&quot;: An Early Bird – University of California Museum of Paleontology
* Are Birds Really Dinosaurs? – University of California Museum of Paleontology</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q100196" start="68" end="68" title="Archaeopteryx" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="109" end="114" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="118" end="122" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="128" end="136" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="165" end="178" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="417" end="433" title="paleontology" label="palaeontologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q782930" start="508" end="515" title="Avialae" label="Avialae"/>
<link wikidata="Q782930" start="534" end="541" title="avialan" label="avialan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511041" start="587" end="597" title="Anchiornis" label="Anchiornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q568269" start="611" end="621" title="Xiaotingia" label="Xiaotingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407566" start="635" end="643" title="Aurornis" label="Aurornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132242371" start="655" end="665" title="Baminornis" label="Baminornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q499312" start="719" end="732" title="Late Jurassic" label="Late Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="829" end="840" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="903" end="910" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q25307" start="948" end="963" title="Eurasian magpie" label="Eurasian magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8335" start="1027" end="1032" title="raven" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="1253" end="1261" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130995" start="1355" end="1369" title="dromaeosauridae" label="dromaeosaurids"/>
<link wikidata="Q132452" start="1374" end="1385" title="troodontidae" label="troodontids"/>
<link wikidata="Q553" start="1403" end="1408" title="Tooth" label="teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q217605" start="1429" end="1433" title="claw" label="claw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325990" start="1539" end="1555" title="homeothermy" label="warm-bloodedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881" start="1586" end="1594" title="skeleton" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q447188" start="1667" end="1686" title="transitional fossil" label="transitional fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q905761" start="1830" end="1845" title="origin of birds" label="origin of birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="1905" end="1912" title="feather" label="feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q392655" start="2414" end="2428" title="flight feather" label="flight feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="2526" end="2539" title="type specimen" label="type specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="2605" end="2619" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="2636" end="2660" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="2858" end="2867" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="3349" end="3358" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q388368" start="3452" end="3471" title="Solnhofen Limestone" label="Solnhofen Limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q233098" start="3693" end="3725" title="Natural History Museum, Berlin" label="Natural History Museum of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061403" start="3753" end="3761" title="holotype" label="holotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178731" start="4360" end="4374" title="covert feather" label="covert feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="4605" end="4627" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q151556" start="4720" end="4732" title="Richard Owen" label="Richard Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="5065" end="5071" title="eocene" label="eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q632078" start="5431" end="5438" title="Oolite" label="oolitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="5595" end="5600" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q392655" start="5855" end="5860" title="Flight feather" label="remex"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="5934" end="5940" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="6549" end="6555" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q299756" start="6756" end="6767" title="O. C. Marsh" label="O. C. Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="6771" end="6786" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q560355" start="6846" end="6854" title="German gold mark" label="Goldmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q58577" start="6959" end="6983" title="Ernst Werner von Siemens" label="Ernst Werner von Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="6996" end="7007" title="Siemens" label="the company"/>
<link wikidata="Q85267" start="7050" end="7063" title="Wilhelm Dames" label="Wilhelm Dames"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575030" start="7438" end="7454" title="Maxberg specimen" label="Maxberg Specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q546335" start="7488" end="7501" title="Langenaltheim" label="Langenaltheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q43752" start="7548" end="7562" title="Florian Heller" label="Florian Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795464" start="7734" end="7748" title="Maxberg Museum" label="Maxberg Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q572949" start="7752" end="7761" title="Solnhofen" label="Solnhofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q110706" start="7803" end="7817" title="Eduard Opitsch" label="Eduard Opitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q309490" start="8113" end="8126" title="Pterodactylus" label="Pterodactylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q373726" start="8192" end="8203" title="John Ostrom" label="John Ostrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q474563" start="8236" end="8250" title="Teylers Museum" label="Teylers Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9920" start="8254" end="8261" title="Haarlem" label="Haarlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q44533656" start="8529" end="8537" title="Ostromia" label="Ostromia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18511041" start="8586" end="8596" title="Anchiornis" label="Anchiornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557535" start="8677" end="8688" title="Workerszell" label="Workerszell"/>
<link wikidata="Q95837" start="8716" end="8732" title="Peter Wellnhofer" label="Peter Wellnhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q458586" start="8767" end="8778" title="Jura Museum" label="Jura Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306225" start="9129" end="9156" title="Bürgermeister-Müller-Museum" label="Bürgermeister-Müller-Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q130880" start="9209" end="9222" title="Compsognathus" label="Compsognathus"/>
<link wikidata="Q138070" start="9406" end="9418" title="Wellnhoferia" label="Wellnhoferia"/>
<link wikidata="Q473832" start="9726" end="9758" title="Paläontologisches Museum München" label="Paläontologisches Museum München"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="9815" end="9826" title="Deutschmark" label="Deutschmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q8481" start="9869" end="9876" title="sternum" label="sternum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131838" start="9906" end="9914" title="coracoid" label="coracoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q502730" start="9922" end="9935" title="cartilaginous" label="cartilaginous"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512380" start="10227" end="10246" title="Mörnsheim Formation" label="Mörnsheim Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q503454" start="10250" end="10257" title="Daiting" label="Daiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812551" start="10259" end="10265" title="Suevia" label="Suevia"/>
<link wikidata="Q233098" start="10384" end="10400" title="Naturkundemuseum" label="Naturkundemuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936" start="10404" end="10411" title="Bamberg" label="Bamberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777677" start="10841" end="10863" title="Knuthenborg Safaripark" label="Knuthenborg Safaripark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306225" start="11071" end="11098" title="Bürgermeister-Müller Museum" label="Bürgermeister-Müller Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570230" start="11599" end="11622" title="Wyoming Dinosaur Center" label="Wyoming Dinosaur Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020393" start="11626" end="11646" title="Thermopolis, Wyoming" label="Thermopolis, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q188438" start="12176" end="12184" title="Theropoda" label="theropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q764789" start="12204" end="12219" title="Gregory S. Paul" label="Gregory S. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q55044" start="12971" end="13009" title="Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich" label="Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q320524" start="13145" end="13155" title="metatarsus" label="metatarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513883" start="13520" end="13537" title="Painten Formation" label="Painten Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122595" start="13675" end="13687" title="Field Museum of Natural History" label="Field Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="13825" end="13836" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q63367481" start="14155" end="14176" title="Jingmai O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Jingmai O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512380" start="14268" end="14287" title="Mörnsheim Formation" label="Mörnsheim Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183397" start="14728" end="14738" title="Fred Hoyle" label="Fred Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894461" start="14753" end="14764" title="Lee Spetner" label="Lee Spetner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600494" start="14931" end="14945" title="Alan J. Charig" label="Alan J. Charig"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="14964" end="14996" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191052" start="15093" end="15106" title="lithification" label="lithification"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="15258" end="15264" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157040" start="15834" end="15845" title="counterslab" label="counterslab"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="17127" end="17134" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q901775" start="17255" end="17273" title="X-ray spectroscopy" label="X-ray spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8335" start="18570" end="18575" title="raven" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q245097" start="18712" end="18720" title="wingspan" label="wingspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188438" start="18990" end="19007" title="Theropoda" label="theropod dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q373726" start="19363" end="19374" title="John Ostrom" label="John Ostrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q184366" start="19386" end="19405" title="Thomas Henry Huxley" label="Thomas Henry Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100" start="19767" end="19777" title="ankle bone" label="ankle bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046053" start="19779" end="19796" title="interdental plate" label="interdental plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436597" start="19802" end="19811" title="obturator foramen" label="obturator"/>
<link wikidata="Q531029" start="19827" end="19834" title="ischium" label="ischium"/>
<link wikidata="Q130995" start="19972" end="19987" title="Dromaeosauridae" label="Dromaeosauridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736439" start="20134" end="20138" title="duck" label="duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564928" start="20141" end="20145" title="swan" label="swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768434" start="20148" end="20155" title="Jacana (genus)" label="Jacanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188660" start="20190" end="20197" title="hoatzin" label="hoatzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q392655" start="20381" end="20395" title="flight feather" label="flight feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="20523" end="20527" title="barb (feather)" label="barb"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="20528" end="20535" title="barbule" label="barbule"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="20536" end="20544" title="barbicel" label="barbicel"/>
<link wikidata="Q83360" start="20678" end="20683" title="thumb" label="thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q447360" start="20730" end="20744" title="alula" label="stiff feathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575030" start="20877" end="20892" title="The Berlin specimen" label="Berlin specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19170" start="21311" end="21317" title="ratite" label="ratite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783398" start="21394" end="21412" title="pennaceous feather" label="pennaceous feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q953515" start="21712" end="21716" title="Down feather" label="down"/>
<link wikidata="Q131379" start="21774" end="21789" title="Sinosauropteryx" label="Sinosauropteryx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294669" start="22348" end="22354" title="Oxygen saturation" label="anoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247626" start="22622" end="22632" title="death pose" label="death pose"/>
<link wikidata="Q321095" start="23256" end="23284" title="Scanning electron microscope" label="scanning electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q386334" start="23300" end="23323" title="Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy" label="energy-dispersive X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065756" start="23379" end="23389" title="melanosome" label="melanosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178731" start="23741" end="23747" title="Covert (feather)" label="covert"/>
<link wikidata="Q21584773" start="25530" end="25535" title="Christian Erich Hermann von Meyer" label="Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496455" start="25545" end="25558" title="Gavin de Beer" label="Gavin de Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061403" start="25602" end="25610" title="holotype" label="holotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q13011" start="25836" end="25840" title="ICZN" label="ICZN"/>
<link wikidata="Q62095" start="26079" end="26100" title="Johann Andreas Wagner" label="Johann Andreas Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q47054" start="26165" end="26171" title="riddle" label="riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179204" start="26394" end="26403" title="pterosaur" label="pterosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q392655" start="26782" end="26796" title="flight feather" label="flight feather"/>
<link wikidata="Q828371" start="26912" end="26930" title="feathered dinosaur" label="feathered theropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="27015" end="27028" title="Biological type" label="type specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13011" start="27142" end="27156" title="International Code of Zoological Nomenclature" label="nomenclatorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="27345" end="27352" title="neotype" label="neotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="27503" end="27512" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q15909170" start="27534" end="27543" title="Pascal Godefroit" label="Godefroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8481" start="28151" end="28158" title="sternum" label="sternum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29015039" start="28979" end="28988" title="Tubercle (bone)" label="tubercles"/>
<link wikidata="Q13011" start="29622" end="29645" title="zoological nomenclature" label="zoological nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="29709" end="29714" title="taxon" label="taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q844326" start="30531" end="30542" title="nomen nudum" label="nomen nudum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131076" start="31236" end="31244" title="Avimimus" label="Avimimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131793" start="31399" end="31410" title="maniraptora" label="maniraptora"/>
<link wikidata="Q568269" start="31593" end="31603" title="Xiaotingia" label="Xiaotingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131218" start="31702" end="31716" title="deinonychosaur" label="deinonychosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561744" start="32800" end="32823" title="Eosinopteryx" label="Eosinopteryx brevipenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q132717" start="32944" end="32966" title="Jinfengopteryx" label="Jinfengopteryx elegans"/>
<link wikidata="Q138070" start="33501" end="33513" title="Wellnhoferia" label="Wellnhoferia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312288" start="33615" end="33628" title="Microraptoria" label="Microraptoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258292" start="33630" end="33642" title="Unenlagiinae" label="Unenlagiinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683" start="34199" end="34216" title="house sparrow" label="Passer domesticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131082" start="34238" end="34263" title="Dromaeosaurus" label="Dromaeosaurus albertensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131043" start="34279" end="34295" title="Troodon" label="Troodon formosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612572" start="34350" end="34355" title="Evolutionary grade" label="grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407566" start="34442" end="34450" title="Aurornis" label="Aurornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407566" start="34618" end="34626" title="Aurornis" label="Aurornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35643398" start="35175" end="35189" title="Anchiornithidae" label="anchiornithids"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="35250" end="35278" title="Convergent evolution" label="evolved flight independently"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842095" start="35343" end="35345" title="Yi (dinosaur)" label="Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8481" start="36043" end="36053" title="Sternum" label="breastbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131838" start="36217" end="36225" title="coracoid" label="coracoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q502730" start="36245" end="36258" title="cartilage" label="cartilaginous"/>
<link wikidata="Q8481" start="36259" end="36266" title="sternum" label="sternum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16336" start="36333" end="36340" title="scapula" label="scapula"/>
<link wikidata="Q162595" start="36356" end="36363" title="humerus" label="humerus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36606" end="36619" title="Philip Senter" label="Philip Senter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558948" start="37041" end="37055" title="turning radius" label="turning radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="37309" end="37314" title="crows" label="crows"/>
<link wikidata="Q214169" start="37319" end="37327" title="pheasant" label="pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q310537" start="37477" end="37488" title="Microraptor" label="Microraptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="37695" end="37702" title="airfoil" label="airfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641175" start="38489" end="38495" title="rachis" label="rachis"/>
<link wikidata="Q644544" start="38531" end="38545" title="Confuciusornis" label="Confuciusornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q975470" start="38869" end="38885" title="Philip J. Currie" label="Philip J. Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q644544" start="39054" end="39068" title="Confuciusornis" label="Confuciusornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q764789" start="39273" end="39285" title="Gregory Paul" label="Gregory Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q256400" start="40603" end="40618" title="basilisk lizard" label="basilisk lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771119" start="40688" end="40710" title="Origin of avian flight" label="Origin of avian flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="40755" end="40762" title="CT scan" label="CT scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148039" start="40770" end="40779" title="braincase" label="braincase"/>
<link wikidata="Q131092" start="41648" end="41662" title="coelurosaurian" label="coelurosaurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14431" start="41687" end="41706" title="Carcharodontosaurus" label="Carcharodontosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14400" start="41722" end="41732" title="Allosaurus" label="Allosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131793" start="41972" end="41983" title="maniraptoran" label="Maniraptora"/>
<link wikidata="Q299756" start="42763" end="42774" title="O. C. Marsh" label="O. C. Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376111" start="42968" end="42992" title="Samuel Wendell Williston" label="Samuel Wendell Williston"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="43455" end="43464" title="Predation" label="predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q131793" start="43804" end="43817" title="maniraptorans" label="maniraptorans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="43844" end="43856" title="Birds" label="modern birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q214169" start="44047" end="44055" title="pheasant" label="pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q381084" start="44198" end="44206" title="moulting" label="moulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="44647" end="44659" title="histological" label="histological"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="45215" end="45226" title="growth ring" label="growth ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q133956" start="45946" end="45956" title="Jeholornis" label="Jeholornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q141637" start="45973" end="45982" title="Sapeornis" label="Sapeornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134166" start="46044" end="46052" title="Mahakala (dinosaur)" label="Mahakala"/>
<link wikidata="Q644544" start="46079" end="46093" title="Confuciusornis" label="Confuciusornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132820" start="46110" end="46121" title="Ichthyornis" label="Ichthyornis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43642" start="46282" end="46286" title="Kiwi (bird)" label="kiwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q623293" start="46371" end="46391" title="basal metabolic rate" label="basal metabolic rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513648" start="46450" end="46462" title="sclerotic ring" label="scleral ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284186" start="46554" end="46561" title="Diurnality" label="diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q388368" start="46649" end="46668" title="Solnhofen limestone" label="Solnhofen limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="46856" end="46863" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q157114" start="47093" end="47098" title="cycad" label="cycad"/>
<link wikidata="Q179204" start="47183" end="47192" title="pterosaur" label="pterosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q130880" start="47205" end="47218" title="Compsognathus" label="Compsognathus"/>
<link wikidata="Q572949" start="47330" end="47339" title="Solnhofen" label="Solnhofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q132647" start="47815" end="47830" title="Rhamphorhynchus (pterosaur)" label="Rhamphorhynchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q137266" start="47854" end="47871" title="Rhamphorhynchidae" label="Rhamphorhynchidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="47903" end="47919" title="ecological niche" label="ecological niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="47942" end="47949" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q309490" start="48047" end="48060" title="Pterodactylus" label="Pterodactylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279329" start="48136" end="48144" title="Vagrancy (biology)" label="vagrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="48249" end="48258" title="semi-arid" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="48268" end="48276" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="48289" end="48299" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100153" start="48388" end="48398" title="Orca Basin" label="Orca Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="48415" end="48429" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="48490" end="48495" title="flora" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q79932" start="48787" end="48793" title="pollen" label="pollen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058587" start="49526" end="49536" title="Generalist and specialist species" label="generalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278665" start="49769" end="49788" title="Dinosaur coloration" label="Dinosaur coloration"/>
<link wikidata="Q468822" start="49791" end="49809" title="Evolution of birds" label="Evolution of birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q828371" start="49812" end="49830" title="Feathered dinosaur" label="Feathered dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q905761" start="49833" end="49848" title="Origin of birds" label="Origin of birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q44533656" start="49857" end="49865" title="Ostromia" label="Ostromia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132647" start="49880" end="49895" title="Rhamphorhynchus" label="Rhamphorhynchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830511" start="49904" end="49935" title="Temporal paradox (paleontology)" label="Temporal paradox (paleontology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q568269" start="49944" end="49954" title="Xiaotingia" label="Xiaotingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993449" start="50370" end="50382" title="Gerhard Heilmann" label="Heilmann, G."/>
<link wikidata="Q7755346" start="50397" end="50416" title="The Origin of Birds (book)" label="The Origin of Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125833" start="51049" end="51061" title="Talk.Origins" label="Talk.Origins"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2999" wikidata="Q710334" url="?curid=2999" title="Arthur Laurents">
<text>Arthur Laurents (July 14, 1917 – May 5, 2011) was an American playwright, theatre director, film producer and screenwriter. With a career spanning seven decades he received numerous accolades including two Tony Awards, a Drama Desk Award, and nominations for two Academy Awards, two BAFTA Awards, and a Golden Globe Award.

After writing scripts for radio shows after college and then training films for the U.S. Army during World War II, Laurents turned to writing for Broadway, producing a body of work that includes &quot;West Side Story&quot; (1957), &quot;&quot; (1959), and &quot;Hallelujah, Baby!&quot; (1967), winning the Tony Award for Best Musical for the latter. He directed the musical &quot;La Cage aux Folles&quot; in 1983 and received the Tony Award for Best Direction of a Musical.

Laurents also worked as a screenwriter on Hollywood films such as Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s thriller &quot;Rope&quot; (1948), &quot;Anastasia&quot; (1956), &quot;Bonjour Tristesse&quot; (1958) and Sydney Pollack&#x27;s romance &quot;The Way We Were&quot; (1973). He received two Academy Award nominations for Best Picture and Best Original Screenplay for the Herbert Ross drama film &quot;The Turning Point&quot; (1977).

==Early life==
Born Arthur Levine, Laurents was the son of middle-class Jewish parents, his father a lawyer and his mother a schoolteacher, who gave up her career when she married. He was born and raised in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, a borough of New York City, New York, the elder of two children, and attended Erasmus Hall High School. His sister Edith suffered from chorea as a child.

His paternal grandparents were Orthodox Jews, and his mother&#x27;s parents, although born Jewish, were atheists. His mother kept a kosher home for her husband&#x27;s sake, but was lax about attending synagogue and observing the Jewish holidays. His Bar Mitzvah marked the end of Laurents&#x27;s religious education and the beginning of his rejection of all fundamentalist religions, although he continued to identify himself as Jewish. However, late in life he admitted to having changed his last name from Levine to the less Jewish-sounding Laurents, &quot;to get a job.&quot;

After graduating from Cornell University, Laurents took an evening class in radio writing at New York University. William N. Robson, his instructor, a CBS Radio director/producer, submitted his script &quot;Now Playing Tomorrow&quot;, a comedic fantasy about clairvoyance, to the network, and it was produced in the Columbia Workshop series on January 30, 1939, with Shirley Booth in the lead role. It was Laurents&#x27; first professional credit. The show&#x27;s success led to him being hired to write scripts for various radio shows, among them &quot;Lux Radio Theater&quot;. Laurents&#x27; career was interrupted when he was drafted into the U.S. Army in the middle of World War II. Through a series of clerical errors, he never saw battle, but instead was assigned to the U.S. Army Pictorial Service located in a film studio in Astoria, Queens, where he wrote training films and met, among others, George Cukor and William Holden. He later was reassigned to write plays for &quot;Armed Service Force Presents&quot;, a radio show that dramatized the contributions of all branches of the armed forces.

== Career ==
=== Theatre ===

According to John Clum, &quot;Laurents was always a mirror of his times. Through his best work, one sees a staged history of leftist, gender, and gay politics in the decades after World War II.&quot; After graduating from Cornell University in 1937, Laurents, who was gay, went to work as a writer for radio drama at CBS in New York. His military duties during World War II, which consisted of writing training films and radio scripts for &quot;Armed Service Force Presents&quot;, brought him into contact with some of the best film directors—distinguished director George Cukor directed his first script. Laurents&#x27;s work in radio and film during World War II was an excellent apprenticeship for a budding playwright and screenwriter. He also had the good fortune to be based in New York City. His first stage play, &quot;Home of the Brave&quot;, was produced in 1945. The sale of the play to a film studio gave Laurents the entrée he needed to become a Hollywood screenwriter though he continued, with mixed success, to write plays. The most important of his early screenplays is his adaptation of &quot;Rope&quot; for Alfred Hitchcock.

Soon after being discharged from the Army, Laurents met ballerina Nora Kaye, and the two became involved in an on-again, off-again romantic relationship. While Kaye was on tour with &quot;Fancy Free&quot;, Laurents continued to write for the radio but was becoming discontented with the medium. In 1962, Laurents directed &quot;I Can Get It for You Wholesale&quot;, which helped to turn then-unknown Barbra Streisand into a star. His next project was the stage musical &quot;Anyone Can Whistle&quot;, which he directed and for which he wrote the book, but it proved to be an infamous flop. He later had success with the musicals &quot;Hallelujah, Baby!&quot; (written for Lena Horne but ultimately starring Leslie Uggams) and &quot;La Cage Aux Folles&quot; (1983), which he directed, however &quot;Nick &amp; Nora&quot; was not successful.
In 2008, Laurents directed a Broadway revival of &quot;Gypsy&quot; starring Patti LuPone, and in 2009, he tackled a bilingual revival of &quot;West Side Story&quot;, with Spanish translations of some dialogue and lyrics by Lin-Manuel Miranda. While preparing &quot;West Side Story&quot;, he noted, &quot;The musical theatre and cultural conventions of 1957 made it next to impossible for the characters to have authenticity.&quot; Following the production&#x27;s March 19 opening at the Palace Theatre, Ben Brantley of &quot;The New York Times&quot; called the translations &quot;an only partly successful experiment&quot; and added, &quot;Mr. Laurents has exchanged insolence for innocence and, as with most such bargains, there are dividends and losses.&quot; The national tour (2011–2012) was directed by David Saint, who was Laurents&#x27; assistant director on the Broadway production. The Spanish lyrics and dialog were reduced from about 18% of the total to about 10%.

=== Hollywood ===
Laurents&#x27; first Hollywood experience proved to be a frustrating disappointment. Director Anatole Litvak, unhappy with the script submitted by Frank Partos and Millen Brand for &quot;The Snake Pit&quot; (1948), hired Laurents to rewrite it. Partos and Brand later insisted the bulk of the shooting script was theirs, and produced carbon copies of many of the pages Laurents actually had written to bolster their claim. Having destroyed the original script and all his notes and rewritten pages after completing the project, Laurents had no way to prove most of the work was his, and the Writers Guild of America denied him screen credit. Brand later confessed he and Partos had copied scenes written by Laurents and apologized for his role in the deception. Four decades later, Laurents learned he was ineligible for WGA health benefits because he had failed to accumulate enough credits to qualify. He was short by one, the one he failed to get for &quot;The Snake Pit&quot;.

Upon hearing 20th Century Fox executives were pleased with Laurents&#x27; work on &quot;The Snake Pit&quot;, Alfred Hitchcock hired him for his next project, the film &quot;Rope&quot; starring James Stewart. Hitchcock wanted Laurents to Americanize the British play &quot;Rope&quot; (1929) by Patrick Hamilton for the screen. With his then-lover Farley Granger set to star, Laurents was happy to accept the assignment. His dilemma was how to make the audience aware of the fact the three main characters were homosexual without blatantly saying so. The Hays Office kept close tabs on his work, and the final script was so discreet that Laurents was unsure whether co-star James Stewart ever realized that his character was gay. In later years, Hitchcock asked him to script both &quot;Torn Curtain&quot; (1966) and &quot;Topaz&quot; (1969), However, Laurents, in both cases unenthused by the material, declined the offers.

Laurents also scripted &quot;Anastasia&quot; (1956) and &quot;Bonjour Tristesse&quot; (1958). &quot;The Way We Were&quot; (1973), in which he incorporated many of his own experiences, particularly those with the HUAC, reunited him with Barbra Streisand, and &quot;The Turning Point&quot; (1977), inspired in part by his love for Nora Kaye, was directed by her husband Herbert Ross. The Fox animated feature film &quot;Anastasia&quot; (1997) was based in part on his screenplay of the live-action 1956 film of the same title.

=== Blacklist ===
Because of a casual remark made by Russel Crouse, Laurents was called to Washington, D.C., to account for his political views. He explained himself to the House Un-American Activities Committee, and his appearance had no obvious impact on his career, which at the time was primarily in the theatre. When the McCarran Internal Security Act, which prohibited individuals suspected of engaging in subversive activities from obtaining a passport, was passed in 1950, Laurents and Granger immediately applied for and received passports and departed for Paris with Harold Clurman and his wife Stella Adler. Laurents and Granger remained abroad, traveling throughout Europe and northern Africa, for about 18 months.

Years earlier, Laurents and Jerome Robbins had developed &quot;Look Ma, I&#x27;m Dancin&#x27;!&quot; (1948), a stage musical about the world of ballet that ran for 188 performances on Broadway, and starred Nancy Walker and Harold Lang. Laurents left the project, however, and the musical was ultimately produced with a book by Jerome Lawrence and Robert E. Lee. When Robbins approached Paramount Pictures about directing a screen version, the studio agreed as long as Laurents was not part of the package.

It was only then that Laurents learned he officially had been blacklisted, primarily because a review of &quot;Home of the Brave&quot; had been published in the &quot;Daily Worker&quot;. He decided to return to Paris, but the State Department refused to renew his passport. Laurents spent three months trying to clear his name, and after submitting a lengthy letter explaining his political beliefs in detail, it was determined they were so idiosyncratic he could not have been a member of any subversive groups. Within a week his passport was renewed, and the following day he sailed for Europe on the &quot;Ile de France&quot;. While on board, he received a cable from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer offering him a screenwriting assignment. The blacklisting had ended.

=== Memoirs ===
Laurents wrote &quot;Original Story By Arthur Laurents: A Memoir of Broadway and Hollywood&quot;, published in 2000. In it, he discusses his lengthy career and his many gay affairs and long-term relationships, including those with Farley Granger and Tom Hatcher (August 24, 1929 - October 26, 2006). Hatcher was an aspiring actor whom Gore Vidal suggested Laurents seek out at the Beverly Hills men&#x27;s clothing store Hatcher was managing at the time. The couple remained together for 52 years until Hatcher&#x27;s death on October 26, 2006.

Laurents wrote &quot;Mainly on Directing: Gypsy, West Side Story and Other Musicals&quot;, published in 2009, in which he discussed musicals he directed and the work of other directors he admired.

His last memoir titled &quot;The Rest of the Story&quot; was published posthumously in September 2012.

==Death==
Laurents died from complications of pneumonia at his home in Manhattan on May 5, 2011, aged 93. Following a long tradition, Broadway theatre lights were dimmed at 8 p.m. on May 6, 2011, for one minute in his memory. His ashes were buried alongside those of Tom Hatcher in a memorial bench in Quogue, Long Island, New York.

==Work==

===Writing===
;Musicals
*&quot;West Side Story&quot; – 1957 – Tony Nomination for Best Musical
*&quot;&quot; – 1959 – Tony Nomination for Best Musical
*&quot;Anyone Can Whistle&quot; – 1964
*&quot;Do I Hear a Waltz?&quot; – 1965
*&quot;Hallelujah, Baby!&quot; – 1967 – Tony Award for Best Musical
*&quot;The Madwoman of Central Park West&quot; – 1979
*&quot;Nick &amp; Nora&quot; – 1991

;Novels
*&quot;The Way We Were&quot; – 1972; Harper &amp; Row (New York City)
*&quot;The Turning Point&quot; – 1977; New American Library (New York City); 

;Plays
*&quot;Home of the Brave&quot; – 1945
*&quot;The Bird Cage&quot; – 1950
*&quot;The Time of the Cuckoo&quot; – 1952
*&quot;A Clearing in the Woods&quot; – 1957
*&quot;Invitation to a March&quot; – 1960
*&quot;The Enclave&quot; – 1973

===Directing===
===Additional credits===
==Accolades==
===Legacy===
A new award was established in 2010, The Laurents/Hatcher Foundation Award. This is awarded annually &quot;for an un-produced, full-length play of social relevance by an emerging American playwright.&quot; The Laurents/Hatcher Foundation will give $50,000 to the writer with a grant of $100,000 towards production costs at a nonprofit theatre. The first award will be given in 2011.

==See also==

*List of Jewish American playwrights
*List of novelists from the United States
*List of pneumonia victims
*List of people from Brooklyn, New York
*List of playwrights from the United States
*List of theatre directors

==References==
==Further reading==
*Laurents, Arthur (2000). &quot;Original Story by Arthur Laurents: A Memoir of Broadway and Hollywood&quot;. New York: Knopf. .
*Laurents, Arthur (2009). &quot;Mainly on Directing: Gypsy, West Side Story, and Other Musicals&quot;. New York: Knopf. .
*Clum, John (2014). &quot;The Works of Arthur Laurents: Politics, Love, and Betrayal&quot;. Amherst, NY: Cambria Press. .

==External links==
*Arthur Laurents at the Internet Off-Broadway Database
*American Theatre Wing biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q710334" start="0" end="15" title="Arthur Laurents" label="Arthur Laurents"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="206" end="217" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q682154" start="221" end="237" title="Drama Desk Award" label="Drama Desk Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="263" end="277" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="283" end="295" title="BAFTA Awards" label="BAFTA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="303" end="321" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832972" start="385" end="398" title="training film" label="training film"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="408" end="417" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="425" end="437" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="470" end="478" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q669010" start="525" end="540" title="West Side Story" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642856" start="586" end="603" title="Hallelujah, Baby!" label="Hallelujah, Baby!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780176" start="630" end="657" title="Tony Award for Best Musical" label="Tony Award for Best Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035179" start="704" end="722" title="La Cage aux Folles (musical)" label="La Cage aux Folles"/>
<link wikidata="Q377293" start="754" end="796" title="Tony Award for Best Direction of a Musical" label="Tony Award for Best Direction of a Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="841" end="850" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="865" end="881" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q109564" start="904" end="908" title="Rope (film)" label="Rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q486591" start="929" end="938" title="Anastasia (1956 film)" label="Anastasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q511332" start="959" end="976" title="Bonjour Tristesse (film)" label="Bonjour Tristesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q51522" start="994" end="1008" title="Sydney Pollack" label="Sydney Pollack"/>
<link wikidata="Q910900" start="1030" end="1045" title="The Way We Were" label="The Way We Were"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="1076" end="1089" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="1106" end="1118" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41417" start="1123" end="1147" title="Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay" label="Best Original Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q711415" start="1156" end="1168" title="Herbert Ross" label="Herbert Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q451558" start="1186" end="1203" title="The Turning Point (1977 film)" label="The Turning Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q840381" start="1430" end="1438" title="Flatbush, Brooklyn" label="Flatbush"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1450" end="1458" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q408804" start="1462" end="1486" title="borough (New York City)" label="borough of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384959" start="1538" end="1562" title="Erasmus Hall High School" label="Erasmus Hall High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076421" start="1595" end="1601" title="Chorea (disease)" label="chorea"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="1646" end="1659" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="1719" end="1727" title="Atheism" label="atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="1747" end="1753" title="Kashrut" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q94920" start="1844" end="1858" title="Jewish holiday" label="Jewish holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q75673" start="1865" end="1876" title="Bar and Bat Mitzvah" label="Bar Mitzvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="2217" end="2235" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="2288" end="2307" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016005" start="2309" end="2326" title="William N. Robson" label="William N. Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022995" start="2346" end="2355" title="CBS Radio" label="CBS Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975244" start="2454" end="2466" title="clairvoyance" label="clairvoyance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149917" start="2511" end="2528" title="Columbia Workshop" label="Columbia Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q253308" start="2562" end="2575" title="Shirley Booth" label="Shirley Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706176" start="2749" end="2766" title="Lux Radio Theater" label="Lux Radio Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194285" start="3013" end="3024" title="Kaufman Astoria Studios" label="film studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q121765" start="3028" end="3043" title="Astoria, Queens" label="Astoria, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832972" start="3060" end="3073" title="training film" label="training film"/>
<link wikidata="Q56014" start="3098" end="3110" title="George Cukor" label="George Cukor"/>
<link wikidata="Q95002" start="3115" end="3129" title="William Holden" label="William Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="3553" end="3571" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="3648" end="3651" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="4290" end="4299" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q109564" start="4441" end="4445" title="Rope_(film)" label="Rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="4456" end="4472" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355634" start="4541" end="4550" title="Nora Kaye" label="Nora Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395476" start="4663" end="4673" title="Fancy Free (ballet)" label="Fancy Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283625" start="4803" end="4833" title="I Can Get It for You Wholesale" label="I Can Get It for You Wholesale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="4875" end="4891" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778265" start="4950" end="4968" title="Anyone Can Whistle" label="Anyone Can Whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642856" start="5110" end="5127" title="Hallelujah, Baby!" label="Hallelujah, Baby!"/>
<link wikidata="Q112307" start="5147" end="5157" title="Lena Horne" label="Lena Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q534925" start="5182" end="5195" title="Leslie Uggams" label="Leslie Uggams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035179" start="5207" end="5225" title="La Cage aux Folles (musical)" label="La Cage Aux Folles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026670" start="5273" end="5288" title="Nick &amp;amp; Nora (musical)" label="Nick &amp;amp; Nora"/>
<link wikidata="Q270324" start="5391" end="5403" title="Patti LuPone" label="Patti LuPone"/>
<link wikidata="Q669010" start="5458" end="5473" title="West Side Story" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646482" start="5538" end="5556" title="Lin-Manuel Miranda" label="Lin-Manuel Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360756" start="5802" end="5816" title="Palace Theatre (Broadway)" label="Palace Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885332" start="5818" end="5830" title="Ben Brantley" label="Ben Brantley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5840" end="5858" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239423" start="6123" end="6134" title="David Saint" label="David Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q213581" start="6404" end="6418" title="Anatole Litvak" label="Anatole Litvak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230411" start="6457" end="6469" title="Frank Partos" label="Frank Partos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858736" start="6474" end="6486" title="Millen Brand" label="Millen Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q659843" start="6497" end="6510" title="The Snake Pit" label="The Snake Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949654" start="6901" end="6925" title="WGA screenwriting credit system" label="Writers Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="7305" end="7321" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="7401" end="7417" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q109564" start="7465" end="7469" title="Rope (film)" label="Rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="7485" end="7498" title="James Stewart" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366709" start="7564" end="7568" title="Rope (play)" label="Rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278407" start="7585" end="7601" title="Patrick Hamilton (writer)" label="Patrick Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q240076" start="7638" end="7652" title="Farley Granger" label="Farley Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q610292" start="7841" end="7856" title="United States Motion Picture Production Code of 1930" label="The Hays Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q372174" start="8077" end="8089" title="Torn Curtain" label="Torn Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q224004" start="8113" end="8118" title="Topaz (1969 film)" label="Topaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q486591" start="8245" end="8254" title="Anastasia (1956 film)" label="Anastasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q511332" start="8278" end="8295" title="Bonjour Tristesse (film)" label="Bonjour Tristesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q910900" start="8316" end="8331" title="The Way We Were" label="The Way We Were"/>
<link wikidata="Q451558" start="8480" end="8497" title="The Turning Point (1977 film)" label="The Turning Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q711415" start="8584" end="8596" title="Herbert Ross" label="Herbert Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q486609" start="8634" end="8643" title="Anastasia (1997 film)" label="Anastasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382872" start="8795" end="8808" title="Russel Crouse" label="Russel Crouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="8915" end="8953" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800168" start="9068" end="9098" title="McCarran Internal Security Act" label="McCarran Internal Security Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783427" start="9319" end="9333" title="Harold Clurman" label="Harold Clurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q32788" start="9347" end="9359" title="Stella Adler" label="Stella Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q353019" start="9498" end="9512" title="Jerome Robbins" label="Jerome Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q464973" start="9676" end="9688" title="Nancy Walker" label="Nancy Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5661458" start="9693" end="9704" title="Harold Lang (dancer)" label="Harold Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6182811" start="9797" end="9812" title="Jerome Lawrence" label="Jerome Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343994" start="9817" end="9830" title="Robert Edwin Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="9856" end="9874" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864771" start="10039" end="10050" title="Hollywood blacklist" label="blacklisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157607" start="10144" end="10156" title="Daily Worker" label="Daily Worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="10203" end="10219" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050884" start="10586" end="10599" title="SS Ile de France" label="Ile de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="10648" end="10667" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q240076" start="10985" end="10999" title="Farley Granger" label="Farley Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q167821" start="11089" end="11099" title="Gore Vidal" label="Gore Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="11135" end="11148" title="Beverly Hills" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q669010" start="11977" end="11992" title="West Side Story" label="West Side Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="12008" end="12012" title="Tony Award" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780176" start="12028" end="12040" title="Tony Award for Best Musical" label="Best Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="12064" end="12068" title="Tony Award" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780176" start="12084" end="12096" title="Tony Award for Best Musical" label="Best Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778265" start="12104" end="12122" title="Anyone Can Whistle" label="Anyone Can Whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286034" start="12143" end="12161" title="Do I Hear a Waltz?" label="Do I Hear a Waltz?"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642856" start="12182" end="12199" title="Hallelujah, Baby!" label="Hallelujah, Baby!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780176" start="12215" end="12242" title="Tony Award for Best Musical" label="Tony Award for Best Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749362" start="12250" end="12283" title="The Madwoman of Central Park West" label="The Madwoman of Central Park West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026670" start="12304" end="12319" title="Nick &amp;amp; Nora (musical)" label="Nick &amp;amp; Nora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12349" end="12364" title="The Way We Were (novel)" label="The Way We Were"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127696" start="12379" end="12395" title="Harper &amp;amp; Row" label="Harper &amp;amp; Row"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12419" end="12436" title="The Turning Point (novel)" label="The Turning Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005314" start="12451" end="12471" title="New American Library" label="New American Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q27776089" start="12505" end="12522" title="Home of the Brave (play)" label="Home of the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769365" start="12577" end="12599" title="The Time of the Cuckoo" label="The Time of the Cuckoo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12620" end="12643" title="A Clearing in the Woods" label="A Clearing in the Woods"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12664" end="12685" title="Invitation to a March" label="Invitation to a March"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575315" start="13199" end="13234" title="List of Jewish American playwrights" label="List of Jewish American playwrights"/>
<link wikidata="Q693651" start="13236" end="13276" title="List of novelists from the United States" label="List of novelists from the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634072" start="13278" end="13303" title="List of pneumonia victims" label="List of pneumonia victims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1863947" start="13305" end="13343" title="List of people from Brooklyn, New York" label="List of people from Brooklyn, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634068" start="13345" end="13387" title="List of playwrights from the United States" label="List of playwrights from the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983026" start="13389" end="13414" title="List of theatre directors" label="List of theatre directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025265" start="13806" end="13819" title="Cambria Press" label="Cambria Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3003" wikidata="Q373385" url="?curid=3003" title="Adrian Lamo">
<text>Adrián Alfonso Lamo Atwood (February 20, 1981 – March 14, 2018) was an American threat analyst and hacker. Lamo first gained media attention for breaking into several high-profile computer networks, including those of &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Yahoo!, and Microsoft, culminating in his 2003 arrest.

Lamo was best known for reporting U.S. soldier Chelsea Manning to Army criminal investigators in 2010 for leaking hundreds of thousands of sensitive U.S. government documents to WikiLeaks. Lamo died on March 14, 2018, at the age of 37.

==Early life and education==
Adrian Lamo was born in Malden, Massachusetts. His father, Mario Ricardo Lamo, was Colombian. Adrian Lamo attended high schools in Bogotá and San Francisco, from which he did not graduate, but received a GED and was court-ordered to take courses at American River College, a community college in Sacramento County, California. Lamo began his hacking efforts by hacking games on the Commodore 64 and through phone phreaking.

==Activities and legal issues==
Lamo first became known for operating AOL watchdog site &quot;Inside-AOL.com&quot;.

===Security compromise===
Lamo was a grey hat hacker who viewed the rise of the World Wide Web with a mixture of excitement and alarm. He felt that others failed to see the importance of internet security in the Web&#x27;s early days. Lamo broke into corporate computer systems but never damaged them. Instead, he would offer to fix the security flaws free of charge, and if the flaw was not fixed, he would alert the media. Lamo hoped to be hired by a corporation to attempt to break into systems and test their security, a practice that came to be known as red teaming. But by the time this practice was common, his felony conviction prevented him from being hired.

In December 2001, Worldcom praised Lamo for helping to fortify its corporate security. In February 2002, he broke into the internal computer network of &quot;The New York Times&quot;, added his name to the internal database of expert sources, and used the paper&#x27;s LexisNexis account to research high-profile subjects. &quot;The New York Times&quot; filed a complaint, and a warrant for Lamo&#x27;s arrest was issued in August 2003 following a 15-month investigation by federal prosecutors in New York. At 10:15 a.m. on September 9, after spending a few days in hiding, he surrendered to the US Marshals in Sacramento, California. He surrendered to the FBI in New York City on September 11, and pleaded guilty to one felony count of computer crimes against Microsoft, LexisNexis, and &quot;The New York Times&quot; on January 8, 2004.

In July 2004, Lamo was sentenced to two years&#x27; probation with six months to be served in home detention and ordered to pay $65,000 in restitution. He was convicted of compromising security at &quot;The New York Times&quot;, Microsoft, Yahoo!, and WorldCom.

When challenged for a response to allegations that he was glamorizing crime for the sake of publicity, he responded: &quot;Anything I could say about my person or my actions would only cheapen what they have to say for themselves&quot;. When approached for comment during his criminal case, Lamo frustrated reporters with non-sequiturs, such as &quot;Faith manages&quot; and &quot;It&#x27;s a beautiful day.&quot;

At his sentencing, Lamo expressed remorse for the harm his intrusions had caused. The court record quotes him as adding: &quot;I want to answer for what I have done and do better with my life.&quot;

He subsequently declared on the question-and-answer site Quora: &quot;We all own our actions in fullness, not just the pleasant aspects of them.&quot; Lamo accepted that he had made mistakes.

===DNA controversy===

On May 9, 2006, 18 months into a two-year probation sentence, Lamo refused to give the United States government a blood sample it had demanded to record his DNA in its CODIS system. According to his attorney at the time, Lamo had a religious objection to giving blood but was willing to give his DNA in another form. On June 15, 2006, Lamo&#x27;s lawyers filed a motion citing the Book of Genesis as one basis for Lamo&#x27;s religious opposition to giving blood.

On June 20, 2007, Lamo&#x27;s legal counsel reached a settlement agreement with the U.S. Department of Justice whereby Lamo would submit a cheek swab instead of a blood sample.

===WikiLeaks and Chelsea Manning===

In February 2009, a partial list of the anonymous donors to the WikiLeaks website was leaked and published on the site. Some media sources indicated at the time that Lamo was among the donors on the list. Lamo commented on his Twitter page, &quot;Thanks WikiLeaks, for leaking your donor list... That&#x27;s dedication.&quot;

In May 2010, Lamo informed U.S. Army authorities that Chelsea Manning had claimed to have leaked a large body of classified documents, including 260,000 classified United States diplomatic cables. He said that Manning also &quot;took credit for leaking&quot; the video footage of the July 12, 2007, Baghdad airstrike, which has since come to be known as the &quot;Collateral Murder&quot; video.

Lamo said he would not have turned Manning in &quot;if lives weren&#x27;t in danger&quot;. He characterized her as &quot;in a war zone and basically trying to vacuum up as much classified information as [she] could and just throwing it up into the air.&quot; WikiLeaks responded by denouncing Lamo and the author of the article as &quot;notorious felons, informers &amp; manipulators&quot;, and said: &quot;journalists should take care.&quot;

Lamo was a volunteer &quot;adversary characterization&quot; analyst for Project Vigilant, a Florida-based government contractor, which encouraged him to inform the government about the alleged WikiLeaks source. The head of Project Vigilant, Chet Uber, claimed, &quot;I&#x27;m the one who called the U.S. government... All the people who say that Adrian is a narc, he did a patriotic thing. He sees all kinds of hacks, and he was seriously worried about people dying.&quot;

The Taliban insurgency later announced its intention to execute Afghan nationals named in the leaks as having cooperated with the U.S.-led coalition in Afghanistan. By that time, the U.S. had received months of advance warning that their names were among the leaks. Manning was arrested and incarcerated in the U.S. military justice system and later sentenced to 35 years in confinement. President Barack Obama commuted the sentence to seven years, including time served. Lamo responded to the commutation with a post on Medium and an interview with &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot;.

Lamo characterized his decision to work with the government as morally ambiguous but objectively necessary, writing that &quot;there were no right choices that day, only less wrong ones. It was cold, it was needful, and it was no one&#x27;s to make except mine.&quot; Lamo was criticized by fellow hackers, such as those at the Hackers on Planet Earth conference in 2010, who labeled him a &quot;snitch.&quot; Another told Lamo, following his speech during a panel discussion: &quot;from my perspective, I see what you have done as treason.&quot;

===Greenwald, Lamo, and &quot;Wired&quot; magazine===
Lamo&#x27;s role in Manning&#x27;s case drew criticism from Glenn Greenwald, who suggested that Lamo lied to Manning by turning her in and then lied after the fact to cover up the circumstances of her confessions. In an article about the case, Greenwald mentioned &quot;Wired&quot; reporter Kevin Poulsen&#x27;s 1994 felony conviction for computer hacking and wrote that &quot;over the years, Poulsen has served more or less as Lamo&#x27;s personal media voice.&quot; In an article titled &quot;The Worsening Journalistic Disgrace at Wired&quot;, Greenwald wrote that &quot;Wired&quot; was &quot;actively conceal[ing] from the public, for months on end, the key evidence [the full Lamo–Manning chat logs] in a political story that has generated headlines around the world.&quot;

This drew a response from &quot;Wired&quot;: &quot;At his most reasonable, Greenwald impugns our motives, attacks the character of our staff and carefully selects his facts and sources to misrepresent the truth and generate outrage in his readership.&quot;

On July 13, 2011, &quot;Wired&quot; published the Lamo–Manning chat logs in full, stating: &quot;The most significant of the unpublished details have now been publicly established with sufficient authority that we no longer believe any purpose is served by withholding the logs.&quot; Greenwald wrote that the logs validated his claim that &quot;Wired&quot; had concealed important evidence.

==Film and television==
On August 22, 2002, Lamo was removed from a segment of &quot;NBC Nightly News&quot; when, after being asked to demonstrate his skills for the camera, he gained access to NBC&#x27;s internal network. NBC was concerned that it broke the law by taping Lamo while he possibly broke the law. Lamo was a guest on &quot;The Screen Savers&quot; five times beginning in 2002.

&quot;Hackers Wanted&quot;, a documentary film focusing on Lamo&#x27;s life as a hacker, was produced by Trigger Street Productions and narrated by Kevin Spacey. Focusing on the 2003 hacking scene, the film features interviews with Kevin Rose and Steve Wozniak. The film has not been conventionally released. In May 2009, a video purporting to be a trailer for &quot;Hackers Wanted&quot; was allegedly leaked onto the Internet film site Eye Crave Network. In May 2010, an early cut of the film was leaked via BitTorrent. According to an insider, what was leaked on the Internet was very different from the newer version, which includes additional footage. On June 12, 2010, a director&#x27;s cut version of the film was leaked onto torrent sites.

Lamo also appeared on &quot;Good Morning America&quot;, Fox News, &quot;Democracy Now!&quot;, &quot;Frontline&quot;, and repeatedly on KCRA-TV News as an expert on netcentric crime and incidents. He was interviewed for the documentaries &quot;We Steal Secrets: The Story of WikiLeaks&quot; and &quot;True Stories: WikiLeaks – Secrets and Lies&quot;. Lamo reconnected with Leo Laporte in 2015 as a result of a Quora article on the &quot;dark web&quot; for an episode of &quot;The New Screen Savers&quot;.

Lamo wrote the book &quot;Ask Adrian&quot;, a collection of his best Q&amp;A drawn from over 500 pages of Quora answers.

==Personal life and death==
Lamo was known as the &quot;Homeless Hacker&quot; for his reportedly transient lifestyle, claiming that he spent much of his travels couch-surfing, squatting in abandoned buildings, and traveling to Internet cafés, libraries, and universities to investigate networks, sometimes exploiting security holes. He usually preferred sleeping on couches, and when he did sleep on beds, he did not sleep under covers. He also often wandered through homes and offices in the middle of the night, by the light of a flashlight.

Lamo was bisexual and volunteered for the gay and lesbian media firm PlanetOut Inc. in the mid-1990s. In 1998, he was appointed to the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer and Questioning Youth Task Force by the San Francisco Board of Supervisors.

Lamo used a wide variety of supplements and drugs. His wife, Lauren Fisher, called his drug use &quot;body hacking&quot;. One of Lamo&#x27;s preferred supplements was &#x27;kratom&#x27; (Mitragyna speciosa), which he used as a less-dangerous alternative to opioids. In 2001, he overdosed on prescription amphetamines. After he turned in Manning, his drug use escalated, but he later claimed that he was in recovery.

In a 2004 interview with &quot;Wired&quot;, an ex-girlfriend of Lamo&#x27;s called him &quot;very controlling&quot;, alleging &quot;he carried a stun gun, which he used on me&quot;. The same article claimed a court had issued a restraining order against Lamo; he disputed the claim, writing: &quot;I have never been subject to a restraining order in my life&quot;.

Lamo said in a &quot;Wired&quot; article that, in May 2010, after he reported the theft of his backpack, an investigating officer noted unusual behavior and placed him under a 72-hour involuntary psychiatric hold, which was extended to a nine-day hold. Lamo said he was diagnosed with Asperger syndrome at the psychiatric ward.

For a period of time in March 2011, Lamo was allegedly &quot;in hiding&quot;, claiming that his &quot;life was under threat&quot; after turning in Manning.

Lamo died on March 14, 2018, in Wichita, Kansas, at age 37. Nearly three months later, the Sedgwick County Regional Forensic Science Center reported that &quot;Despite a complete autopsy and supplemental testing, no definitive cause of death was identified.&quot; Many bottles of pills were found in his home, some of which were known to cause severe health problems when combined with kratom. As a result, evidence points to an accidental death due to drug abuse.

==See also==
*List of unsolved deaths

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q373385" start="0" end="26" title="Adrian Lamo" label="Adrián Alfonso Lamo Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798820" start="99" end="105" title="Hacker (computer security)" label="hacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="224" end="242" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="250" end="256" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="262" end="271" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q298423" start="353" end="368" title="Chelsea Manning" label="Chelsea Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q59193" start="412" end="419" title="internet leak" label="leaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q359" start="484" end="493" title="WikiLeaks" label="WikiLeaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q54149" start="596" end="617" title="Malden, Massachusetts" label="Malden, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="703" end="709" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q947286" start="776" end="779" title="General Educational Development" label="GED"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791079" start="821" end="843" title="American River College" label="American River College"/>
<link wikidata="Q108131" start="868" end="897" title="Sacramento County, California" label="Sacramento County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="954" end="966" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162746" start="979" end="994" title="Phreaking" label="phone phreaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="1067" end="1070" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973120" start="1071" end="1079" title="Watchdog journalism" label="watchdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132716" start="1151" end="1166" title="grey hat hacker" label="grey hat hacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="1194" end="1208" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305396" start="1673" end="1681" title="red team" label="red team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881291" start="1801" end="1809" title="Worldcom" label="Worldcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="1941" end="1959" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q683146" start="2052" end="2062" title="LexisNexis" label="LexisNexis"/>
<link wikidata="Q934866" start="2379" end="2390" title="United States Marshals Service" label="US Marshals"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="2394" end="2416" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="2440" end="2443" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q29137" start="2520" end="2534" title="computer crime" label="computer crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="2544" end="2553" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q683146" start="2555" end="2565" title="LexisNexis" label="LexisNexis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="2863" end="2869" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780448" start="3208" end="3221" title="Non sequitur (literary device)" label="non-sequiturs"/>
<link wikidata="Q51711" start="3558" end="3563" title="Quora" label="Quora"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="3804" end="3828" title="Federal government of the United States" label="United States government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="3874" end="3877" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265403" start="3885" end="3890" title="Combined DNA Index System" label="CODIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="4098" end="4113" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="4271" end="4292" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982391" start="4321" end="4331" title="cheek swab" label="cheek swab"/>
<link wikidata="Q359" start="4461" end="4470" title="WikiLeaks" label="WikiLeaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="4624" end="4631" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788040" start="5008" end="5040" title="July 12, 2007, Baghdad airstrike" label="July 12, 2007, Baghdad airstrike"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5088" end="5105" title="July 12, 2007, Baghdad airstrike#Leaked video footage" label="Collateral Murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q603999" start="5426" end="5432" title="Kevin Poulsen" label="author"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752743" start="6042" end="6060" title="Taliban insurgency" label="Taliban insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="6436" end="6448" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186120" start="6559" end="6565" title="Medium (website)" label="Medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="6594" end="6622" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q22678" start="6959" end="6982" title="Hackers on Planet Earth" label="Hackers on Planet Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364673" start="7027" end="7033" title="Informant" label="snitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568842" start="7293" end="7308" title="Glenn Greenwald" label="Glenn Greenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q603999" start="7524" end="7537" title="Kevin Poulsen" label="Kevin Poulsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q594503" start="8749" end="8765" title="NBC Nightly News" label="NBC Nightly News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762707" start="9001" end="9018" title="The Screen Savers" label="The Screen Savers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782369" start="9062" end="9076" title="Hackers Wanted" label="Hackers Wanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841714" start="9161" end="9187" title="Trigger Street Productions" label="Trigger Street Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q25144" start="9204" end="9216" title="Kevin Spacey" label="Kevin Spacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427588" start="9288" end="9298" title="Kevin Rose" label="Kevin Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q483382" start="9303" end="9316" title="Steve Wozniak" label="Steve Wozniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q133862" start="9565" end="9575" title="BitTorrent (protocol)" label="BitTorrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q825946" start="9832" end="9852" title="Good Morning America" label="Good Morning America"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="9860" end="9868" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185824" start="9876" end="9890" title="Democracy Now!" label="Democracy Now!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894569" start="9904" end="9913" title="Frontline (U.S. TV series)" label="Frontline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6327252" start="9939" end="9946" title="KCRA-TV" label="KCRA-TV"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10047" end="10087" title="We Steal Secrets: The Story of WikiLeaks" label="We Steal Secrets: The Story of WikiLeaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071994" start="10176" end="10187" title="Leo Laporte" label="Leo Laporte"/>
<link wikidata="Q51711" start="10213" end="10218" title="Quora" label="Quora"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120082" start="10240" end="10248" title="dark web" label="dark web"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762707" start="10279" end="10300" title="The New Screen Savers" label="The New Screen Savers"/>
<link wikidata="Q51711" start="10415" end="10420" title="Quora" label="Quora"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130026" start="10592" end="10605" title="couch-surfing" label="couch-surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q44854" start="10607" end="10616" title="squatting" label="squatting"/>
<link wikidata="Q272399" start="10658" end="10671" title="Internet café" label="Internet café"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="10985" end="10993" title="bisexual" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098131" start="11045" end="11059" title="PlanetOut Inc." label="PlanetOut Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q3658756" start="11194" end="11228" title="San Francisco Board of Supervisors" label="San Francisco Board of Supervisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086942" start="11333" end="11345" title="body hacking" label="body hacking"/>
<link wikidata="Q139698" start="11418" end="11436" title="Mitragyna speciosa" label="Mitragyna speciosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q179452" start="11535" end="11546" title="amphetamine" label="amphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="11679" end="11684" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q593132" start="11876" end="11893" title="restraining order" label="restraining order"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640177" start="12190" end="12226" title="5150 (involuntary psychiatric hold)" label="72-hour involuntary psychiatric hold"/>
<link wikidata="Q161790" start="12299" end="12316" title="Asperger syndrome" label="Asperger syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="12532" end="12539" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q375108" start="12591" end="12606" title="Sedgwick County, Kansas" label="Sedgwick County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435337" start="12980" end="13003" title="List of unsolved deaths" label="List of unsolved deaths"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3004" wikidata="Q11144" url="?curid=3004" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States">
<text>An associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States is a justice of the Supreme Court of the United States, other than the chief justice of the United States. The number of associate justices is eight, as set by the Judiciary Act of 1869.

Article II, Section 2, Clause 2 of the Constitution of the United States grants plenary power to the president to nominate, and with the advice and consent (confirmation) of the Senate, appoint justices to the Supreme Court. Article III, Section 1 of the Constitution effectively grants life tenure to associate justices, and all other federal judges, which ends only when a justice dies, retires, resigns, or is impeached and convicted.

Each Supreme Court justice has a single vote in deciding the cases argued before it, and the chief justice&#x27;s vote counts no more than that of any other justice; however, the chief justice leads the discussion of the case among the justices. Furthermore, the chief justice—when in the majority—decides who writes the court&#x27;s opinion; otherwise, the senior justice in the majority assigns the writing of a decision. The chief justice also has certain administrative responsibilities that the other justices do not and is paid slightly more ($298,500 per year as of 2023, compared to $285,400 per year for an associate justice).

Associate justices have seniority in order of the date their respective commissions bear, although the chief justice is always considered to be the most senior justice. If two justices are commissioned on the same day, the elder is designated the senior justice of the two. Currently, the senior associate justice is Clarence Thomas. By tradition, when the justices are in conference deliberating the outcome of cases before the Supreme Court, the justices state their views in order of seniority. The senior associate justice is also tasked with carrying out the chief justice&#x27;s duties when he is unable to, or if that office is vacant.

==Current associate justices==
There are currently eight associate justices on the Supreme Court. The justices, ordered by seniority, are:
==Retired associate justices==
An associate justice who leaves the Supreme Court after attaining the age and meeting the service requirements prescribed by federal statute () may retire rather than resign. After retirement, they keep their title, and by custom may also keep a set of chambers in the Supreme Court building, and employ law clerks. The names of retired associate justices continue to appear alongside those of the active justices in the bound volumes of Supreme Court decisions. Federal statute () provides that retired Supreme Court justices may serve—if designated and assigned by the chief justice—on panels of the U.S. courts of appeals, or on the U.S. district courts. Retired justices are not, however, authorized to take part in the consideration or decision of any cases before the Supreme Court (unlike other retired federal judges who may be permitted to do so in their former courts); neither are they known or designated as a &quot;senior judge&quot;. When, after his retirement, William O. Douglas attempted to take a more active role than was customary, maintaining that it was his prerogative to do so because of his senior status, he was rebuffed by Chief Justice Warren Burger and admonished by the whole Court.

There are currently three living retired associate justices: David Souter, retired June 29, 2009; Anthony Kennedy, retired July 31, 2018; and Stephen Breyer, retired June 30, 2022. Souter has served on panels of the First Circuit Courts of Appeals following his retirement; Kennedy and Breyer have not performed any judicial duties since retiring.

==List of associate justices==
Since the Supreme Court was established in 1789, the following 104 persons have served as an associate justice:

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* Historic Supreme Court Decisionsby Justice, Legal Information Institute, Cornell University Law School
* Supreme Court of the United States (website home page)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="3" end="62" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q113331361" start="68" end="75" title="Justice (title)" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="83" end="117" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="134" end="168" title="chief justice of the United States" label="chief justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303054" start="227" end="248" title="Judiciary Act of 1869" label="Judiciary Act of 1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781647" start="251" end="282" title="Appointments Clause" label="Article II, Section 2, Clause 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="290" end="323" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204535" start="331" end="344" title="plenary power" label="plenary power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="352" end="361" title="President of the United States" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686796" start="388" end="406" title="advice and consent" label="advice and consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="429" end="435" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q48429" start="476" end="498" title="Article Three of the United States Constitution" label="Article III, Section 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365387" start="538" end="549" title="life tenure" label="life tenure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006696" start="587" end="601" title="United States federal judge" label="federal judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="664" end="687" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="impeached and convicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q11142" start="1644" end="1659" title="Clarence Thomas" label="Clarence Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391996" start="3117" end="3135" title="William O. Douglas" label="William O. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q346685" start="3305" end="3318" title="Warren Burger" label="Warren Burger"/>
<link wikidata="Q472547" start="3416" end="3428" title="David Souter" label="David Souter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171" start="3453" end="3468" title="Anthony Kennedy" label="Anthony Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11124" start="3497" end="3511" title="Stephen Breyer" label="Stephen Breyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q250492" start="3571" end="3602" title="United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit" label="First Circuit Courts of Appeals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3010" wikidata="Q961893" url="?curid=3010" title="Alan Jay Lerner">
<text>Alan Jay Lerner (August 31, 1918 – June 14, 1986) was an American lyricist and librettist. In collaboration with Frederick Loewe, and later Burton Lane, he created some of the world&#x27;s most popular and enduring works of musical theatre both for the stage and on film. Lerner won three Tony Awards and three Academy Awards, among other honors.

==Early life and education==
Lerner was born in New York City to a Jewish family. He was the son of Edith ( Adelson) and Joseph Jay Lerner, whose brother, Samuel Alexander Lerner, was founder and owner of the Lerner Stores, a chain of dress shops. One of Lerner&#x27;s cousins was the radio comedian and television game show panelist Henry Morgan. Lerner was educated at Bedales School in England, The Choate School (now Choate Rosemary Hall) in Wallingford, Connecticut, (where he wrote &quot;The Choate Marching Song&quot;) and Harvard. He attended both Camp Androscoggin and Camp Greylock. At both Choate and Harvard, Lerner was a classmate of John F. Kennedy; at Choate they had worked together on the yearbook staff. Like Cole Porter at Yale and Richard Rodgers at Columbia, his career in musical theater began with his collegiate contributions, in Lerner&#x27;s case to the annual Harvard Hasty Pudding musicals. During the summers of 1936 and 1937, Lerner studied music composition at Juilliard. While attending Harvard, he lost his sight in his left eye due to an accident in the boxing ring. In 1957, Lerner and Leonard Bernstein, another of Lerner&#x27;s college classmates, collaborated on &quot;Lonely Men of Harvard&quot;, a tongue-in-cheek salute to their alma mater.

==Career==
Owing to his eye injury, Lerner could not serve in World War II. Instead he wrote radio scripts, including &quot;Your Hit Parade&quot;, until he was introduced to German-Austrian composer Frederick Loewe, who needed a partner, in 1942 at the Lamb&#x27;s Club. While at the Lamb&#x27;s, he also met Lorenz Hart, with whom he would also collaborate.

Lerner and Loewe&#x27;s first collaboration was a musical adaptation of Barry Conners&#x27;s farce &quot;The Patsy&quot; called &quot;Life of the Party&quot; for a Detroit stock company. The lyrics were mostly written by Earle Crooker, but he had left the project, with the score needing vast improvement. It enjoyed a nine-week run and encouraged the duo to join forces with Arthur Pierson for &quot;What&#x27;s Up?&quot;, which opened on Broadway in 1943. It ran for 63 performances and was followed two years later by &quot;The Day Before Spring&quot;.

Their first hit was &quot;Brigadoon&quot; (1947), a romantic fantasy set in a mystical Scottish village, directed by Robert Lewis. It was followed in 1951 by the Gold Rush story &quot;Paint Your Wagon&quot;. While the show ran for nearly a year and included songs that later became pop standards, such as &quot;They Call the Wind Maria&quot;, it was less successful than Lerner&#x27;s previous work. He later said of &quot;Paint Your Wagon&quot;, it was &quot;a success but not a hit.&quot;

Lerner worked with Kurt Weill on the stage musical &quot;Love Life&quot; (1948) and Burton Lane on the movie musical &quot;Royal Wedding&quot; (1951). In that same year Lerner also wrote the Oscar-winning original screenplay for &quot;An American in Paris&quot;, produced by Arthur Freed and directed by Vincente Minnelli. This was the same team who would later join with Lerner and Loewe to create &quot;Gigi&quot;.

In 1956, Lerner and Loewe unveiled &quot;My Fair Lady&quot;. By this time, too, Lerner and Burton Lane were already working on a musical about Li&#x27;l Abner. Gabriel Pascal owned the rights to &quot;Pygmalion&quot;, which had been unsuccessful with other composers who tried to adapt it into a musical. Arthur Schwartz and Howard Dietz first tried, and then Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II attempted, but gave up and Hammerstein told Lerner, &quot;&quot;Pygmalion&quot; had no subplot&quot;. Lerner and Loewe&#x27;s adaptation of George Bernard Shaw&#x27;s &quot;Pygmalion&quot; retained his social commentary and added appropriate songs for the characters of Henry Higgins and Eliza Doolittle, played originally by Rex Harrison and Julie Andrews. It set box-office records in New York and London. When brought to the screen in 1964, the movie version won eight Oscars, including Best Picture and Best Actor for Rex Harrison.

Lerner and Loewe&#x27;s run of success continued with their next project, a film adaptation of stories from Colette, the Academy Award-winning film musical &quot;Gigi&quot;, starring Leslie Caron, Louis Jourdan and Maurice Chevalier. The film won all of its nine Oscar nominations, a record at that time, and a special Oscar for co-star Maurice Chevalier.

The Lerner-Loewe partnership cracked under the stress of producing the Arthurian &quot;Camelot&quot; in 1960, with Loewe resisting Lerner&#x27;s desire to direct as well as write when original director Moss Hart suffered a heart attack in the last few months of rehearsals and died about a year after the show&#x27;s Broadway premiere. Lerner was hospitalized with bleeding ulcers while Loewe continued to have heart troubles. &quot;Camelot&quot; was a hit nonetheless, and immediately following the assassination of John F. Kennedy, his widow told reporter Theodore H. White that JFK&#x27;s administration reminded her of the &quot;one brief shining moment&quot; of Lerner and Loewe&#x27;s &quot;Camelot&quot;. As of the early 21st century, &quot;Camelot&quot; was still invoked to describe the idealism, romance, and tragedy of the Kennedy years.

Loewe retired to Palm Springs, California, while Lerner went through a series of musicals—some successful, some not—with such composers as André Previn (&quot;Coco&quot;), John Barry (&quot;Lolita, My Love&quot;), Leonard Bernstein (&quot;1600 Pennsylvania Avenue&quot;), Burton Lane (&quot;Carmelina&quot;) and Charles Strouse (&quot;Dance a Little Closer&quot;, based on the film, &quot;Idiot&#x27;s Delight&quot;, nicknamed &quot;Close A Little Faster&quot; by Broadway humorists because it closed on opening night). Most biographers blame Lerner&#x27;s professional decline on the lack of a strong director with whom Lerner could collaborate, as Neil Simon did with Mike Nichols or Stephen Sondheim with Harold Prince. (Moss Hart, who had directed &quot;My Fair Lady,&quot; died shortly after &quot;Camelot&quot; opened.) In 1965 Lerner collaborated again with Burton Lane on the musical &quot;On a Clear Day You Can See Forever&quot;, which was adapted for film in 1970. At this time, Lerner was hired by film producer Arthur P. Jacobs to write a treatment for an upcoming film project, &quot;Doctor Dolittle&quot;, but Lerner abrogated his contract after several non-productive months of non-communicative procrastination and was replaced with Leslie Bricusse. Lerner was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1971.

In 1973, Lerner coaxed Loewe out of retirement to augment the &quot;Gigi&quot; score for a musical stage adaptation. The following year they collaborated on a musical film version of &quot;The Little Prince&quot;, based on the classic children&#x27;s tale by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry. This film was a critical and box office failure, but it has gained a modern following.

Lerner&#x27;s autobiography, &quot;The Street Where I Live&quot; (1978), was an account of three of his and Loewe&#x27;s successful collaborations, &quot;My Fair Lady&quot;, &quot;Gigi&quot;, and &quot;Camelot&quot;, along with personal information. In the last year of his life, he published &quot;The Musical Theatre: A Celebration&quot;, a well-reviewed history of the theatre, with personal anecdotes and humor. The &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; reviewer wrote: &quot;There are several reasons why this book makes a fine introduction to musical theater. One is that Lerner knows exactly what was new, and when and why...In &quot;The Musical Theatre,&quot; one is privy to the judgment of a man... who expresses his opinions in a forthright, warm and personal manner.&quot; A book of Lerner&#x27;s lyrics entitled &quot;A Hymn To Him&quot;, edited by a British writer Benny Green, was published in 1987.

At the time of Lerner&#x27;s death, he had been working with Gerard Kenny and Kristi Kane in London on a musical version of the film &quot;My Man Godfrey&quot;. He had also received an urgent call from Andrew Lloyd Webber, asking him to write the lyrics to &quot;The Phantom of the Opera&quot;. He wrote &quot;Masquerade&quot;, but he then informed Webber that he wanted to leave the project because he was losing his memory (he had developed metastatic lung cancer) and Charles Hart replaced him. He had turned down an invitation to write the English-language lyrics for the musical version of &quot;Les Misérables&quot;.

After Lerner&#x27;s death, Paul Blake made a musical revue based on Lerner&#x27;s lyrics and life entitled &quot;Almost Like Being In Love&quot;, which featured music by Loewe, Lane, Previn, Strouse, and Weill. The show ran for 10 days at the Herbst Theatre in San Francisco.

==Songwriting==
Lerner often struggled with writing his lyrics. He was uncharacteristically able to complete &quot;I Could Have Danced All Night&quot; from &quot;My Fair Lady&quot; in one 24-hour period. He usually spent months on each song and was constantly rewriting them. Lerner was said to have insecurity about his talent. He would sometimes write songs with someone in mind. For instance, he changed the rhymes in some lines of &quot;I&#x27;ve Grown Accustomed To Her Face&quot; to ones that Rex Harrison was more comfortable with.

Lerner said of writing:

In a 1979 interview on NPR&#x27;s &quot;All Things Considered&quot;, Lerner went into some depth about his lyrics for &quot;My Fair Lady&quot;. Professor Henry Higgins sings, &quot;Look at her, a prisoner of the gutters / Condemned by every syllable she utters / By right she should be taken out and hung / For the cold-blooded murder of the English tongue.&quot; Lerner said he knew the lyric used incorrect grammar for the sake of a rhyme. He was later approached about it by another lyricist:
==Dramatists Guild==
Alan Jay Lerner was an advocate for writers&#x27; rights in theatre. He was a member of the Dramatists Guild of America. In 1960, he was elected as the twelfth president of the non-profit organization. He continued to serve as the Guild&#x27;s president until 1964.

==Personal life==
For nearly twenty years, Lerner was addicted to amphetamines; during the 1960s he was a patient of Max Jacobson, known as &quot;Dr. Feelgood&quot;, who administered injections of &quot;vitamins with enzymes&quot; that were in fact laced with amphetamines. Lerner&#x27;s addiction is believed to have been the result of Jacobson&#x27;s practice.

===Marriages and children===
Lerner married eight times: Ruth Boyd (1940–1947), singer Marion Bell (1947–1949), actress Nancy Olson (1950–1957), lawyer Micheline Muselli Pozzo di Borgo (1957–1965), editor Karen Gundersen (1966–1974), Sandra Payne (1974–1976), Nina Bushkin (1977–1981) and Liz Robertson (1981–1986 [his death]). Four of his eight wives — Olson, Payne, Bushkin, and Robertson — were actresses. His seventh wife, Nina Bushkin, whom he married on May 30, 1977, was the director of development at Mannes College of Music and the daughter of composer and musician Joey Bushkin. After their divorce in 1981, Lerner was ordered to pay her a settlement of $50,000. Lerner wrote in his autobiography (as quoted by &quot;The New York Times&quot;): &quot;All I can say is that if I had no flair for marriage, I also had no flair for bachelorhood.&quot; All of this lent some irony to the lyrics for his song &quot;Get Me to the Church on Time&quot;. 

Lerner had four children — three daughters, Susan (by Boyd), Liza, and Jennifer (by Olson), and one son, screenwriter and journalist Michael Alan Lerner (by di Borgo).
Lerner&#x27;s multiple divorces cost him much of his wealth. Still, he was primarily responsible for his financial ups and downs and was less than truthful about his financial fecklessness. It was claimed that his divorce settlement from Micheline Muselli Pozzo di Borgo (his fourth wife) cost him an estimated $1 million in 1965. This was untrue. Lerner&#x27;s pattern of financial mismanagement continued until his death from cancer in 1986 when he reportedly owed the U.S. Internal Revenue Service over US$1 million in back taxes and was unable to pay for his final medical expenses.

==Death==
On June 14, 1986, Lerner died of lung cancer in Manhattan at the age of 67. At the time of his death he was married to actress Liz Robertson, who was 36 years his junior. He lived in Center Island, New York. He has a memorial plaque in St Paul&#x27;s Church, the Actors&#x27; Church in Covent Garden in London.

==Awards and honors==

*American Theater Hall of Fame 1979
*Kennedy Center Honors 1985

;Academy Award
*Best Original Screenplay, 1951 &quot;An American in Paris&quot;
*Best Adapted Screenplay, 1958 &quot;Gigi&quot;
*Best Original Song, 1958 &quot;Gigi&quot;

;Golden Globes
*Best Original Song, 1968 &quot;Camelot&quot;
*Best Original Score, 1975 &quot;The Little Prince&quot;

;Tony Award
*Best Book of a Musical, 1957 &quot;My Fair Lady&quot;
*Best Original Score, 1957 &quot;My Fair Lady&quot; and 1974 &quot;Gigi&quot;

;New York Drama Critics Circle
*Best Musical, 1947 &quot;Brigadoon&quot;
*Best Musical, 1956 &quot;My Fair Lady&quot;

;Johnny Mercer Award
*Lyric Writing, 1985, Lifetime

==Works==

===Stage===
* &quot;Life of the Party&quot; (1942), with Frederick Loewe
* &quot;What&#x27;s Up?&quot; (1943), with Frederick Loewe
* &quot;The Day Before Spring&quot; (1945), with Frederick Loewe
* &quot;Brigadoon&quot; (1947), with Frederick Loewe
* &quot;Love Life&quot; (1948), with Kurt Weill
* &quot;Paint Your Wagon&quot; (1951), Frederick Loewe
* &quot;My Fair Lady&quot; (1956), with Frederick Loewe
* &quot;Camelot&quot; (1960), with Frederick Loewe
* &quot;On a Clear Day You Can See Forever&quot; (1965), with Burton Lane
* &quot;Coco&quot; (1969), with André Previn
* &quot;Lolita, My Love&quot; (1971), with John Barry
* &quot;Gigi&quot; (1973), based on the 1958 film of the same name, with Frederick Loewe
* &quot;1600 Pennsylvania Avenue&quot; (1976), with Leonard Bernstein
* &quot;Carmelina&quot; (1979), with Burton Lane and Joseph Stein
* &quot;Dance a Little Closer&quot; (1983), with Charles Strouse
* &quot;My Man Godfrey&quot; (1984), unfinished, with Gerard Kenny

===Films===
Source: TCM

*&quot;Royal Wedding&quot;, 1951 (screenwriter/lyricist)
*&quot;An American in Paris&quot; (1951) (writer)
*&quot;Brigadoon&quot;, 1954 (film) (screenwriter/lyricist)
*&quot;Gigi&quot;, 1958 (screenwriter/lyricist)
*&quot;The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn&quot;, 1960 (lyricist)
*&quot;My Fair Lady&quot;, 1964 (screenwriter/lyricist)
*&quot;Camelot&quot;, 1967 (screenwriter/lyricist)
*&quot;Paint Your Wagon&quot;, 1969 (producer/screenwriter/lyricist)
*&quot;On a Clear Day You Can See Forever&quot;, 1970 (screenwriter/lyricist)
*&quot;The Little Prince&quot;, 1974 (screenwriter/lyricist)
*&quot;Tribute&quot;, 1980 (&quot;It&#x27;s All for the Best&quot;, lyricist)
*&quot;Secret Places&quot;, 1984 (title song lyricist)

==See also==
*Lerner and Loewe

==Notes==
==References==
*Green, Stanley. &quot;The world of musical comedy&quot; (Edition 4, 1984), Da Capo Press, 

==Further reading==
* Lerner, Alan Jay (1985). &quot;The Street Where I Live&quot;. Da Capo Press. 
* Shapiro, Doris (1989). &quot;We Danced All Night: My Life Behind the Scenes With Alan Jay Lerner&quot;. Barricade Books. 
* Jablonski, Edward (1996). &quot;Alan Jay Lerner: A Biography&quot;. Henry Holt &amp; Co. 
* Citron, David (1995). &quot;The Wordsmiths: Oscar Hammerstein 2nd and Alan Jay Lerner&quot;. Oxford University Press. 
* Green, Benny, Editor (1987). &quot;A Hymn to Him : The Lyrics of Alan Jay Lerner&quot;. Hal Leonard Corporation. 
* Garebian, Keith (1998). &quot;The Making of My Fair Lady&quot;. Publisher: Mosaic Press. 

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q961893" start="0" end="15" title="Alan Jay Lerner" label="Alan Jay Lerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q822146" start="66" end="74" title="lyricist" label="lyricist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="79" end="89" title="librettist" label="librettist"/>
<link wikidata="Q551678" start="113" end="128" title="Frederick Loewe" label="Frederick Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q364143" start="140" end="151" title="Burton Lane" label="Burton Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="224" end="239" title="musical theatre" label="musical theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="289" end="299" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="311" end="325" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="396" end="409" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012977" start="557" end="570" title="Lerner Stores" label="Lerner Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q973292" start="682" end="694" title="Henry Morgan (comedian)" label="Henry Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893526" start="719" end="733" title="Bedales School" label="Bedales School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103452" start="746" end="763" title="Choate Rosemary Hall" label="The Choate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="878" end="885" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026964" start="904" end="921" title="Camp Androscoggin" label="Camp Androscoggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027210" start="926" end="939" title="Camp Greylock" label="Camp Greylock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="995" end="1010" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q215120" start="1075" end="1086" title="Cole Porter" label="Cole Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1090" end="1094" title="Yale" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q269094" start="1099" end="1114" title="Richard Rodgers" label="Richard Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="1118" end="1126" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588813" start="1243" end="1256" title="Hasty Pudding Theatricals" label="Hasty Pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q503246" start="1340" end="1349" title="Juilliard" label="Juilliard"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="1469" end="1486" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1693" end="1705" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248132" start="1755" end="1770" title="Your Hit Parade" label="Your Hit Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="1812" end="1819" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q551678" start="1830" end="1845" title="Frederick Loewe" label="Frederick Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9086916" start="1884" end="1900" title="Lamb&amp;#x27;s Club" label="Lamb&amp;#x27;s Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q725828" start="1940" end="1951" title="Lorenz Hart" label="Lorenz Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820298" start="1991" end="2007" title="Lerner and Loewe" label="Lerner and Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="2155" end="2162" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893282" start="2163" end="2176" title="Stock company (acting)" label="stock company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990840" start="2392" end="2407" title="What&amp;#x27;s Up? (musical)" label="What&amp;#x27;s Up?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729157" start="2518" end="2539" title="The Day Before Spring" label="The Day Before Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q611332" start="2574" end="2583" title="Brigadoon (musical)" label="Brigadoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489956" start="2665" end="2677" title="Robert Lewis (actor)" label="Robert Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="2710" end="2719" title="California Gold Rush" label="Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288100" start="2732" end="2748" title="Paint Your Wagon (musical)" label="Paint Your Wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783665" start="2859" end="2883" title="They Call the Wind Maria" label="They Call the Wind Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="3059" end="3069" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690960" start="3097" end="3106" title="Love Life (musical)" label="Love Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q364143" start="3124" end="3135" title="Burton Lane" label="Burton Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q538600" start="3163" end="3176" title="Royal Wedding" label="Royal Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="3231" end="3244" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar-winning"/>
<link wikidata="Q103076" start="3254" end="3264" title="screenplay" label="screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q747570" start="3275" end="3295" title="An American in Paris (film)" label="An American in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q709413" start="3315" end="3327" title="Arthur Freed" label="Arthur Freed"/>
<link wikidata="Q51535" start="3344" end="3361" title="Vincente Minnelli" label="Vincente Minnelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q577757" start="3445" end="3449" title="Gigi (1958 film)" label="Gigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="3499" end="3511" title="My Fair Lady" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866715" start="3601" end="3616" title="Li&amp;#x27;l Abner" label="Li&amp;#x27;l Abner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489537" start="3618" end="3632" title="Gabriel Pascal" label="Gabriel Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q711473" start="3763" end="3778" title="Arthur Schwartz" label="Arthur Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631780" start="3783" end="3795" title="Howard Dietz" label="Howard Dietz"/>
<link wikidata="Q319693" start="3838" end="3858" title="Oscar Hammerstein II" label="Oscar Hammerstein II"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="3999" end="4018" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q637200" start="4032" end="4041" title="Pygmalion (play)" label="Pygmalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q181887" start="4185" end="4197" title="Rex Harrison" label="Rex Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q161819" start="4202" end="4215" title="Julie Andrews" label="Julie Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q218679" start="4504" end="4511" title="Colette" label="Colette"/>
<link wikidata="Q577757" start="4558" end="4562" title="Gigi (1958 film)" label="Gigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q230023" start="4579" end="4591" title="Leslie Caron" label="Leslie Caron"/>
<link wikidata="Q364083" start="4593" end="4606" title="Louis Jourdan" label="Louis Jourdan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106001" start="4611" end="4628" title="Maurice Chevalier" label="Maurice Chevalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028491" start="4840" end="4847" title="Camelot (musical)" label="Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q728876" start="4955" end="4964" title="Moss Hart" label="Moss Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q172941" start="5118" end="5132" title="bleeding ulcer" label="bleeding ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392601" start="5311" end="5328" title="Theodore H. White" label="Theodore H. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q488004" start="5620" end="5644" title="Palm Springs, California" label="Palm Springs, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q155712" start="5742" end="5754" title="André Previn" label="André Previn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981318" start="5762" end="5766" title="Coco (musical)" label="Coco"/>
<link wikidata="Q111074" start="5775" end="5785" title="John Barry (composer)" label="John Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668903" start="5793" end="5808" title="Lolita, My Love" label="Lolita, My Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551092" start="5842" end="5866" title="1600 Pennsylvania Avenue (musical)" label="1600 Pennsylvania Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043344" start="5894" end="5903" title="Carmelina" label="Carmelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960275" start="5915" end="5930" title="Charles Strouse" label="Charles Strouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215222" start="5938" end="5959" title="Dance a Little Closer" label="Dance a Little Closer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518053" start="5992" end="6012" title="Idiot&amp;#x27;s Delight (film)" label="Idiot&amp;#x27;s Delight"/>
<link wikidata="Q315808" start="6253" end="6263" title="Neil Simon" label="Neil Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51537" start="6273" end="6285" title="Mike Nichols" label="Mike Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q153579" start="6289" end="6305" title="Stephen Sondheim" label="Stephen Sondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q605924" start="6311" end="6324" title="Harold Prince" label="Harold Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q10340884" start="6501" end="6535" title="On a Clear Day You Can See Forever" label="On a Clear Day You Can See Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q18971" start="6627" end="6643" title="Arthur P. Jacobs" label="Arthur P. Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q950865" start="6701" end="6716" title="Doctor Dolittle (film)" label="Doctor Dolittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305608" start="6853" end="6868" title="Leslie Bricusse" label="Leslie Bricusse"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="6899" end="6923" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523674" start="7025" end="7049" title="Gigi (musical)" label="musical stage adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199280" start="7123" end="7140" title="The Little Prince (1974 film)" label="The Little Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908" start="7193" end="7217" title="Antoine de Saint-Exupéry" label="Antoine de Saint-Exupéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q239261" start="8178" end="8189" title="Benny Green (saxophonist)" label="Benny Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550046" start="8276" end="8288" title="Gerard Kenny" label="Gerard Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8293" end="8304" title="Kristi Kane (libretto)" label="Kristi Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811134" start="8354" end="8368" title="My Man Godfrey" label="My Man Godfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q180975" start="8417" end="8436" title="Andrew Lloyd Webber" label="Andrew Lloyd Webber"/>
<link wikidata="Q382353" start="8478" end="8502" title="The Phantom of the Opera (1986 musical)" label="The Phantom of the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q382353" start="8525" end="8535" title="Masquerade (The Phantom of the Opera song)" label="Masquerade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496084" start="8686" end="8698" title="Charles Hart (lyricist)" label="Charles Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q830581" start="8816" end="8830" title="Les Misérables (musical)" label="Les Misérables"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736243" start="9082" end="9096" title="Herbst Theatre" label="Herbst Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="9100" end="9113" title="San Francisco, California" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433464" start="9231" end="9260" title="I Could Have Danced All Night" label="I Could Have Danced All Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="9278" end="9290" title="My Fair Lady" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q11976620" start="9557" end="9595" title="I&amp;#x27;ve Grown Accustomed To Her Face" label="I&amp;#x27;ve Grown Accustomed To Her Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q181887" start="9615" end="9627" title="Rex Harrison" label="Rex Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="9704" end="9707" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837534" start="9721" end="9742" title="All Things Considered" label="All Things Considered"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="9805" end="9817" title="My Fair Lady" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255671" start="10290" end="10317" title="Dramatists Guild of America" label="Dramatists Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="10519" end="10527" title="Substance use disorder" label="addicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445303" start="10531" end="10543" title="amphetamines" label="amphetamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794896" start="10582" end="10594" title="Max Jacobson" label="Max Jacobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q27854126" start="10916" end="10927" title="Marion Bell" label="Marion Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q259453" start="10949" end="10960" title="Nancy Olson" label="Nancy Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416730" start="11063" end="11075" title="Sandra Payne (actress)" label="Sandra Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660276" start="11118" end="11131" title="Liz Robertson" label="Liz Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519151" start="11338" end="11361" title="Mannes College of Music" label="Mannes College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691349" start="11404" end="11416" title="Joey Bushkin" label="Joey Bushkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554037" start="11748" end="11776" title="Get Me to the Church on Time" label="Get Me to the Church on Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657328" start="11919" end="11938" title="Michael Alan Lerner" label="Michael Alan Lerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="12430" end="12454" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="12585" end="12596" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="12600" end="12609" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660276" start="12679" end="12692" title="Liz Robertson" label="Liz Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3448926" start="12735" end="12758" title="Center Island, New York" label="Center Island, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q385521" start="12788" end="12809" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s, Covent Garden" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q55019" start="12838" end="12851" title="Covent Garden" label="Covent Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q467050" start="12888" end="12917" title="American Theater Hall of Fame" label="American Theater Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738793" start="12924" end="12945" title="Kennedy Center Honors" label="Kennedy Center Honors"/>
<link wikidata="Q41417" start="12968" end="12992" title="Academy Award for Writing Original Screenplay" label="Best Original Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q747570" start="13005" end="13025" title="An American in Paris (film)" label="An American in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258" start="13033" end="13056" title="Academy Award for Writing Adapted Screenplay" label="Best Adapted Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q577757" start="13069" end="13073" title="Gigi (1958 film)" label="Gigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q112243" start="13081" end="13099" title="Academy Award for Best Original Song" label="Best Original Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q577757" start="13112" end="13116" title="Gigi (1958 film)" label="Gigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="13125" end="13138" title="Golden Globes" label="Golden Globes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472235" start="13140" end="13158" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song" label="Best Original Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q930372" start="13171" end="13178" title="Camelot (film)" label="Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422140" start="13186" end="13205" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score" label="Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q25338" start="13218" end="13235" title="The Little Prince" label="The Little Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="13244" end="13254" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784838" start="13256" end="13278" title="Tony Award for Best Book of a Musical" label="Best Book of a Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="13291" end="13303" title="My Fair Lady" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478089" start="13311" end="13330" title="Tony Award for Best Original Score" label="Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="13343" end="13355" title="My Fair Lady" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523674" start="13377" end="13381" title="Gigi (musical)" label="Gigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711507" start="13390" end="13419" title="New York Drama Critics Circle" label="New York Drama Critics Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711507" start="13421" end="13433" title="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle" label="Best Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q611332" start="13446" end="13455" title="Brigadoon" label="Brigadoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711507" start="13463" end="13475" title="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle" label="Best Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="13488" end="13500" title="My Fair Lady" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970135" start="13530" end="13543" title="National Academy of Popular Music" label="Lyric Writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545260" start="13592" end="13609" title="Life of the Party (musical)" label="Life of the Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q551678" start="13629" end="13644" title="Frederick Loewe" label="Frederick Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990840" start="13653" end="13668" title="What&amp;#x27;s Up? (musical)" label="What&amp;#x27;s Up?"/>
<link wikidata="Q551678" start="13688" end="13703" title="Frederick Loewe" label="Frederick Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729157" start="13712" end="13733" title="The Day Before Spring" label="The Day Before Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q551678" start="13753" end="13768" title="Frederick Loewe" label="Frederick Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q611332" start="13777" end="13786" title="Brigadoon (musical)" label="Brigadoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q551678" start="13806" end="13821" title="Frederick Loewe" label="Frederick Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690960" start="13830" end="13839" title="Love Life (musical)" label="Love Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="13859" end="13869" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288100" start="13878" end="13894" title="Paint Your Wagon (musical)" label="Paint Your Wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q551678" start="13909" end="13924" title="Frederick Loewe" label="Frederick Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q591943" start="13933" end="13945" title="My Fair Lady" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q551678" start="13965" end="13980" title="Frederick Loewe" label="Frederick Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028491" start="13989" end="13996" title="Camelot (musical)" label="Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q551678" start="14016" end="14031" title="Frederick Loewe" label="Frederick Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10340884" start="14040" end="14074" title="On a Clear Day You Can See Forever" label="On a Clear Day You Can See Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q364143" start="14094" end="14105" title="Burton Lane" label="Burton Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981318" start="14114" end="14118" title="Coco (musical)" label="Coco"/>
<link wikidata="Q155712" start="14138" end="14150" title="André Previn" label="André Previn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668903" start="14159" end="14174" title="Lolita, My Love" label="Lolita, My Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q111074" start="14194" end="14204" title="John Barry (composer)" label="John Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523674" start="14213" end="14217" title="Gigi (musical)" label="Gigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q577757" start="14250" end="14271" title="Gigi (1958 film)" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q551678" start="14278" end="14293" title="Frederick Loewe" label="Frederick Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551092" start="14302" end="14326" title="1600 Pennsylvania Avenue (musical)" label="1600 Pennsylvania Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q152505" start="14346" end="14363" title="Leonard Bernstein" label="Leonard Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043344" start="14372" end="14381" title="Carmelina" label="Carmelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q364143" start="14401" end="14412" title="Burton Lane" label="Burton Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361175" start="14417" end="14429" title="Joseph Stein" label="Joseph Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215222" start="14438" end="14459" title="Dance a Little Closer" label="Dance a Little Closer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960275" start="14479" end="14494" title="Charles Strouse" label="Charles Strouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550046" start="14549" end="14561" title="Gerard Kenny" label="Gerard Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q538600" start="14595" end="14608" title="Royal Wedding" label="Royal Wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q747570" start="14652" end="14672" title="An American in Paris (film)" label="An American in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q636534" start="14702" end="14711" title="Brigadoon (film)" label="Brigadoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q577757" start="14762" end="14766" title="Gigi (1958 film)" label="Gigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201215" start="14875" end="14887" title="My Fair Lady (film)" label="My Fair Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q930372" start="14931" end="14938" title="Camelot (film)" label="Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q637192" start="14982" end="14998" title="Paint Your Wagon (film)" label="Paint Your Wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702903" start="15051" end="15085" title="On a Clear Day You Can See Forever (film)" label="On a Clear Day You Can See Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199280" start="15129" end="15146" title="The Little Prince (1974 film)" label="The Little Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089818" start="15190" end="15197" title="Tribute (1980 film)" label="Tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820298" start="15331" end="15347" title="Lerner and Loewe" label="Lerner and Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11311963" start="15375" end="15389" title="Stanley Green (historian)" label="Green, Stanley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3012" wikidata="Q2060191" url="?curid=3012" title="Al Capp">
<text>Alfred Gerald Caplin (September 28, 1909 – November 5, 1979), better known as Al Capp, was an American cartoonist and humorist best known for the satirical comic strip &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;, which he created in 1934 and continued writing and (with help from assistants) drawing until 1977. He also wrote the comic strips &quot;Abbie an&#x27; Slats&quot; (in the years 1937–45) and &quot;Long Sam&quot; (1954). He won the National Cartoonists Society&#x27;s Reuben Award in 1947 for Cartoonist of the Year, and their 1979 Elzie Segar Award, posthumously for his &quot;unique and outstanding contribution to the profession of cartooning&quot;. 

Capp&#x27;s comic strips dealt with urban experiences in the Northern United States until the year he introduced &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;. Although Capp was from Connecticut, he spent 43 years writing about the fictional Southern town of Dogpatch, reaching an estimated 60 million readers in more than 900 American newspapers and 100 more papers in 28 countries internationally. M. Thomas Inge says Capp made a large personal fortune through the strip and &quot;had a profound influence on the way the world viewed the American South&quot;.

==Early life and education==
Capp was born in New Haven, Connecticut, of East European Jewish heritage. He was the eldest child of Otto Philip Caplin (1885–1964) and Matilda (Davidson) Caplin (1884–1948). His brothers, Elliot and Jerome, were cartoonists, and his sister, Madeline, was a publicist. Capp&#x27;s parents were both natives of Latvia whose families had migrated to New Haven in the 1880s. &quot;My mother and father had been brought to this country from Russia when they were infants&quot;, wrote Capp in 1978. &quot;Their fathers had found that the great promise of America was true – it was no crime to be a Jew.&quot; The Caplins were dirt-poor, and Capp later recalled stories of his mother going out in the night to sift through ash barrels for reusable bits of coal.

In August 1919, at the age of nine, Capp was run down by a trolley car and had his left leg amputated above the knee. According to his father Otto&#x27;s unpublished autobiography, young Capp was not prepared for the amputation beforehand; having been in a coma for days, he suddenly awoke to discover that his leg had been removed. He was eventually given a prosthetic leg, but only learned to use it by adopting a slow way of walking which became increasingly painful as he grew older. The childhood tragedy of losing a leg likely helped shape Capp&#x27;s cynical worldview, which was darker and more sardonic than that of the average newspaper cartoonist. &quot;I was indignant as hell about that leg,&quot; he revealed in a November 1950 interview in &quot;Time&quot; magazine.

&quot;The secret of how to live without resentment or embarrassment in a world in which I was different from everyone else&quot;, Capp philosophically wrote (in &quot;Life magazine&quot; on May 23, 1960), &quot;was to be indifferent to that difference.&quot; The prevailing opinion among his friends was that Capp&#x27;s Swiftian satire was, to some degree, a creatively channeled, compensatory response to his disability.

Capp&#x27;s father, a failed businessman and an amateur cartoonist, introduced him to drawing as a form of therapy. He became quite proficient, advancing mostly on his own. Among his earliest influences were &quot;Punch&quot; cartoonist–illustrator Phil May and American comic strip cartoonists Tad Dorgan, Cliff Sterrett, Rube Goldberg, Rudolph Dirks, Fred Opper, Billy DeBeck, George McManus, and Milt Gross. At about this same time, Capp became a voracious reader. According to Capp&#x27;s brother Elliot, Alfred had finished all of Shakespeare and George Bernard Shaw by the time he turned 13. Among his childhood favorites were Dickens, Smollett, Mark Twain, Booth Tarkington, and later, Robert Benchley and S. J. Perelman.

Capp spent five years at Bridgeport High School in Bridgeport, Connecticut, without receiving a diploma. He liked to joke about how he failed geometry for nine straight terms. His formal training came from a series of art schools in the Northeast. Attending three of them in rapid succession, the impoverished Capp was thrown out of each for nonpayment of tuition—the Boston Museum School of Fine Arts, the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, and Designers Art School in Boston—the last before launching his career. Capp already had decided to become a cartoonist. &quot;I heard that Bud Fisher (creator of &quot;Mutt and Jeff&quot;) got $3,000 a week and was constantly marrying French countesses&quot;, Capp said. &quot;I decided that was for me.&quot;

In early 1932, Capp hitchhiked to New York City. He lived in &quot;airless rat holes&quot; in Greenwich Village and turned out advertising strips at $2 each while scouring the city hunting for jobs. He eventually found work at the Associated Press when he was 23 years old. By March 1932, Capp was drawing &quot;Colonel Gilfeather&quot;, a single-panel, AP-owned property created in 1930 by Dick Dorgan. Capp changed the focus and title to &quot;Mister Gilfeather&quot; but soon grew to hate the feature. He left the Associated Press in September 1932. Before leaving, he met Milton Caniff and the two became lifelong friends. Capp moved to Boston and married Catherine Wingate Cameron, whom he had met earlier in art class. She died in 2006 at the age of 96.

Leaving his new wife with her parents in Amesbury, Massachusetts, he subsequently returned to New York in 1933, in the midst of the Great Depression. &quot;I was 23, I carried a mass of drawings, and I had nearly five dollars in my pocket. People were sleeping in alleys then, willing to work at anything.&quot; There he met Ham Fisher, who hired him to ghost on &quot;Joe Palooka&quot;. During one of Fisher&#x27;s extended vacations, Capp&#x27;s &quot;Joe Palooka&quot; story arc introduced a stupid, coarse, oafish mountaineer named &quot;Big Leviticus&quot;, a crude prototype. (Leviticus was much closer to Capp&#x27;s later villains Lem and Luke Scragg than to the much more appealing and innocent Li&#x27;l Abner.)

Also during this period, Capp was working at night on samples for the strip that eventually became &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;. He based his cast of characters on the authentic mountain-dwellers he met (This would have been before the Tennessee Valley Authority Act of 1933 began the years-long process of bringing basic utilities such as electricity and running water to the region.) Leaving &quot;Joe Palooka&quot;, Capp sold &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; to United Feature Syndicate (later known as United Media). The feature was launched on Monday, August 13, 1934, in eight North American newspapers—including the &quot;New York Mirror&quot;—and was an immediate success. Alfred G. Caplin eventually became &quot;Al Capp&quot; because the syndicate felt the original would not fit in a cartoon frame. Capp had his name changed legally in 1949.

His younger brother, Elliot Caplin, also became a comic strip writer, best known for co-creating the soap opera strip &quot;The Heart of Juliet Jones&quot; with artist Stan Drake and conceiving the comic strip character &quot;Broom-Hilda&quot; with cartoonist Russell Myers. Elliot also authored several off-Broadway plays, including &quot;A Nickel for Picasso&quot; (1981), which was based on and dedicated to his mother and his famous brother.

==&quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;==

What began as a hillbilly burlesque soon evolved into one of the most imaginative, popular, and well-drawn strips of the twentieth century. Featuring vividly outlandish characters, bizarre situations, and equal parts suspense, slapstick, irony, satire, black humor, and biting social commentary, &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; is considered a classic of the genre. The comic strip stars Li&#x27;l Abner Yokum—the simple-minded, loutish but good-natured, and eternally innocent hayseed who lives with his parents—scrawny but superhuman Mammy Yokum, and shiftless, childlike Pappy Yokum.

&quot;Yokum&quot; was a combination of &quot;yokel&quot; and &quot;hokum&quot;, although Capp established a deeper meaning for the name during a series of visits around 1965–1970 with comics historians George E. Turner and Michael H. Price: 

The Yokums live in the backwater hamlet of Dogpatch, Kentucky. Described by its creator as &quot;an average stone-age community&quot;, Dogpatch mostly consists of hopelessly ramshackle log cabins, pine trees, &quot;tarnip&quot; fields, and &quot;hawg&quot; wallows. Whatever energy Abner had went into evading the marital goals of Daisy Mae Scragg, his sexy, well-endowed, but virtuous girlfriend, until Capp finally gave in to reader pressure and allowed the couple to marry. This newsworthy event made the cover of &quot;Life&quot; on March 31, 1952.

Capp peopled his comic strip with an assortment of memorable characters, including Marryin&#x27; Sam, Hairless Joe, Lonesome Polecat, Evil-Eye Fleegle, General Bullmoose, Lena the Hyena, Senator Jack S. Phogbound (Capp&#x27;s caricature of the anti-New Deal Dixiecrats), the &quot;(shudder!)&quot; Scraggs, Available Jones, Nightmare Alice, Earthquake McGoon, and a host of others. Especially notable, certainly from a G.I. point of view, are the beautiful, full-figured women such as Daisy Mae, Wolf Gal, Stupefyin&#x27; Jones, and Moonbeam McSwine (a caricature of his wife Catherine, aside from the dirt), all of whom found their way onto the nose art of bomber planes during World War II and the Korean War. Perhaps Capp&#x27;s most popular creations were the Shmoos, creatures whose incredible usefulness and generous nature made them a threat to civilization as we know it.

Another famous character was Joe Btfsplk, who wants to be a loving friend but is &quot;the world&#x27;s worst jinx&quot;, bringing bad luck to all those nearby. Btfsplk (his name is &quot;pronounced&quot; by simply blowing a &quot;raspberry&quot; or Bronx cheer) always has an iconic dark cloud over his head.

Dogpatch residents regularly combat the likes of city slickers, business tycoons, government officials, and intellectuals with their homespun simplicity. Situations often take the characters to other destinations, including New York City, Washington, D.C., Hollywood, tropical islands, the moon, Mars, and some purely fanciful worlds of Capp&#x27;s invention, including El Passionato, Kigmyland, The Republic of Crumbumbo, Skunk Hollow, The Valley of the Shmoon, Planets Pincus Number 2 and 7, and a miserable frozen wasteland known as Lower Slobbovia, a pointedly political satire of backward nations and foreign diplomacy that remains a contemporary reference.

According to cultural historian Anthony Harkins: 

The strip&#x27;s popularity grew from an original eight papers to eventually more than 900. At its peak, &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; was estimated to have been read daily in the United States by 60 to 70 million people (the U.S. population at the time was only 180 million), with adult readers far outnumbering children. Many communities, high schools, and colleges staged Sadie Hawkins dances patterned after the similar annual event in the strip.

Li&#x27;l Abner has one odd design quirk that has puzzled readers for decades: the part in his hair always faces the viewer, no matter which direction Abner is facing. In response to the question &quot;Which side does Abner part his hair on?&quot;, Capp would answer: &quot;Both.&quot; Capp said he finally found the right &quot;look&quot; for Li&#x27;l Abner with Henry Fonda&#x27;s character Dave Tolliver in &quot;The Trail of the Lonesome Pine&quot; (1936).

In later years, Capp always claimed to have effectively created the miniskirt, when he first put one on Daisy Mae in the 1930s.

==Parodies, toppers, and alternate strips==
&quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; also features a comic strip-within-the-strip: &quot;Fearless Fosdick&quot; is a parody of Chester Gould&#x27;s &quot;Dick Tracy&quot;. It first appeared in 1942, and it proved so popular that it ran intermittently during the next 35 years. Gould was parodied personally in the series as cartoonist &quot;Lester Gooch&quot;—the diminutive, much-harassed and occasionally deranged &quot;creator&quot; of Fosdick. The style of the &quot;Fosdick&quot; sequences closely mimicks &quot;Tracy&quot;, including the urban setting, the outrageous villains, the galloping mortality rate, the crosshatched shadows, and even the lettering style. In 1952, Fosdick was the star of his own short-lived puppet show on NBC, featuring the Mary Chase marionettes.

Besides &quot;Dick Tracy&quot;, Capp parodied many other comic strips in &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;—including &quot;Steve Canyon&quot;, &quot;Superman&quot; (at least twice; first as &quot;Jack Jawbreaker&quot; in 1947, and again in 1966 as &quot;Chickensouperman&quot;), &quot;Mary Worth&quot; as &quot;Mary Worm&quot;, &quot;Peanuts&quot; (in 1968, with &quot;Peewee&quot;, a parody of Charlie Brown, and &quot;Croopy&quot;, a parody of Snoopy, drawn by &quot;Bedley Damp&quot;, a parody of Charles Schulz), &quot;Rex Morgan, M.D.&quot;, &quot;Little Annie Rooney&quot;, and &quot;Little Orphan Annie&quot; (in which Punjab became &quot;Punjbag&quot;, an oleaginous slob). &quot;Fearless Fosdick&quot;—and Capp&#x27;s other spoofs such as &quot;Little Fanny Gooney&quot; (1952) and &quot;Jack Jawbreaker&quot;—were almost certainly an early inspiration for Harvey Kurtzman&#x27;s &quot;Mad Magazine&quot;, which began in 1952 as a comic book that specifically parodied other comics in the same distinctive style and subversive manner.

Capp also lampooned popular recording idols of the day, such as Elvis Presley (&quot;Hawg McCall&quot;, 1957), Liberace (&quot;Loverboynik&quot;, 1956), the Beatles (&quot;the Beasties&quot;, 1964)—and in 1944, Frank Sinatra. &quot;Sinatra was the first great public figure I ever wrote about,&quot; Capp once said. &quot;I called him &#x27;Hal Fascinatra.&#x27; I remember my news syndicate was so worried about what his reaction might be, and we were all surprised when he telephoned and told me how thrilled he was with it. He always made it a point to send me champagne whenever he happened to see me in a restaurant...&quot; (from &quot;Frank Sinatra, My Father&quot; by Nancy Sinatra, 1985). On the other hand, Liberace was &quot;cut to the quick&quot; over Loverboynik, according to Capp, and even threatened legal action—as would Joan Baez later, over &quot;Joanie Phoanie&quot; in 1967.

Capp was just as likely to parody himself; his self-caricature made frequent, tongue-in-cheek appearances in &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;. The gag was often at his own expense, as in the above 1951 sequence showing Capp&#x27;s interaction with &quot;fans&quot; (see excerpt), or in his 1955 Disneyland parody, &quot;Hal Yappland&quot;. Just about anything could be a target for Capp&#x27;s satire—in one storyline Li&#x27;l Abner is revealed to be the missing link between ape and man. In another, the search is on in Dogpatch for a pair of missing socks knitted by the first president of the United States.
In addition to creating &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;, Capp also co-created two other newspaper strips: &quot;Abbie an&#x27; Slats&quot; with magazine illustrator Raeburn van Buren in 1937, and &quot;Long Sam&quot; with cartoonist Bob Lubbers in 1954, as well as the Sunday &quot;topper&quot; strips &quot;Washable Jones&quot;, &quot;Small Fry&quot; (a.k.a. &quot;Small Change&quot;), and &quot;Advice fo&#x27; Chillun&quot;.

==Critical recognition==
According to comics historian Coulton Waugh, a 1947 poll of newspaper readers who claimed they ignored the comics page altogether revealed that many confessed to making a single exception: &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;. &quot;When &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; made its debut in 1934, the vast majority of comic strips were designed chiefly to amuse or thrill their readers. Capp turned that world upside-down by routinely injecting politics and social commentary into &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;. The strip was the first to regularly introduce characters and story lines having nothing to do with the nominal stars of the strip. The technique—as invigorating as it was unorthodox—was later adopted by cartoonists such as Walt Kelly [&quot;Pogo&quot;] and Garry Trudeau [&quot;Doonesbury&quot;]&quot;, wrote comic strip historian Rick Marschall. According to Marschall, &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; gradually evolved into a broad satire of human nature. In his book &quot;America&#x27;s Great Comic Strip Artists&quot; (1989), Marschall&#x27;s analysis revealed a decidedly misanthropic subtext.

Over the years, &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; has been adapted to radio, animated cartoons, stage production, motion pictures, and television. Capp has been compared, at various times, to Mark Twain, Dostoevski, Jonathan Swift, Lawrence Sterne, and Rabelais. Fans of the strip ranged from novelist John Steinbeck—who called Capp &quot;possibly the best writer in the world today&quot; in 1953 and even earnestly recommended him for the Nobel Prize in literature—to media critic and theorist Marshall McLuhan, who considered Capp &quot;the only robust satirical force in American life&quot;. John Updike, comparing Abner to a &quot;hillbilly Candide&quot;, added that the strip&#x27;s &quot;richness of social and philosophical commentary approached the Voltairean&quot;. Charlie Chaplin, William F. Buckley, Al Hirschfeld, Harpo Marx, Russ Meyer, John Kenneth Galbraith, Ralph Bakshi, Shel Silverstein, Hugh Downs, Gene Shalit, Frank Cho, Daniel Clowes, and (reportedly) even Queen Elizabeth have confessed to being fans of &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;.

&quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; was also the subject of the first book-length scholarly assessment of an American comic strip ever published. &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner: A Study in American Satire&quot; by Arthur Asa Berger (Twayne, 1969) contained serious analyses of Capp&#x27;s narrative technique, his use of dialogue, self-caricature, and grotesquerie, the place of &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; in American satire, and the significance of social criticism and the graphic image. &quot;One of the few strips ever taken seriously by students of American culture,&quot; wrote Professor Berger, &quot;&quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; is worth studying ... because of Capp&#x27;s imagination and artistry, and because of the strip&#x27;s very obvious social relevance.&quot; It was reprinted by the University Press of Mississippi in 1994.

==The 1940s and 1950s==

During World War II and for many years afterward, Capp worked tirelessly going to hospitals to entertain patients, especially to cheer recent amputees and explain to them that the loss of a limb did not mean an end to a happy and productive life. Making no secret of his own disability, Capp openly joked about his prosthetic leg his whole life. In 1946, Capp created a special full-color comic book, &quot;Al Capp by Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;, to be distributed by the Red Cross to encourage the thousands of amputee veterans returning from the war. Capp also was involved with the Sister Kenny Foundation, which pioneered new treatments for polio in the 1940s. Serving in his capacity as honorary chairman, Capp made public appearances on its behalf for years, contributed free artwork for its annual fundraising appeals, and entertained disabled and paraplegic children in children&#x27;s hospitals with inspirational pep talks, humorous stories, and sketches.

In 1940, an RKO movie adaptation starred Granville Owen (later known as Jeff York) as Li&#x27;l Abner, with Buster Keaton taking the role of Lonesome Polecat, and featuring a title song with lyrics by Milton Berle. A successful musical comedy adaptation of the strip opened on Broadway at the St. James Theater on November 15, 1956, and had a long run of 693 performances, followed by a nationwide tour. The stage musical, with music and lyrics by Gene de Paul and Johnny Mercer, was adapted into a Technicolor motion picture at Paramount in 1959 by producer Norman Panama and director Melvin Frank, with a score by Nelson Riddle. Several performers repeated their Broadway roles in the film, most memorably Julie Newmar as Stupefyin&#x27; Jones and Stubby Kaye as Marryin&#x27; Sam.

Other highlights of that decade included the 1942 debut of Fearless Fosdick as Abner&#x27;s &quot;ideel&quot; (hero); the 1946 Lena the Hyena Contest, in which a hideous Lower Slobbovian gal was ultimately revealed in the harrowing winning entry (as judged by Frank Sinatra, Boris Karloff, and Salvador Dalí) drawn by noted cartoonist Basil Wolverton; and an ill-fated Sunday parody of &quot;Gone With the Wind&quot; that aroused anger and legal threats from author Margaret Mitchell, and led to a printed apology within the strip. In October 1947, Li&#x27;l Abner met Rockwell P. Squeezeblood, head of the abusive and corrupt Squeezeblood Comic Strip Syndicate. The resulting sequence, &quot;Jack Jawbreaker Fights Crime!&quot;, was a devastating satire of Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster&#x27;s notorious exploitation by DC Comics over &quot;Superman&quot;. It was later reprinted in &quot;The World of Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; (1953). (Siegel and Shuster had earlier poked fun at Capp in a &quot;Superman&quot; story in &quot;Action Comics #55&quot;, December 1942, in which a cartoonist named &quot;Al Hatt&quot; invents a comic strip featuring the hillbilly &quot;Tiny Rufe&quot;.)

In 1947, Capp earned a &quot;Newsweek&quot; cover story. That same year the &quot;New Yorker&#x27;s&quot; profile on him was so long that it ran in consecutive issues. In 1948, Capp reached a creative peak with the introduction of the Shmoos, lovable and innocent fantasy creatures who reproduced at amazing speed and brought so many benefits that, ironically, the world economy was endangered. The much-copied storyline was a parable that was metaphorically interpreted in many different ways at the outset of the Cold War.

Following his close friend Milton Caniff&#x27;s lead (with &quot;Steve Canyon&quot;), Capp had recently fought a successful battle with the syndicate to gain complete ownership of his feature when the Shmoos debuted. As a result, he reaped enormous financial rewards from the unexpected (and almost unprecedented) merchandising phenomenon that followed. As in the strip, Shmoos suddenly appeared to be everywhere in 1949 and 1950—including a &quot;Time&quot; cover story. A paperback collection of the original sequence, &quot;The Life and Times of the Shmoo&quot;, became a bestseller for Simon &amp; Schuster. Shmoo dolls, clocks, watches, jewelry, earmuffs, wallpaper, fishing lures, air fresheners, soap, ice cream, balloons, ashtrays, comic books, records, sheet music, toys, games, Halloween masks, salt and pepper shakers, decals, pinbacks, tumblers, coin banks, greeting cards, planters, neckties, suspenders, belts, curtains, fountain pens, and other Shmoo paraphernalia were produced. A garment factory in Baltimore turned out a whole line of Shmoo apparel, including &quot;Shmooveralls&quot;. The original sequence and its 1959 sequel &quot;The Return of the Shmoo&quot; have been collected in print many times since, most recently in 2011, always to high sales figures. The Shmoos later had their own animated television series.

Capp followed this success with other allegorical fantasy critters, including the aboriginal and masochistic &quot;Kigmies&quot;, who craved abuse (a story that began as a veiled comment on racial and religious oppression), the dreaded &quot;Nogoodniks&quot; (or &quot;bad&quot; shmoos), and the irresistible &quot;Bald Iggle&quot;, a guileless creature whose sad-eyed countenance compelled involuntary truthfulness—with predictably disastrous results.

&quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; was censored for the first time, but not the last, in September 1947 and was pulled from papers by Scripps-Howard. The controversy, as reported in &quot;Time&quot;, centered on Capp&#x27;s portrayal of the United States Senate. Edward Leech of Scripps said, &quot;We don&#x27;t think it is good editing or sound citizenship to picture the Senate as an assemblage of freaks and crooks ... boobs and undesirables.&quot; Capp criticized Senator Joseph McCarthy in 1954, calling him a &quot;poet&quot;. &quot;He uses poetic license to try to create the beautifully ordered world of good guys and bad guys that he wants,&quot; said Capp. &quot;He seems at his best when terrifying the helpless and naïve.&quot;

Capp received the National Cartoonists Society&#x27;s Billy DeBeck Memorial Award in 1947 for Cartoonist of the Year. (When the award name was changed in 1954, Capp also retroactively received a Reuben statuette.) He was an outspoken pioneer in favor of diversifying the NCS by admitting women cartoonists. Originally, the Society had disallowed female members. Capp briefly resigned his membership in 1949 to protest their refusal of admission to Hilda Terry, creator of the comic strip &quot;Teena&quot;. According to Tom Roberts, author of &quot;Alex Raymond: His Life and Art&quot; (2007), Capp delivered a stirring speech that was instrumental in changing those rules. The NCS finally accepted female members the following year. In December 1952, Capp published an article in &quot;Real&quot; magazine entitled &quot;The REAL Powers in America&quot; that further challenged the conventional attitudes of the day: &quot;The real powers in America are &quot;women&quot;—the wives and sweethearts behind the masculine dummies...&quot;

Highlights of the 1950s included the much-heralded marriage of Abner and Daisy Mae in 1952, the birth of their son &quot;Honest Abe&quot; Yokum in 1953, and in 1954 the introduction of Abner&#x27;s enormous, long-lost kid brother Tiny Yokum, who filled Abner&#x27;s place as a bachelor in the annual Sadie Hawkins Day race. In 1952, Capp and his characters graced the covers of both &quot;Life&quot; and &quot;TV Guide&quot;. The year 1956 saw the debut of Bald Iggle, considered by some &quot;Abner&quot; enthusiasts to be the creative high point of the strip, as well as Mammy&#x27;s revelatory encounter with the &quot;Square Eyes&quot; Family—Capp&#x27;s thinly-veiled appeal for racial tolerance. (This fable-like story was collected into an educational comic book called &quot;Mammy Yokum and the Great Dogpatch Mystery!&quot; and distributed by the Anti-Defamation League of B&#x27;nai B&#x27;rith later that year.) Two years later, Capp&#x27;s studio issued &quot;Martin Luther King and the Montgomery Story&quot;, a biographical comic book distributed by the Fellowship of Reconciliation.

Often, Capp had parodied corporate greed—pork tycoon J. Roaringham Fatback had figured prominently in wiping out the Shmoos. But in 1952, when General Motors president Charles E. Wilson, nominated for a cabinet post, told Congress &quot;...what was good for the country was good for General Motors and vice versa&quot;, he inspired one of Capp&#x27;s greatest satires—the introduction of General Bullmoose, the robust, ruthless, and ageless business tycoon. The blustering Bullmoose, who seemed to own and control nearly everything, justified his far-reaching and mercenary excesses by saying &quot;What&#x27;s good for General Bullmoose is good for &quot;the USA!&quot;&quot; Bullmoose&#x27;s corrupt interests were often pitted against those of the pathetic Lower Slobbovians in a classic mismatch of &quot;haves&quot; versus &quot;have-nots&quot;. This character, along with the Shmoos, helped cement Capp&#x27;s favor with the Left, and increased their outrage a decade later when Capp, a former Franklin D. Roosevelt liberal, switched targets. Nonetheless, General Bullmoose continued to appear, undaunted and unredeemed, during the strip&#x27;s final right-wing phase and into the 1970s.

==Feud with Ham Fisher==
After Capp quit his ghosting job on Ham Fisher&#x27;s &quot;Joe Palooka&quot; in 1934 to launch his own strip, Fisher badmouthed him to colleagues and editors, claiming that Capp had &quot;stolen&quot; his idea. For years, Fisher brought the characters back to his strip, billing them as &quot;The ORIGINAL Hillbilly Characters&quot; and advising readers not to be &quot;fooled by imitations&quot;. (In fact, Fisher&#x27;s brutish hillbilly character—Big Leviticus, created by Capp in Fisher&#x27;s absence—bore little resemblance to Li&#x27;l Abner.) According to a November 1950 &quot;Time&quot; article, &quot;Capp parted from Fisher with a definite impression, (to put it mildly) that he had been underpaid and unappreciated. Fisher, a man of Roman self esteem, considered Capp an ingrate and a whippersnapper, and watched his rise to fame with unfeigned horror.&quot;

&quot;Fisher repeatedly brought Leviticus and his clan back, claiming their primacy as comics&#x27; first hillbilly family – but he was missing the point. It wasn&#x27;t the setting that made Capp&#x27;s strip such a huge success. It was Capp&#x27;s finely tuned sense of the absurd, his ability to milk an outrageous situation for every laugh in it and then, impossibly, to squeeze even more laughs from it, that found such favor with the public,&quot; (from Don Markstein&#x27;s &quot;Toonopedia&quot;).

The Capp-Fisher feud was well known in cartooning circles, and it grew more personal as Capp&#x27;s strip eclipsed &quot;Joe Palooka&quot; in popularity. Fisher hired away Capp&#x27;s top assistant, Moe Leff. After Fisher underwent plastic surgery, Capp included a racehorse in &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; named &quot;Ham&#x27;s Nose-Bob&quot;. In 1950, Capp introduced a cartoonist character named &quot;Happy Vermin&quot;—a caricature of Fisher—who hired Abner to draw his comic strip in a dimly lit closet (after sacking his previous &quot;temporary&quot; assistant of 20 years, who had been cut off from all his friends in the process). Instead of using Vermin&#x27;s tired characters, Abner inventively peopled the strip with hillbillies. A bighearted Vermin told his slaving assistant: &quot;I&#x27;m proud of having created these characters!! They&#x27;ll make millions for me!! And if they do – I&#x27;ll get &quot;you&quot; a new light bulb!!&quot;

Traveling in the same social circles, the two men engaged in a 20-year mutual vendetta, as described by the &quot;New York Daily News&quot; in 1998: &quot;They crossed paths often, in the midtown watering holes and at National Cartoonists Society banquets, and the city&#x27;s gossip columns were full of their snarling public donnybrooks.&quot; In 1950, Capp wrote a nasty article for &quot;The Atlantic&quot;, entitled &quot;I Remember Monster&quot;. The article recounted Capp&#x27;s days working for an unnamed &quot;benefactor&quot; with a miserly, swinish personality, who Capp claimed was a never-ending source of inspiration when it came time to create a new unregenerate villain for his comic strip. The thinly-veiled boss was understood to be Ham Fisher.

Fisher retaliated, doctoring photostats of &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; and falsely accusing Capp of sneaking obscenities into his comic strip. Fisher submitted examples of &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; to Capp&#x27;s syndicate and to the New York courts, in which Fisher had identified pornographic images that were hidden in the background art. However, the X-rated material had been drawn there by Fisher. Capp was able to refute the accusation by simply showing the original artwork.

In 1954, when Capp was applying for a Boston television license, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) received an anonymous packet of pornographic &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; drawings. The National Cartoonists Society (NCS) convened an ethics hearing, and Fisher was expelled for the forgery from the same organization that he had helped found; Fisher&#x27;s scheme had backfired in spectacular fashion. Around the same time, his mansion in Wisconsin was destroyed by a storm. On December 27, 1955, Fisher committed suicide in his studio. The feud and Fisher&#x27;s suicide were used as the basis for a lurid, highly fictionalized murder mystery, &quot;Strip for Murder&quot; by Max Allan Collins.

Another &quot;feud&quot; seemed to be looming when, in one run of Sunday strips in 1957, Capp lampooned the comic strip &quot;Mary Worth&quot; as &quot;Mary Worm&quot;. The title character was depicted as a nosy, interfering busybody. Allen Saunders, the creator of the &quot;Mary Worth&quot; strip, returned Capp&#x27;s fire with the introduction of the character &quot;Hal Rapp&quot;, a foul-tempered, ill-mannered, and (ironically, as Capp was a teetotaler) inebriated cartoonist. Later, the &quot;feud&quot; was revealed to be a collaborative hoax that Capp and his longtime pal Saunders had cooked up together. The Capp-Saunders &quot;feud&quot; fooled both editors and readers, generated plenty of free publicity for both strips—and Capp and Saunders had a good laugh when all was revealed.

==Production methods==
Like many cartoonists, Capp made extensive use of assistants (notably Andy Amato, Harvey Curtis, Walter Johnson, and Frank Frazetta). During the extended peak of the strip, the workload grew to include advertising, merchandising, promotional work, public service comics, and other specialty work—in addition to the regular six dailies and one Sunday strip per week. From the early 1940s to the late 1950s, there were scores of Sunday strip-style magazine ads for Cream of Wheat using the &quot;Abner&quot; characters, and in the 1950s, Fearless Fosdick became a spokesman for Wildroot Cream-Oil hair tonic in a series of daily strip-style print ads. The characters also sold chainsaws, underwear, ties, detergent, candy, soft drinks—including a licensed version of Capp&#x27;s moonshine creation, Kickapoo Joy Juice—and General Electric and Procter &amp; Gamble products, all requiring special artwork.

No matter how much help he had, Capp insisted on his drawing and inking the characters&#x27; faces and hands—especially of Abner and Daisy Mae—and his distinctive touch is often discernible. &quot;He had &quot;the touch,&quot;&quot; Frazetta said of Capp in 2008. &quot;He knew how to take an otherwise ordinary drawing and really make it &quot;pop&quot;. I&#x27;ll never knock his talent.&quot;

As is usual with collaborative efforts in comic strips, his name was the only one credited— although, sensitive to his own experience working on &quot;Joe Palooka&quot;, Capp frequently drew attention to his assistants in interviews and publicity pieces. A 1950 cover story in &quot;Time&quot; even included photographs of two of his employees, whose roles in the production were detailed by Capp. Ironically, this highly irregular policy (along with the subsequent fame of Frank Frazetta) has led to the misconception that his strip was &quot;ghosted&quot; by other hands. The production of &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; has been well documented, however. In point of fact, Capp maintained creative control over every stage of production for virtually the entire run of the strip. Capp originated the stories, wrote the dialogue, designed the major characters, rough penciled the preliminary staging and action of each panel, oversaw the finished pencils, and drew and inked the hands and faces of the characters. Frazetta authority David Winiewicz described the everyday working mode of operation in &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner Dailies: 1954 Volume 20&quot; (Kitchen Sink, 1994):

There was also a separate line of comic book titles published by the Caplin family-owned Toby Press, including &quot;Shmoo Comics&quot; featuring Washable Jones. Cartoonist Mell Lazarus, creator of &quot;Miss Peach&quot; and &quot;Momma&quot;, wrote a comic novel in 1963 entitled &quot;The Boss Is Crazy, Too&quot; which was partly inspired by his apprenticeship days working with Capp and his brother Elliot at Toby. In a seminar at the Charles Schulz Museum on November 8, 2008, Lazarus called his experience at Toby &quot;the five funniest years of my life&quot;. Lazarus went on to cite Capp as one of the &quot;four essentials&quot; in the field of newspaper cartoonists, along with Walt Kelly, Charles Schulz, and Milton Caniff.

Capp detailed his approach to writing and drawing the stories in an instructional course book for the Famous Artists School, beginning in 1956. In 1959, Capp recorded and released an album for Folkways Records (now owned by the Smithsonian) on which he identified and described &quot;The Mechanics of the Comic Strip&quot;.

Frazetta, later famous as a fantasy artist, assisted on the strip from 1954 to December 1961. Fascinated by Frazetta&#x27;s abilities, Capp initially gave him a free hand in an extended daily sequence (about a biker named &quot;Frankie&quot;, a caricature of Frazetta) to experiment with the basic look of the strip by adding a bit more realism and detail (particularly to the inking). After editors complained about the stylistic changes, the strip&#x27;s previous look was restored. During most of his tenure with Capp, Frazetta&#x27;s primary responsibility—along with various specialty art, such as a series of &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; greeting cards—was tight-penciling the Sunday pages from studio roughs. This work was collected by Dark Horse Comics in a four-volume hardcover series entitled &quot;Al Capp&#x27;s Li&#x27;l Abner: The Frazetta Years&quot;. In 1961, Capp, complaining of declining revenue, wanted to have Frazetta continue with a 50% pay cut. &quot;[Capp] said he would cut the salary in half. Goodbye. That was that. &quot;I&quot; said goodbye,&quot; (from &quot;Frazetta: Painting with Fire&quot;). However, Frazetta returned briefly a few years later to draw a public service comic book called &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner and the Creatures from Drop-Outer Space&quot;, distributed by the Job Corps in 1965.

==Personality==

Although he was often considered a difficult person, some acquaintances of Capp have stressed that the cartoonist also had a sensitive side. In 1973, upon learning that 12-year-old Ted Kennedy Jr., the son of his political rival Ted Kennedy Sr., had his right leg amputated, Capp wrote the boy an encouraging letter that gave candid advice about dealing with the loss of a limb, which Capp himself had experienced as a boy. One of Capp&#x27;s grandchildren recalls that at one point, tears were streaming down the cartoonist&#x27;s cheeks while he was watching a documentary about the Jonestown massacre. Capp gave money anonymously to charities and &quot;people in need&quot; at various points in his life.

==Sexual harassment and assault claims==
Two biographies, one of Grace Kelly and the other of Goldie Hawn, describe Capp as trying to force the younger women to have sex with him.

While no firsthand allegation has ever surfaced regarding Kelly, in her autobiography, Hawn stated that Capp sexually propositioned her on a casting couch and exposed himself to her when she was 19 years old. When she refused his advances, Capp became angry and told her that she was &quot;never gonna make anything in your life&quot; and that she should &quot;go and marry a Jewish dentist. You&#x27;ll never get anywhere in this business.&quot;

In 1971, investigative journalist Jack Anderson wrote that Capp had exposed his genitals to four female students at the University of Alabama.

In 1972, after an incident at the University of Wisconsin–Eau Claire, Capp was arrested. He pleaded guilty to a charge of attempted adultery, while charges of indecent exposure and sodomy were dropped. He was fined US$500 ().

In 2019, Jean Kilbourne was inspired by the MeToo movement to publish in &quot;Hogan&#x27;s Alley&quot; her own experience of being groped and sexually solicited by Al Capp while doing freelance writing and research work for him in contemplation of a permanent job in 1967.

==Public service works==
Capp provided specialty artwork for civic groups, government agencies, and charitable or nonprofit organizations, spanning several decades. The following titles are all single-issue, educational comic books and pamphlets produced for various public services:

*&quot;Al Capp by Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;— Public service giveaway issued by the Red Cross (1946)
*&quot;Yo&#x27; Bets Yo&#x27; Life!&quot;— Public service giveaway issued by the U.S. Army ()
*&quot;Li&#x27;l Abner Joins the Navy&quot;— Public service giveaway issued by the Dept. of the Navy (1950)
*&quot;Fearless Fosdick and the Case of the Red Feather&quot;— Public service giveaway issued by Red Feather Services, a forerunner of United Way (1951)
*&quot;The Youth You Supervise&quot;— Public service giveaway issued by the U.S. Department of Labor (1956)
*&quot;Mammy Yokum and the Great Dogpatch Mystery!&quot;— Public service giveaway issued by the Anti-Defamation League of B&#x27;nai B&#x27;rith (1956)
*&quot;Operation: Survival!&quot;— Public service giveaway issued by the Dept. of Civil Defense (1957)
*&quot;Natural Disasters!&quot;— Public service giveaway issued by the Department of Civil Defense (1957)
*&quot;Martin Luther King and the Montgomery Story&quot;— Public service giveaway issued by The Fellowship of Reconciliation (1958)
*&quot;Li&#x27;l Abner and the Creatures from Drop-Outer Space&quot;— Public service giveaway issued by the Job Corps (1965)
*&quot;Statue of Josiah Flintabattey Flonatin&quot;— design of a statue for the northern Manitoba city of Flin Flon&#x27;s mascot [City of Flin Flon&#x27;s tribute ] (1962)

In addition, Dogpatch characters were used in national campaigns for the U.S. Treasury, the Cancer Foundation, the March of Dimes, the National Heart Fund, the Sister Kenny Foundation, the Boy Scouts of America, Community Chest, the National Reading Council, Minnesota Tuberculosis and Health Association, Christmas Seals, the National Amputation Foundation, and Disabled American Veterans, among others.

==Public figure==
In the Golden Age of the American comic strip, successful cartoonists received a great deal of attention; their professional and private lives were reported in the press, and their celebrity was often nearly sufficient to rival their creations. As &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; reached its peak years, and following the success of the Shmoos and other high moments in his work, Al Capp achieved a public profile that is still unparalleled in his profession, and arguably exceeded the fame of his strip. &quot;Capp was the best known, most influential and most controversial cartoonist of his era,&quot; writes publisher (and leading Shmoo collector) Denis Kitchen. &quot;His personal celebrity transcended comics, reaching the public and influencing the culture in a variety of media. For many years he simultaneously produced the daily strip, a weekly syndicated newspaper column, and a 500-station radio program...&quot; He ran the Boston Summer Theatre with &quot;The Phantom&quot; cartoonist Lee Falk, bringing in Hollywood actors such as Mae West, Melvyn Douglas, and Claude Rains to star in their live productions. He even briefly considered running for a Massachusetts Senate seat. Vice President Spiro Agnew urged Capp to run in the Democratic Party Massachusetts primary in 1970 against Ted Kennedy, but Capp ultimately declined. (He did, however, donate his services as a speaker at a $100-a-plate fundraiser for Republican Congressman Jack Kemp.)

Besides his use of the comic strip to voice his opinions and display his humor, Capp was a popular guest speaker at universities, and on radio and television. He remains the only cartoonist to be embraced by television; no other comic artist to date has come close to Capp&#x27;s televised exposure. Capp appeared as a regular on &quot;The Author Meets the Critics&quot; (1948–&#x27;54) and made regular, weekly appearances on &quot;Today&quot; in 1953. He was also a periodic panelist on ABC and NBC&#x27;s &quot;Who Said That?&quot; (1948–&#x27;55), and co-hosted DuMont&#x27;s &quot;What&#x27;s the Story?&quot; (1953). Between 1952 and 1972, he hosted at least &quot;five&quot; television shows–three different talk shows called &quot;The Al Capp Show&quot; (1952 and 1968) and &quot;Al Capp&quot; (1971–&#x27;72), &quot;Al Capp&#x27;s America&quot; (a live &quot;chalk talk&quot;, with Capp providing a barbed commentary while sketching cartoons, 1954), and a CBS game show called &quot;Anyone Can Win&quot; (1953). He also hosted similar vehicles on the radio—and was a familiar celebrity guest on various other broadcast programs, including NBC Radio&#x27;s long-running &quot;Monitor&quot; with its famous &quot;Monitor&quot; Beacon audio signature, as a commentator dubbed &quot;An expert of nothing with opinions on everything.&quot;

His frequent appearances on NBC&#x27;s &quot;The Tonight Show&quot; spanned three emcees (Steve Allen, Jack Paar, and Johnny Carson), from the 1950s to the 1970s. One memorable story, as recounted to Johnny Carson, was about his meeting with then-President Dwight D. Eisenhower. As Capp was ushered into the Oval Office, his prosthetic leg suddenly collapsed into a pile of disengaged parts and hinges on the floor. The President immediately turned to an aide and said, &quot;Call Walter Reed (Hospital), or maybe Bethesda,&quot; to which Capp replied, &quot;Hell no, just call a good local mechanic!&quot; (Capp also spoofed Carson in his strip, in a 1970 episode called &quot;The Tommy Wholesome Show&quot;.)

Capp portrayed himself in a cameo role in the Bob Hope film &quot;That Certain Feeling&quot;, for which he also provided promotional art. He was interviewed live on &quot;Person to Person&quot; on November 27, 1959, by host Charles Collingwood. He also appeared as himself on &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot;, Sid Caesar&#x27;s &quot;Your Show of Shows&quot;, &quot;The Red Skelton Show&quot;, &quot;The Merv Griffin Show&quot;, &quot;The Mike Douglas Show&quot;, and guested on Ralph Edwards&#x27; &quot;This Is Your Life&quot; on February 12, 1961, with honoree Peter Palmer (the actor who played Li&#x27;l Abner in the Paramount film). Capp also freelanced very successfully as a magazine writer and newspaper columnist, in a wide variety of publications including &quot;Life&quot;, &quot;Show&quot;, &quot;Pageant&quot;, &quot;The Atlantic&quot;, &quot;Esquire&quot;, &quot;Coronet&quot;, and &quot;The Saturday Evening Post&quot;. Capp was impersonated by comedians Rich Little and David Frye. Although Capp&#x27;s endorsement activities never rivaled Li&#x27;l Abner&#x27;s or Fearless Fosdick&#x27;s, he was a celebrity spokesman in print ads for Sheaffer Snorkel fountain pens (along with colleagues and close friends Milton Caniff and Walt Kelly), and—with an irony that became apparent later—a brand of cigarettes (Chesterfield).

Capp resumed visiting war amputees during the Korean War and Vietnam War. He toured Vietnam with the USO, entertaining troops along with Art Buchwald and George Plimpton. He served as chairman of the Cartoonists&#x27; Committee in President Dwight D. Eisenhower&#x27;s People-to-People program in 1954 (although Capp had supported Adlai Stevenson for president in 1952 and 1956), which was organized to promote Savings bonds for the U.S. Treasury. Capp had earlier provided the Shmoo for a special Children&#x27;s Savings Bond in 1949, accompanying President Harry S. Truman at the bond&#x27;s unveiling ceremony. During the Soviet Union&#x27;s blockade of West Berlin in 1948, the commanders of the Berlin airlift had cabled Capp, requesting inflatable shmoos as part of &quot;Operation: Little Vittles&quot;. Candy-filled shmoos were air-dropped to hungry West Berliners by America&#x27;s 17th Military Airport Squadron during the humanitarian effort. &quot;When the candy-chocked shmoos were dropped, a near-riot resulted,&quot; (reported in &quot;Newsweek&quot;—October 11, 1948).

In addition to his public service work for charitable organizations for disabled people, Capp also served on the National Reading Council, which was organized to combat illiteracy. He published a column (&quot;Wrong Turn Onto Sesame Street&quot;) challenging federally funded public television endowments in favor of educational comics—which, according to Capp, &quot;didn&#x27;t cost a dime in taxes and never had. I pointed out that a kid could enjoy &quot;Sesame Street&quot; &quot;without&quot; learning how to read, but he couldn&#x27;t enjoy comic strips &quot;unless&quot; he could read; and that a smaller investment in getting kids to read by supplying them with educational matter in such &quot;reading&quot; form might make better sense.&quot;

Capp&#x27;s academic interests included being one of nineteen original &quot;Trustees and Advisors&quot; for &quot;Endicott, Junior College for Young Woman&quot;, located in Pride&#x27;s Crossing (Beverly), Massachusetts, which was founded in 1939. Al Capp is listed in the 1942 Mingotide Yearbook, representing the first graduating class from what is now the 4-year school known as Endicott College. The yearbook entry includes his credential as a &quot;Cartoonist for United Feature Syndicate&quot; and a resident of New York City.

&quot;Comics&quot;, wrote Capp in 1970, &quot;can be a combination of the highest quality of art and text, and many of them are.&quot; Capp produced many giveaway educational comic books and public services pamphlets, spanning several decades, for the Red Cross, the Department of Civil Defense, the Department of the Navy, the U.S. Army, the Anti-Defamation League, the Department of Labor, Community Chest (a forerunner of United Way), and the Job Corps. Capp&#x27;s studio provided special artwork for various civic groups and nonprofit organizations as well. Dogpatch characters were used in national campaigns for the Cancer Foundation, the March of Dimes, the National Heart Fund, the Boy Scouts of America, Minnesota Tuberculosis and Health Association, the National Amputation Foundation, and Disabled American Veterans, among others. They were also used to help sell Christmas Seals.

In the early 1960s, Capp regularly wrote a column entitled &quot;Al Capp&#x27;s Column&quot; for the newspaper &quot;The Schenectady Gazette&quot; (currently &quot;The Daily Gazette&quot;). He was the &quot;Playboy&quot; interview subject in December 1965, in a conversation conducted by Alvin Toffler. In August 1967, Capp was the narrator and host of an ABC network special called &quot;Do Blondes Have More Fun?&quot; In 1970, he was the subject of a provocative NBC documentary called &quot;This Is Al Capp&quot;.

==The 1960s and 1970s==
Capp and his family lived in Cambridge, Massachusetts, near Harvard University, during the entire Vietnam War protest era. The turmoil that Americans were watching on their television sets was happening live—right in his own neighborhood. Campus radicals and &quot;hippies&quot; inevitably became one of Capp&#x27;s favorite targets in the sixties. Alongside his long-established caricatures of right-wing, big business types such as General Bullmoose and J. Roaringham Fatback, Capp began spoofing counterculture icons such as Joan Baez (in the character of Joanie Phoanie, a wealthy folksinger who offers an impoverished orphanage ten thousand dollars&#x27; worth of &quot;protest songs&quot;). The sequence implicitly labeled Baez a limousine liberal, a charge she took to heart, as detailed years later in her 1987 autobiography, &quot;And A Voice To Sing With: A Memoir&quot;. Another target was Senator Ted Kennedy, parodied as &quot;Senator O. Noble McGesture&quot;, resident of &quot;Hyideelsport&quot;. The town name is a play on Hyannisport, Massachusetts, where a number of the Kennedy clan have lived.

Capp became a popular public speaker on college campuses, where he reportedly relished hecklers. He attacked militant antiwar demonstrators, both in his personal appearances and in his strip. He also satirized student political groups. The Youth International Party (YIP) and Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) emerged in &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; as &quot;Students Wildly Indignant about Nearly Everything!&quot; (SWINE). In an April 1969 letter to &quot;Time&quot;, Capp insisted, &quot;The students I blast are not the dissenters, but the destroyers—the less than 4% who lock up deans in washrooms, who burn manuscripts of unpublished books, who make combination pigpens and playpens of their universities. The remaining 96% detest them as heartily as I do.&quot;

Capp&#x27;s increasingly controversial remarks at his campus speeches and during television appearances cost him his semi-regular spot on the &quot;Tonight Show&quot;. His contentious public persona during this period was captured on a late sixties comedy LP called &quot;Al Capp On Campus&quot;. The album features his interaction with students at Fresno State College (now California State University, Fresno) on such topics as &quot;sensitivity training&quot;, &quot;humanitarianism&quot;, &quot;abstract art&quot; (Capp hated it), and &quot;student protest&quot;. The cover features a cartoon drawing by Capp of wildly dressed, angry hippies carrying protest signs with slogans like &quot;End Capp Brutality&quot;, &quot;Abner and Daisy Mae Smoke Pot&quot;, &quot;Capp Is Over [30, 40, 50—all crossed out] the Hill!!&quot;, and &quot;If You Like Crap, You&#x27;ll Like Capp!&quot;

Highlights of the strip&#x27;s final decades include &quot;Boomchik&quot; (1961), in which America&#x27;s international prestige is saved by Mammy Yokum, &quot;Daisy Mae Steps Out&quot; (1966), a female-empowering tale of Daisy&#x27;s brazenly audacious &quot;homewrecker gland&quot;, &quot;The Lips of Marcia Perkins&quot; (1967), a satirical, thinly-veiled commentary on venereal disease and public health warnings, &quot;Ignoble Savages&quot; (1968), in which the Mob takes over Harvard, and &quot;Corporal Crock&quot; (1973), in which Bullmoose reveals his reactionary cartoon role model, in a tale of obsession and the fanatical world of comic book collecting.

The cartoonist visited John Lennon and Yoko Ono at their 1969 Bed-In for Peace in Montreal, and their testy exchange later appeared in the documentary film &quot;&quot; (1988). Introducing himself with the words &quot;I&#x27;m a dreadful Neanderthal fascist. How do you do?&quot;, Capp sardonically congratulated Lennon and Ono on their &quot;Two Virgins&quot; nude album cover: &quot;I think that everybody owes it to the world to prove they have pubic hair. You&#x27;ve done it, and I tell you that I applaud you for it.&quot; Following this exchange, Capp insulted Ono (&quot;Good God, you&#x27;ve gotta live with that?&quot;), and was asked to &quot;get out&quot; by Lennon publicist Derek Taylor. Lennon allowed him to stay, however, but the conversation had soured considerably. On Capp&#x27;s exit, Lennon sang an impromptu version of his song &quot;The Ballad of John and Yoko&quot; with a slightly revised, but nonetheless prophetic lyric: &quot;Christ, you know it ain&#x27;t easy / You know how hard it can be / The way things are goin&#x27; / They&#x27;re gonna crucify &quot;Capp!&quot; &quot;

Despite his political conservatism in the last decade of his life, Capp is reported to have been liberal in some particular causes; he supported gay rights, and did not tolerate any attempts at homophobic jokes. He is also said to have supported Martin Luther King Jr. and the fight for racial equality in American society, although he was very sceptical of the tactics of the Black Panthers and Malcolm X.

In 1968, a theme park called Dogpatch USA opened at Marble Falls, Arkansas, based on Capp&#x27;s work and with his support. The park was a popular attraction during the 1970s, but was abandoned in 1993 due to financial difficulties. By 2005, the area once devoted to a live-action facsimile of Dogpatch (including a lifesize statue in the town square of Dogpatch &quot;founder&quot; General Jubilation T. Cornpone) had been heavily stripped by vandals and souvenir hunters, and was slowly being reclaimed by the surrounding Arkansas wilderness.

On April 22, 1971, syndicated columnist Jack Anderson reported allegations that in February 1968 Capp had made indecent advances to four female students when he was invited to speak at the University of Alabama. Anderson and an associate confirmed that Capp was shown out of town by university police, but that the incident had been hushed up by the university to avoid negative publicity.

The following month, Capp was charged in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, in connection with another alleged incident following his April 1 lecture at the University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire. Capp was accused of propositioning a married woman in his hotel room. Although no sexual act was alleged to have resulted, the original charge included &quot;sodomy&quot;. As part of a plea agreement, Capp pleaded guilty to the charge of &quot;attempted adultery&quot; (adultery was a felony in Wisconsin), and the other charges were dropped. Capp was fined $500 and court costs. In a December 1992 article for &quot;The New Yorker,&quot; Seymour Hersh reported that President Richard Nixon and Charles Colson had repeatedly discussed the Capp case in Oval Office recordings that had recently been made available by the National Archives. Nixon and Capp were on friendly terms, Hersh wrote, and Nixon and Colson had worked to find a way for Capp to run against Ted Kennedy for the U.S. Senate. &quot;Nixon was worried about the allegations, fearing that Capp&#x27;s very close links to the White House would become embarrassingly public&quot;, Hersh wrote. &quot;The White House tapes and documents show that he and Colson discussed the issue repeatedly, and that Colson eventually reassured the president by saying that he had, in essence, fixed the case. Specifically, the president was told that one of Colson&#x27;s people had gone to Wisconsin and tried to talk to the prosecutors.&quot; Colson&#x27;s efforts failed, however. The Eau Claire district attorney, a Republican, refused to dismiss the attempted adultery charge. In passing sentence in February 1972, the judge rejected the D.A.&#x27;s motion that Capp agree to undergo psychiatric treatment.

The resulting publicity led to hundreds of papers dropping his comic strip, and Capp, already in failing health, withdrew from public speaking. Celebrity biographer James Spada has claimed that similar allegations were made by actress Grace Kelly. However, no firsthand allegation has ever surfaced.

&quot;From beginning to end, Capp was acid-tongued toward the targets of his wit, intolerant of hypocrisy, and always wickedly funny. After about 40 years, however, Capp&#x27;s interest in &quot;Abner&quot; waned, and this showed in the strip itself,&quot; according to Don Markstein&#x27;s &quot;Toonopedia&quot;. Although Capp had used assistants on the strip practically since the beginning, in the final years his own involvement in the strip decreased, to the point that Bob Lubbers did most of the drawing towards the end. His health issues made it increasingly difficult for Capp to work, recalled his assistants. On November 13, 1977, Capp retired with an apology to his fans for the recently declining quality of the strip, which he said had been the best he could manage due to declining health. &quot;If you have any sense of humor about your strip—and I had a sense of humor about mine—you knew that for three or four years &quot;Abner&quot; was wrong. Oh hell, it&#x27;s like a fighter retiring. I stayed on longer than I should have,&quot; he admitted, adding that he couldn&#x27;t breathe anymore. &quot;When he retired &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;, newspapers ran expansive articles and television commentators talked about the passing of an era. &quot;People magazine&quot; ran a substantial feature, and even the comics-free &quot;New York Times&quot; devoted nearly a full page to the event&quot;, wrote publisher Denis Kitchen.

Capp&#x27;s final years were marked by advancing illness and by family tragedy. In October 1977, one of his two daughters died; a few weeks later, a beloved granddaughter was killed in a car accident. A lifelong chain smoker, Capp died in 1979 from emphysema at his home in South Hampton, New Hampshire. Capp is buried in Mount Prospect Cemetery in Amesbury, Massachusetts. Engraved on his headstone is a stanza from Thomas Gray: &quot;The plowman homeward plods his weary way / And leaves the world to darkness and to me&quot; (from &quot;Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard&quot;, 1751).

==Legacy==
&quot;Neither the strip&#x27;s shifting political leanings nor the slide of its final few years had any bearing on its status as a classic; and in 1995, it was recognized as such by the U.S. Postal Service&quot;, according to &quot;Toonopedia&quot;. &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; was one of 20 American comic strips included in the Comic Strip Classics series of USPS commemorative stamps. Al Capp, an inductee into the National Cartoon Museum (formerly the International Museum of Cartoon Art), is one of only 31 artists selected to their Hall of Fame. Capp was also inducted into the Will Eisner Award Hall of Fame in 2004.

Sadie Hawkins Day and double whammy are two terms attributed to Al Capp that have entered the English language. Other, less ubiquitous Cappisms include skunk works and Lower Slobbovia. The term shmoo also has entered the lexicon, defining highly technical concepts in no fewer than &quot;four&quot; separate fields of science, including the variations shmooing (a microbiological term for the &quot;budding&quot; process in yeast reproduction), and shmoo plot (a technical term in the field of electrical engineering). In socioeconomics, a &quot;shmoo&quot; refers to any generic kind of good that reproduces itself, (as opposed to &quot;widgets&quot; which require resources and active production). In the field of particle physics, &quot;shmoo&quot; refers to a high energy survey instrument, as used at the Los Alamos National Laboratory to capture subatomic cosmic ray particles emitted from the Cygnus X-3 constellation. Capp also had a knack for popularizing certain uncommon terms, such as druthers, schmooze, and nogoodnik, neatnik, etc. In his book &quot;The American Language&quot;, H.L. Mencken credits the postwar mania for adding &quot;-nik&quot; to the ends of adjectives to create nouns as beginning—not with beatnik or Sputnik—but earlier, in the pages of &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;.

Al Capp&#x27;s life and career are the subjects of a new life-sized mural commemorating the 100th anniversary of his birth. Created by resident artist Jon P. Mooers, the mural was unveiled in downtown Amesbury on May 15, 2010. According to the &quot;Boston Globe&quot; (as reported on May 18, 2010), the town has renamed its amphitheater in the artist&#x27;s honor, and is looking to develop an Al Capp Museum. Capp is also the subject of an upcoming WNET-TV &quot;American Masters&quot; documentary, &quot;The Life and Times of Al Capp&quot;, produced by his granddaughter, independent filmmaker Caitlin Manning.

Since his death in 1979, Al Capp and his work have been the subject of more than 40 books, including three biographies. Underground cartoonist and &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; expert Denis Kitchen has published, co-published, edited, or otherwise served as consultant on nearly all of them. Kitchen is currently compiling a biographical monograph on Al Capp.

At San Diego Comic-Con in July 2009, IDW announced the upcoming publication of &quot;Al Capp&#x27;s Li&#x27;l Abner: The Complete Dailies and Color Sundays&quot; as part of their ongoing The Library of American Comics series. The comprehensive series, a reprinting of the entire 43-year history of &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot;, spanning a projected 20 volumes, began on April 7, 2010.

==Notes==
==Further reading==

*Capp, Al, &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner in New York&quot; (1936) Whitman Publishing
*Capp, Al, &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner Among the Millionaires&quot; (1939) Whitman Publishing
*Capp, Al, &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner and Sadie Hawkins Day&quot; (1940) Saalfield Publishing
*Capp, Al, &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner and the Ratfields&quot; (1940) Saalfield Publishing
*Sheridan, Martin, &quot;Comics and Their Creators&quot; (1942) R.T. Hale &amp; Co, (1977) Hyperion Press
*Waugh, Coulton, &quot;The Comics&quot; (1947) Macmillan Publishers
*Capp, Al, &quot;Newsweek Magazine&quot; (November 24, 1947) &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&#x27;s Mad Capp&quot;
*Capp, Al, &quot;Saturday Review of Literature&quot; (March 20, 1948) &quot;The Case for the Comics&quot;
*Capp, Al, &quot;The Life and Times of the Shmoo&quot; (1948) Simon &amp; Schuster
*Capp, Al, &quot;The Nation&quot; (March 21, 1949) &quot;There Is a Real Shmoo&quot;
*Capp, Al, &quot;Cosmopolitan Magazine&quot; (June 1949) &quot;I Don&#x27;t Like Shmoos&quot;
*Capp, Al, &quot;Atlantic Monthly&quot; (April 1950) &quot;I Remember Monster&quot;
*Capp, Al, &quot;Time Magazine&quot; (November 6, 1950) &quot;Die Monstersinger&quot;
*Capp, Al, &quot;Life Magazine&quot; (March 31, 1952) &quot;It&#x27;s Hideously True!!...&quot;
*Capp, Al, &quot;Real Magazine&quot; (December 1952) &quot;The REAL Powers in America&quot;
*Capp, Al, &quot;The World of Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; (1953) Farrar, Straus &amp; Young
*Leifer, Fred, &quot;The Li&#x27;l Abner Official Square Dance Handbook&quot; (1953) A.S. Barnes
*Mikes, George, &quot;Eight Humorists&quot; (1954) Allen Wingate, (1977) Arden Library
*Lehrer, Tom, &quot;The Tom Lehrer Song Book&quot;, introduction by Al Capp (1954) Crown Publishers
*Capp, Al, &quot;Al Capp&#x27;s Fearless Fosdick: His Life and Deaths&quot; (1956) Simon &amp; Schuster
*Capp, Al, &quot;Al Capp&#x27;s Bald Iggle: The Life it Ruins May Be Your Own&quot; (1956) Simon &amp; Schuster
*Capp, Al, et al. &quot;Famous Artists Cartoon Course&quot; – 3 volumes (1956) Famous Artists School
*Capp, Al, &quot;Life Magazine&quot; (January 14, 1957) &quot;The Dogpatch Saga: Al Capp&#x27;s Own Story&quot;
*Brodbeck, Arthur J, et al. &quot;How to Read Li&#x27;l Abner Intelligently&quot; from &quot;Mass Culture: Popular Arts in America,&quot; pp. 218–224 (1957) Free Press
*Capp, Al, &quot;The Return of the Shmoo&quot; (1959) Simon &amp; Schuster
*Hart, Johnny, &quot;Back to B.C.&quot;, introduction by Al Capp (1961) Fawcett Publications
*Lazarus, Mell, &quot;Miss Peach&quot;, introduction by Al Capp (1962) Pyramid Books
*Gross, Milt, &quot;He Done Her Wrong&quot;, introduction by Al Capp (1963 Ed.) Dell Books
*White, David Manning, and Robert H. Abel, eds. &quot;The Funnies: An American Idiom&quot; (1963) Free Press
*White, David Manning, ed. &quot;From Dogpatch to Slobbovia: The (Gasp!) World of Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; (1964) Beacon Press
*Capp, Al, &quot;Life International Magazine&quot; (June 14, 1965) &quot;My Life as an Immortal Myth&quot;
*Toffler, Alvin, &quot;Playboy Magazine&quot; (December 1965) interview with Al Capp, pp. 89–100
*Moger, Art, et al. &quot;Chutzpah Is&quot;, introduction by Al Capp (1966) Colony Publishers
*Berger, Arthur Asa, &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner: A Study in American Satire&quot; (1969) Twayne Publishers, (1994) Univ. Press of Mississippi 
*Sugar, Andy, &quot;Saga Magazine&quot; (December 1969) &quot;On the Campus Firing Line with Al Capp&quot;
*Gray, Harold, &quot;Arf! The Life and Hard Times of Little Orphan Annie&quot;, introduction by Al Capp (1970) Arlington House
*Moger, Art, &quot;Some of My Best Friends are People&quot;, introduction by Al Capp (1970) Directors Press
*Capp, Al, &quot;The Hardhat&#x27;s Bedtime Story Book&quot; (1971) Harper &amp; Row 
*Robinson, Jerry, &quot;The Comics: An Illustrated History of Comic Strip Art&quot; (1974) G.P. Putnam&#x27;s Sons
*Horn, Maurice, &quot;The World Encyclopedia of Comics&quot; (1976) Chelsea House, (1982) Avon
*Blackbeard, Bill, ed. &quot;The Smithsonian Collection of Newspaper Comics&quot; (1977) Smithsonian Inst. Press/Harry Abrams
*Marschall, Rick, &quot;Cartoonist PROfiles&quot; No. 37 (March 1978) interview with Al Capp
*Capp, Al, &quot;The Best of Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; (1978) Holt, Rinehart &amp; Winston 
*Lardner, Ring, &quot;You Know Me Al: The Comic Strip Adventures of Jack Keefe&quot;, introduction by Al Capp (1979) Harcourt Brace Jovanovich
*Van Buren, Raeburn, &quot;Abbie an&#x27; Slats&quot; – 2 volumes (1983) Ken Pierce Books
*Capp, Al, &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner: Reuben Award Winner Series Book 1&quot; (1985) Blackthorne
*Marschall, Rick, &quot;Nemo, the Classic Comics Library&quot; No. 18, pp. 3–32 (April 1986)
*Capp, Al, &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner Dailies&quot; – 27 volumes (1988–1999) Kitchen Sink Press
*Marschall, Rick, &quot;America&#x27;s Great Comic Strip Artists&quot; (1989) Abbeville Press
*Capp, Al, &quot;Fearless Fosdick&quot; (1990) Kitchen Sink 
*Capp, Al, &quot;My Well-Balanced Life on a Wooden Leg&quot; (1991) John Daniel &amp; Co. 
*Capp, Al, &quot;Fearless Fosdick: The Hole Story&quot; (1992) Kitchen Sink 
*Goldstein, Kalman, &quot;Al Capp and Walt Kelly: Pioneers of Political and Social Satire in the Comics&quot; from &quot;Journal of Popular Culture;&quot; Vol. 25, Issue 4 (Spring 1992)
*Caplin, Elliot, &quot;Al Capp Remembered&quot; (1994) Bowling Green State University 
*Theroux, Alexander, &quot;The Enigma of Al Capp&quot; (1999) Fantagraphics Books 
*Lubbers, Bob, &quot;Glamour International #26: The Good Girl Art of Bob Lubbers&quot; (May 2001)
*Capp, Al, &quot;The Short Life and Happy Times of the Shmoo&quot; (2002) Overlook Press 
*Capp, Al, &quot;Al Capp&#x27;s Li&#x27;l Abner: The Frazetta Years&quot; – 4 volumes (2003–2004) Dark Horse Comics
*Al Capp Studios, &quot;Al Capp&#x27;s Complete Shmoo: The Comic Books&quot; (2008) Dark Horse 
*Capp, Al, &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner: The Complete Dailies and Color Sundays Vol. 1 – Vol. x(ongoing)&quot; (2010–present) The Library of American Comics
*Capp, Al, &quot;Al Capp&#x27;s Complete Shmoo Vol. 2: The Newspaper Strips&quot; (2011) Dark Horse 
*Inge, M. Thomas, &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner, Snuffy and Friends&quot; from &quot;Comics and the U.S. South&quot;, pp. 3–27 (2012) Univ. Press of Mississippi 
*Kitchen, Denis, and Michael Schumacher, &quot;Al Capp: A Life to the Contrary&quot; (2013) Bloomsbury Publishing 
==External links==

* &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; official site
* 
* Denis Kitchen biography: Al Capp
* Animation Resources: Al Capp part I
* Animation Resources: Al Capp part II
* Animation Resources: Al Capp part III
* Animation Resources: Al Capp part IV
* Animation Resources: Al Capp part V
* Al Capp Deserves a Tribute (&quot;Newburyport News&quot;, 28 Sept. 2009)
* Dogpatch USA amusement park.
* The Dogpatch Family Band Mechanical Toy
* Dogpatch and &quot;Li&#x27;l Abner&quot; on Broadway in &quot;Life&quot;, January 14, 1957, pp. 71–83
*Billy Ireland Cartoon Library &amp; Museum Art Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2060191" start="0" end="20" title="Al Capp" label="Alfred Gerald Caplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060191" start="78" end="85" title="Al Capp" label="Al Capp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114448" start="103" end="113" title="cartoonist" label="cartoonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="146" end="155" title="satirical" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="156" end="167" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866715" start="174" end="189" title="Li&amp;#x27;l Abner" label="Li&amp;#x27;l Abner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820832" start="333" end="353" title="Abbie an&amp;#x27; Slats" label="Abbie an&amp;#x27; Slats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673214" start="393" end="401" title="Long Sam" label="Long Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571762" start="427" end="455" title="National Cartoonists Society" label="National Cartoonists Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="463" end="475" title="National Cartoonists Society#Reuben Award" label="Reuben Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q452745" start="527" end="544" title="E. C. Segar" label="Elzie Segar Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357541" start="711" end="733" title="Northern United States" label="Northern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="815" end="826" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="874" end="882" title="Southern United States" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288410" start="891" end="899" title="Dogpatch" label="Dogpatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730049" start="1032" end="1046" title="M. Thomas Inge" label="M. Thomas Inge"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="1241" end="1263" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q16129257" start="1268" end="1288" title="Eastern European Jewry" label="East European Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="1535" end="1541" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="2041" end="2052" title="Tram" label="trolley car"/>
<link wikidata="Q477415" start="2074" end="2083" title="amputation" label="amputated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="2148" end="2161" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="2239" end="2243" title="coma" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q181802" start="2341" end="2351" title="prosthetic" label="prosthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="2743" end="2747" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="2932" end="2945" title="Life magazine" label="Life magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="3086" end="3094" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Swiftian"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="3095" end="3101" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="3403" end="3408" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378808" start="3438" end="3446" title="Phil May (caricaturist)" label="Phil May"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674223" start="3484" end="3494" title="Thomas Aloysius Dorgan" label="Tad Dorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q946368" start="3496" end="3510" title="Cliff Sterrett" label="Cliff Sterrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q505850" start="3512" end="3525" title="Rube Goldberg" label="Rube Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q68586" start="3527" end="3540" title="Rudolph Dirks" label="Rudolph Dirks"/>
<link wikidata="Q456248" start="3542" end="3552" title="Frederick Burr Opper" label="Fred Opper"/>
<link wikidata="Q863067" start="3554" end="3566" title="Billy DeBeck" label="Billy DeBeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363049" start="3568" end="3582" title="George McManus" label="George McManus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15492951" start="3588" end="3598" title="Milt Gross" label="Milt Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q19185" start="3741" end="3760" title="George Bernard Shaw" label="George Bernard Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="3822" end="3829" title="Charles Dickens" label="Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q356283" start="3831" end="3839" title="Tobias Smollett" label="Smollett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="3841" end="3851" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q893138" start="3853" end="3869" title="Booth Tarkington" label="Booth Tarkington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790472" start="3882" end="3897" title="Robert Benchley" label="Robert Benchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998209" start="3902" end="3916" title="S. J. Perelman" label="S. J. Perelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q49174" start="3970" end="3993" title="Bridgeport, Connecticut" label="Bridgeport, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="4061" end="4069" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="4156" end="4165" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298529" start="4287" end="4320" title="School of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston" label="Boston Museum School of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952033" start="4326" end="4363" title="Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts" label="Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000471" start="4506" end="4516" title="Bud Fisher" label="Bud Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955932" start="4535" end="4548" title="Mutt and Jeff" label="Mutt and Jeff"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4712" end="4725" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="4772" end="4789" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="4909" end="4925" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329698" start="5069" end="5080" title="Richard Dorgan" label="Dick Dorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935903" start="5254" end="5267" title="Milton Caniff" label="Milton Caniff"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="5319" end="5325" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q54176" start="5480" end="5503" title="Amesbury, Massachusetts" label="Amesbury, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="5571" end="5587" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572551" start="5764" end="5774" title="Ham Fisher" label="Ham Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015116" start="5808" end="5819" title="Joe Palooka" label="Joe Palooka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620972" start="5911" end="5920" title="story arc" label="story arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="6010" end="6019" title="prototype" label="prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866715" start="6143" end="6158" title="Li&amp;#x27;l Abner" label="Li&amp;#x27;l Abner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367577" start="6397" end="6423" title="Tennessee Valley Authority" label="Tennessee Valley Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738805" start="6621" end="6645" title="United Feature Syndicate" label="United Feature Syndicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550700" start="6662" end="6674" title="United Media" label="United Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339058" start="6785" end="6800" title="New York Mirror" label="New York Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332225" start="7031" end="7044" title="Elliot Caplin" label="Elliot Caplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189790" start="7134" end="7159" title="The Heart of Juliet Jones" label="The Heart of Juliet Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330028" start="7178" end="7188" title="Stan Drake" label="Stan Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926181" start="7236" end="7247" title="Broom-Hilda" label="Broom-Hilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453489" start="7270" end="7283" title="Russell Myers" label="Russell Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448" start="7506" end="7515" title="hillbilly" label="hillbilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q217117" start="7516" end="7525" title="burlesque" label="burlesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="7717" end="7726" title="slapstick" label="slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q131361" start="7728" end="7733" title="irony" label="irony"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="7735" end="7741" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="7743" end="7754" title="black humor" label="black humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3697780" start="7767" end="7784" title="social commentary" label="social commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288410" start="8360" end="8368" title="Dogpatch" label="Dogpatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="8370" end="8378" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="9120" end="9128" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231756" start="9129" end="9139" title="Dixiecrats" label="Dixiecrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485700" start="9290" end="9294" title="G.I." label="G.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q1424696" start="9517" end="9525" title="nose art" label="nose art"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="9529" end="9542" title="bomber aircraft" label="bomber planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530240" start="9635" end="9640" title="Shmoo" label="Shmoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208831" start="9781" end="9792" title="Joe Btfsplk" label="Joe Btfsplk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130485" start="10002" end="10013" title="Bronx cheer (gesture)" label="Bronx cheer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693827" start="10599" end="10614" title="Lower Slobbovia" label="Lower Slobbovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397922" start="11151" end="11170" title="Sadie Hawkins dance" label="Sadie Hawkins dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q19155" start="11593" end="11604" title="Henry Fonda" label="Henry Fonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q766626" start="11645" end="11675" title="The Trail of the Lonesome Pine (1936 film)" label="The Trail of the Lonesome Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q230823" start="11759" end="11768" title="miniskirt" label="miniskirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740587" start="11944" end="11960" title="Fearless Fosdick" label="Fearless Fosdick"/>
<link wikidata="Q178250" start="11982" end="11995" title="Chester Gould" label="Chester Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129715" start="12009" end="12019" title="Dick Tracy" label="Dick Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="12453" end="12467" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="12578" end="12589" title="puppet show" label="puppet show"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="12593" end="12596" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q189888" start="12623" end="12633" title="marionette" label="marionette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471769" start="12754" end="12766" title="Steve Canyon" label="Steve Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643833" start="12780" end="12788" title="Superman (comic strip)" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780988" start="12916" end="12926" title="Mary Worth" label="Mary Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="12965" end="12972" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q207369" start="13077" end="13083" title="Snoopy" label="Snoopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q298920" start="13131" end="13145" title="Charles Schulz" label="Charles Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319253" start="13154" end="13170" title="Rex Morgan, M.D." label="Rex Morgan, M.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q3256648" start="13184" end="13203" title="Little Annie Rooney" label="Little Annie Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865791" start="13221" end="13240" title="Little Orphan Annie" label="Little Orphan Annie"/>
<link wikidata="Q732474" start="13497" end="13512" title="Harvey Kurtzman" label="Harvey Kurtzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="13526" end="13538" title="Mad Magazine" label="Mad Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="13740" end="13753" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q347528" start="13787" end="13795" title="Liberace" label="Liberace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="13829" end="13840" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="13887" end="13900" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q233937" start="14352" end="14365" title="Nancy Sinatra" label="Nancy Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q131725" start="14514" end="14523" title="Joan Baez" label="Joan Baez"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="14863" end="14873" title="Disneyland Park (Anaheim)" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15024" end="15036" title="Transitional fossil#Missing links" label="missing link"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820832" start="15288" end="15308" title="Abbie an&amp;#x27; Slats" label="Abbie an&amp;#x27; Slats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281947" start="15341" end="15358" title="Raeburn van Buren" label="Raeburn van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673214" start="15378" end="15386" title="Long Sam" label="Long Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q888070" start="15409" end="15420" title="Bob Lubbers" label="Bob Lubbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825106" start="15458" end="15464" title="topper (comic strip)" label="topper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696042" start="15660" end="15673" title="Coulton Waugh" label="Coulton Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q933892" start="16348" end="16358" title="Walt Kelly" label="Walt Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100584" start="16366" end="16370" title="Pogo (comics)" label="Pogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340213" start="16382" end="16395" title="Garry Trudeau" label="Garry Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q429433" start="16403" end="16413" title="Doonesbury" label="Doonesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15440279" start="16456" end="16470" title="Rick Marschall" label="Rick Marschall"/>
<link wikidata="Q742609" start="16565" end="16577" title="human nature" label="human nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q219645" start="16699" end="16711" title="Misanthropy" label="misanthropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062896" start="16793" end="16810" title="Character animation" label="animated cartoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="16920" end="16930" title="Dostoevski" label="Dostoevski"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="16932" end="16946" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q218960" start="16948" end="16963" title="Lawrence Sterne" label="Lawrence Sterne"/>
<link wikidata="Q131018" start="16969" end="16977" title="Rabelais" label="Rabelais"/>
<link wikidata="Q39212" start="17018" end="17032" title="John Steinbeck" label="John Steinbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q193871" start="17211" end="17227" title="Marshall McLuhan" label="Marshall McLuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105756" start="17311" end="17322" title="John Updike" label="John Updike"/>
<link wikidata="Q215894" start="17361" end="17368" title="Candide" label="Candide"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="17473" end="17483" title="Voltairean" label="Voltairean"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="17491" end="17506" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q378098" start="17508" end="17526" title="William F. Buckley" label="William F. Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532260" start="17528" end="17541" title="Al Hirschfeld" label="Al Hirschfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q317237" start="17543" end="17553" title="Harpo Marx" label="Harpo Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q315325" start="17555" end="17565" title="Russ Meyer" label="Russ Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q186042" start="17567" end="17589" title="John Kenneth Galbraith" label="John Kenneth Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q315441" start="17591" end="17603" title="Ralph Bakshi" label="Ralph Bakshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q361257" start="17605" end="17621" title="Shel Silverstein" label="Shel Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097923" start="17623" end="17633" title="Hugh Downs" label="Hugh Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q130088" start="17635" end="17646" title="Gene Shalit" label="Gene Shalit"/>
<link wikidata="Q562317" start="17648" end="17657" title="Frank Cho" label="Frank Cho"/>
<link wikidata="Q712675" start="17659" end="17672" title="Daniel Clowes" label="Daniel Clowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="17696" end="17711" title="Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18071587" start="17971" end="17988" title="Arthur Asa Berger" label="Arthur Asa Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894895" start="18558" end="18589" title="University Press of Mississippi" label="University Press of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181802" start="18940" end="18950" title="prosthetic" label="prosthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="19091" end="19100" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q531161" start="19204" end="19227" title="Elizabeth Kenny" label="Sister Kenny Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="19264" end="19269" title="polio" label="polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049655" start="19474" end="19484" title="paraplegic" label="paraplegic"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="19598" end="19601" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538593" start="19602" end="19618" title="Li&amp;#x27;l Abner (1940 film)" label="movie adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175307" start="19658" end="19667" title="Jeff York" label="Jeff York"/>
<link wikidata="Q103949" start="19694" end="19707" title="Buster Keaton" label="Buster Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q558933" start="19787" end="19799" title="Milton Berle" label="Milton Berle"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="19863" end="19871" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538597" start="19994" end="20007" title="Li&amp;#x27;l Abner (musical)" label="stage musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q731258" start="20034" end="20046" title="Gene de Paul" label="Gene de Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q363698" start="20051" end="20064" title="Johnny Mercer" label="Johnny Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q674564" start="20085" end="20096" title="Technicolor" label="Technicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282841" start="20097" end="20111" title="Li&amp;#x27;l Abner (1959 film)" label="motion picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="20115" end="20124" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount"/>
<link wikidata="Q544016" start="20145" end="20158" title="Norman Panama" label="Norman Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q41131" start="20172" end="20184" title="Melvin Frank" label="Melvin Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q961851" start="20202" end="20215" title="Nelson Riddle" label="Nelson Riddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q237221" start="20294" end="20306" title="Julie Newmar" label="Julie Newmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q454238" start="20336" end="20347" title="Stubby Kaye" label="Stubby Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q203219" start="20646" end="20659" title="Boris Karloff" label="Boris Karloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="20665" end="20678" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q810047" start="20706" end="20721" title="Basil Wolverton" label="Basil Wolverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870" start="20763" end="20781" title="Gone with the Wind (novel)" label="Gone With the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q173540" start="20837" end="20854" title="Margaret Mitchell" label="Margaret Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q380113" start="21129" end="21141" title="Jerry Siegel" label="Jerry Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q471619" start="21146" end="21157" title="Joe Shuster" label="Joe Shuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="21191" end="21200" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="21212" end="21220" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q343615" start="21394" end="21407" title="Action Comics" label="Action Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="21582" end="21590" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="21635" end="21652" title="New Yorker magazine" label="New Yorker&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530240" start="21788" end="21793" title="Shmoo" label="Shmoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q208555" start="21980" end="21987" title="parable" label="parable"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="21997" end="22005" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="22068" end="22076" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471769" start="22144" end="22156" title="Steve Canyon" label="Steve Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="22669" end="22689" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="22867" end="22876" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="23095" end="23104" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="23459" end="23470" title="allegory" label="allegorical"/>
<link wikidata="Q580754" start="23518" end="23529" title="Self-defeating personality disorder" label="masochistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="23907" end="23915" title="censorship" label="censored"/>
<link wikidata="Q283457" start="24002" end="24016" title="Scripps-Howard" label="Scripps-Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="24109" end="24129" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="24337" end="24360" title="Senator Joseph McCarthy" label="Senator Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q922131" start="24416" end="24430" title="poetic license" label="poetic license"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571762" start="24628" end="24656" title="National Cartoonists Society" label="National Cartoonists Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24664" end="24691" title="National Cartoonists Society#Billy DeBeck Memorial Award" label="Billy DeBeck Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24805" end="24811" title="National Cartoonists Society#Reuben Award" label="Reuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q5761483" start="25058" end="25069" title="Hilda Terry" label="Hilda Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694360" start="25104" end="25109" title="Teena (comic strip)" label="Teena"/>
<link wikidata="Q919115" start="25159" end="25171" title="Alex Raymond" label="Alex Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="26058" end="26066" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q693" start="26356" end="26361" title="fable" label="fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="26504" end="26526" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q248686" start="26530" end="26552" title="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith" label="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith"/>
<link wikidata="Q21261251" start="26620" end="26663" title="Martin Luther King and the Montgomery Story" label="Martin Luther King and the Montgomery Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442541" start="26716" end="26744" title="Fellowship of Reconciliation" label="Fellowship of Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="26890" end="26904" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064288" start="26915" end="26932" title="Charles Erwin Wilson" label="Charles E. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="26969" end="26977" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="27678" end="27682" title="Left-wing politics" label="Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="27747" end="27768" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293067" start="29301" end="29314" title="Don Markstein" label="Don Markstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293067" start="29328" end="29338" title="Toonopedia" label="Toonopedia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29547" end="29555" title="Moe Leff" label="Moe Leff"/>
<link wikidata="Q182442" start="29580" end="29595" title="plastic surgery" label="plastic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="30421" end="30440" title="New York Daily News" label="New York Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="30699" end="30711" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="31628" end="31661" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q690233" start="32245" end="32262" title="Max Allan Collins" label="Max Allan Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780988" start="32391" end="32401" title="Mary Worth" label="Mary Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648387" start="32500" end="32514" title="Allen Saunders" label="Allen Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131448" start="32714" end="32724" title="teetotaler" label="teetotaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q448205" start="33203" end="33217" title="Frank Frazetta" label="Frank Frazetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981624" start="33429" end="33441" title="Sunday strip" label="Sunday strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q10752167" start="33549" end="33563" title="Cream of Wheat" label="Cream of Wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q96117900" start="33662" end="33680" title="Wildroot Cream-Oil" label="Wildroot Cream-Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q10545287" start="33883" end="33901" title="Kickapoo Joy Juice" label="Kickapoo Joy Juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="33906" end="33922" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q212405" start="33927" end="33947" title="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble" label="Procter &amp;amp; Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530184" start="35651" end="35661" title="Toby Press" label="Toby Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695815" start="35735" end="35747" title="Mell Lazarus" label="Mell Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877259" start="35766" end="35776" title="Miss Peach" label="Miss Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748613" start="35793" end="35798" title="Momma" label="Momma"/>
<link wikidata="Q657915" start="36001" end="36022" title="Charles Schulz Museum" label="Charles Schulz Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q298920" start="36263" end="36277" title="Charles Schulz" label="Charles Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935903" start="36283" end="36296" title="Milton Caniff" label="Milton Caniff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066277" start="36401" end="36422" title="Famous Artists School" label="Famous Artists School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435522" start="36492" end="36508" title="Folkways Records" label="Folkways Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="36527" end="36538" title="Smithsonian" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q782129" start="36652" end="36663" title="fantasy art" label="fantasy art"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="37366" end="37383" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206647" start="37935" end="37944" title="Job Corps" label="Job Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048622" start="38153" end="38168" title="Edward M. Kennedy Jr." label="Ted Kennedy Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="38201" end="38216" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q985684" start="38557" end="38566" title="Jonestown" label="Jonestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925" start="38746" end="38757" title="Grace Kelly" label="Grace Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q188459" start="38775" end="38786" title="Goldie Hawn" label="Goldie Hawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133991" start="39003" end="39016" title="casting couch" label="casting couch"/>
<link wikidata="Q142567" start="39344" end="39357" title="Jack Anderson (columnist)" label="Jack Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946773" start="39690" end="39704" title="Jean Kilbourne" label="Jean Kilbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q42133786" start="39725" end="39739" title="MeToo movement" label="MeToo movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5877041" start="39760" end="39778" title="Hogan&amp;#x27;s Alley (magazine)" label="Hogan&amp;#x27;s Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="40223" end="40238" title="public services" label="public services"/>
<link wikidata="Q470110" start="40320" end="40329" title="American Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="40418" end="40427" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="40514" end="40531" title="U.S. Navy" label="Dept. of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050859" start="40674" end="40684" title="United Way of America" label="United Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q628807" start="40768" end="40792" title="U.S. Department of Labor" label="U.S. Department of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="40896" end="40918" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q248686" start="40922" end="40944" title="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith" label="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith"/>
<link wikidata="Q10427676" start="41025" end="41047" title="Civil Defense" label="Dept. of Civil Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q21261251" start="41168" end="41211" title="Martin Luther King and the Montgomery Story" label="Martin Luther King and the Montgomery Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442541" start="41253" end="41285" title="The Fellowship of Reconciliation" label="The Fellowship of Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206647" start="41401" end="41410" title="Job Corps" label="Job Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="41665" end="41678" title="U.S. Treasury" label="U.S. Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q751572" start="41707" end="41721" title="March of Dimes" label="March of Dimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="41781" end="41802" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154671" start="41804" end="41819" title="Community Chest (organization)" label="Community Chest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111420" start="41898" end="41913" title="Christmas Seal &amp;amp; Charity Stamp Society" label="Christmas Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q15280868" start="41955" end="41981" title="Disabled American Veterans" label="Disabled American Veterans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257319" start="42664" end="42677" title="Denis Kitchen" label="Denis Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q267628" start="42878" end="42894" title="newspaper column" label="newspaper column"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555508" start="42914" end="42927" title="radio program" label="radio program"/>
<link wikidata="Q947755" start="42981" end="42992" title="The Phantom (comics)" label="The Phantom"/>
<link wikidata="Q554900" start="43010" end="43018" title="Lee Falk" label="Lee Falk"/>
<link wikidata="Q202878" start="43057" end="43065" title="Mae West" label="Mae West"/>
<link wikidata="Q312084" start="43067" end="43081" title="Melvyn Douglas" label="Melvyn Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q318734" start="43087" end="43099" title="Claude Rains" label="Claude Rains"/>
<link wikidata="Q203433" start="43218" end="43229" title="Spiro Agnew" label="Spiro Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="43255" end="43271" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="43272" end="43285" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="43310" end="43321" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q357676" start="43460" end="43469" title="Jack Kemp" label="Jack Kemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825917" start="43809" end="43837" title="The Author Meets the Critics" label="The Author Meets the Critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q130838" start="43906" end="43911" title="Today (NBC program)" label="Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997364" start="43987" end="44001" title="Who Said That?" label="Who Said That?"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144150" start="44059" end="44080" title="What&amp;#x27;s the Story" label="What&amp;#x27;s the Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q123598804" start="44465" end="44479" title="Anyone Can Win" label="Anyone Can Win"/>
<link wikidata="Q58037172" start="44621" end="44630" title="NBC Radio" label="NBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900468" start="44657" end="44664" title="Monitor (NBC radio)" label="Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338655" start="44863" end="44879" title="The Tonight Show" label="The Tonight Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q553276" start="44908" end="44919" title="Steve Allen" label="Steve Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587581" start="44921" end="44930" title="Jack Paar" label="Jack Paar"/>
<link wikidata="Q310819" start="44936" end="44949" title="Johnny Carson" label="Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="45075" end="45095" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q338067" start="45126" end="45137" title="Oval Office" label="Oval Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q181802" start="45143" end="45157" title="Prosthesis" label="prosthetic leg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473658" start="45299" end="45310" title="Walter Reed Army Medical Center" label="Walter Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457886" start="45332" end="45340" title="National Naval Medical Center" label="Bethesda"/>
<link wikidata="Q94081" start="45576" end="45584" title="Bob Hope" label="Bob Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170451" start="45701" end="45717" title="Person to Person" label="Person to Person"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076393" start="45754" end="45773" title="Charles Collingwood (journalist)" label="Charles Collingwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081494" start="45812" end="45832" title="The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q555226" start="45840" end="45850" title="Sid Caesar" label="Sid Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568001" start="45864" end="45882" title="Your Show of Shows" label="Your Show of Shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960406" start="45896" end="45916" title="The Red Skelton Show" label="The Red Skelton Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404046" start="45930" end="45951" title="The Merv Griffin Show" label="The Merv Griffin Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235414" start="45965" end="45986" title="The Mike Douglas Show" label="The Mike Douglas Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q708784" start="46009" end="46022" title="Ralph Edwards" label="Ralph Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253942" start="46035" end="46052" title="This Is Your Life (American franchise)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176277" start="46094" end="46106" title="Peter Palmer (actor)" label="Peter Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="46304" end="46308" title="Life magazine" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="46361" end="46373" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="46387" end="46394" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302345" start="46433" end="46458" title="The Saturday Evening Post" label="The Saturday Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341644" start="46501" end="46512" title="Rich Little" label="Rich Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233888" start="46517" end="46527" title="David Frye" label="David Frye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935903" start="46756" end="46769" title="Milton Caniff" label="Milton Caniff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070786" start="46855" end="46867" title="Chesterfield cigarettes" label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="46917" end="46927" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="46932" end="46943" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972821" start="46972" end="46975" title="USO" label="USO"/>
<link wikidata="Q319342" start="47008" end="47020" title="Art Buchwald" label="Art Buchwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508079" start="47025" end="47040" title="George Plimpton" label="George Plimpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="47112" end="47132" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q311719" start="47202" end="47217" title="Adlai Stevenson II" label="Adlai Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122162" start="47282" end="47294" title="Savings bond" label="Savings bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="47304" end="47317" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="U.S. Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="47430" end="47445" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="47496" end="47508" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="47528" end="47539" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="47922" end="47930" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="48233" end="48250" title="public television" label="public television"/>
<link wikidata="Q155629" start="48416" end="48429" title="Sesame Street" label="Sesame Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376124" start="49096" end="49112" title="Endicott College" label="Endicott College"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="49439" end="49454" title="public services" label="public services"/>
<link wikidata="Q470110" start="49500" end="49509" title="American Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892373" start="49515" end="49542" title="United States civil defense" label="Department of Civil Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q742787" start="49548" end="49570" title="United States Department of the Navy" label="Department of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="49576" end="49585" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="49591" end="49613" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q628807" start="49619" end="49638" title="United States Department of Labor" label="Department of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154671" start="49640" end="49655" title="Community Chest (organization)" label="Community Chest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050859" start="49673" end="49683" title="United Way of America" label="United Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206647" start="49694" end="49703" title="Job Corps" label="Job Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q751572" start="49894" end="49908" title="March of Dimes" label="March of Dimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="49939" end="49960" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q15280868" start="50049" end="50075" title="Disabled American Veterans" label="Disabled American Veterans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15138174" start="50124" end="50139" title="Christmas Seals" label="Christmas Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728652" start="50306" end="50323" title="The Daily Gazette" label="The Daily Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="50349" end="50356" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q297425" start="50430" end="50443" title="Alvin Toffler" label="Alvin Toffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="50714" end="50738" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="50745" end="50763" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="50783" end="50794" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129409" start="50931" end="50939" title="Far left" label="radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="50950" end="50957" title="hippies" label="hippies"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="51184" end="51198" title="counterculture" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q131725" start="51213" end="51222" title="Joan Baez" label="Joan Baez"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050732" start="51421" end="51438" title="limousine liberal" label="limousine liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="51594" end="51605" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060635" start="51724" end="51750" title="Hyannisport, Massachusetts" label="Hyannisport, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890424" start="52040" end="52065" title="Youth International Party" label="Youth International Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250103" start="52076" end="52109" title="Students for a Democratic Society (1960 organization)" label="Students for a Democratic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026919" start="52950" end="52985" title="California State University, Fresno" label="California State University, Fresno"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="53834" end="53850" title="venereal disease" label="venereal disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="53924" end="53931" title="organized crime" label="the Mob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="54151" end="54162" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q117012" start="54167" end="54175" title="Yoko Ono" label="Yoko Ono"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186383" start="54190" end="54206" title="Bed-In for Peace" label="Bed-In for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="" start="54471" end="54482" title="Unfinished Music No. 1: Two Virgins" label="Two Virgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711139" start="54816" end="54828" title="Derek Taylor" label="Derek Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418935" start="54985" end="55012" title="The Ballad of John and Yoko" label="The Ballad of John and Yoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="55381" end="55391" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="55482" end="55504" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q189150" start="55613" end="55627" title="Black Panthers" label="Black Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q43303" start="55632" end="55641" title="Malcolm X" label="Malcolm X"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="55655" end="55665" title="theme park" label="theme park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033769" start="55673" end="55685" title="Dogpatch USA" label="Dogpatch USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="55710" end="55718" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="56379" end="56400" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q122563" start="56622" end="56643" title="Eau Claire, Wisconsin" label="Eau Claire, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551771" start="56726" end="56760" title="University of Wisconsin–Eau Claire" label="University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088236" start="56914" end="56932" title="Sodomy laws in the United States" label="&amp;quot;sodomy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="57179" end="57193" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q435792" start="57201" end="57214" title="Seymour Hersh" label="Seymour Hersh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="57239" end="57252" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q451808" start="57257" end="57271" title="Charles Colson" label="Charles Colson"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="57382" end="57399" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="57523" end="57534" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057776" start="58467" end="58487" title="Celebrity biographer" label="Celebrity biographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925" start="58558" end="58569" title="Grace Kelly" label="Grace Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293067" start="58894" end="58907" title="Don Markstein" label="Don Markstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293067" start="58921" end="58931" title="Toonopedia" label="Toonopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q888070" start="59100" end="59111" title="Bob Lubbers" label="Bob Lubbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="59892" end="59907" title="People magazine" label="People magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="59972" end="59986" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257319" start="60056" end="60069" title="Denis Kitchen" label="Denis Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q662860" start="60284" end="60296" title="Smoking" label="chain smoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q199804" start="60321" end="60330" title="Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease" label="emphysema"/>
<link wikidata="Q582637" start="60346" end="60374" title="South Hampton, New Hampshire" label="South Hampton, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q315516" start="60489" end="60500" title="Thomas Gray" label="Thomas Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936762" start="60612" end="60649" title="Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard" label="Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="60862" end="60881" title="United States Postal Service" label="U.S. Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151777" start="61006" end="61026" title="Comic Strip Classics" label="Comic Strip Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756502" start="61042" end="61061" title="commemorative stamp" label="commemorative stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336850" start="61094" end="61117" title="National Cartoon Museum" label="National Cartoon Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621997" start="61214" end="61226" title="Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q842614" start="61260" end="61277" title="Will Eisner Award" label="Will Eisner Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397921" start="61301" end="61318" title="Sadie Hawkins Day" label="Sadie Hawkins Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61323" end="61336" title=":wikt:double whammy" label="double whammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083177" start="61453" end="61464" title="skunk works" label="skunk works"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693827" start="61469" end="61484" title="Lower Slobbovia" label="Lower Slobbovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530240" start="61495" end="61500" title="shmoo" label="shmoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="61522" end="61529" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604177" start="61653" end="61661" title="Mating of yeast" label="shmooing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193" start="61665" end="61680" title="microbiological" label="microbiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499633" start="61750" end="61760" title="shmoo plot" label="shmoo plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="61795" end="61817" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="61823" end="61837" title="socioeconomics" label="socioeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467478" start="61939" end="61945" title="widget (economics)" label="widget"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="62017" end="62033" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="62111" end="62141" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="62163" end="62173" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147725" start="62201" end="62211" title="Cygnus X-3" label="Cygnus X-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="62212" end="62225" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561633" start="62298" end="62306" title="List of American words not widely used in the United Kingdom" label="druthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147874" start="62308" end="62316" title="schmooze" label="schmooze"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545017" start="62322" end="62346" title="-nik" label="nogoodnik, neatnik, etc."/>
<link wikidata="Q784886" start="62365" end="62386" title="The American Language" label="The American Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q439204" start="62394" end="62406" title="H.L. Mencken" label="H.L. Mencken"/>
<link wikidata="Q622408" start="62525" end="62532" title="beatnik" label="beatnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="62536" end="62543" title="Sputnik" label="Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q219423" start="62671" end="62676" title="mural" label="mural"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62754" end="62767" title="Jon P. Mooers" label="Jon P. Mooers"/>
<link wikidata="Q54176" start="62804" end="62812" title="Amesbury, Massachusetts" label="Amesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="62853" end="62865" title="Boston Globe" label="Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120960" start="63054" end="63061" title="WNET-TV" label="WNET-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842976" start="63068" end="63084" title="American Masters" label="American Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121742" start="63338" end="63360" title="Underground comix" label="Underground cartoonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257319" start="63400" end="63413" title="Denis Kitchen" label="Denis Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="63554" end="63563" title="monograph" label="monograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q279385" start="63580" end="63599" title="San Diego Comic-Con" label="San Diego Comic-Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146596" start="63614" end="63617" title="IDW Publishing" label="IDW"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740997" start="63764" end="63794" title="The Library of American Comics" label="The Library of American Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996621" start="64051" end="64069" title="Whitman Publishing" label="Whitman Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395636" start="64226" end="64246" title="Saalfield Publishing" label="Saalfield Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350563" start="64423" end="64437" title="Hyperion Press" label="Hyperion Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108217" start="64485" end="64505" title="Macmillan Publishers" label="Macmillan Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846515" start="64628" end="64657" title="Saturday Review of Literature" label="Saturday Review of Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="64779" end="64799" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067003" start="65396" end="65422" title="Farrar, Straus and Giroux" label="Farrar, Straus &amp;amp; Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189454" start="65690" end="65706" title="Crown Publishers" label="Crown Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066277" start="66002" end="66023" title="Famous Artists School" label="Famous Artists School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499961" start="66293" end="66303" title="Free Press (publisher)" label="Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067653" start="66451" end="66471" title="Fawcett Publications" label="Fawcett Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296730" start="66543" end="66556" title="Pyramid Books" label="Pyramid Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075464" start="66637" end="66647" title="Dell Books" label="Dell Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875979" start="66868" end="66880" title="Beacon Press" label="Beacon Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894895" start="67289" end="67315" title="Univ. Press of Mississippi" label="Univ. Press of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127696" start="67727" end="67743" title="Harper &amp;amp; Row" label="Harper &amp;amp; Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093062" start="67836" end="67859" title="G.P. Putnam&amp;#x27;s Sons" label="G.P. Putnam&amp;#x27;s Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q59333939" start="67861" end="67874" title="Maurice Horn" label="Horn, Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030420" start="67928" end="67941" title="Chelsea House" label="Chelsea House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874472" start="67950" end="67954" title="Avon (publishers)" label="Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="68044" end="68067" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Inst. Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669411" start="68068" end="68080" title="Harry Abrams" label="Harry Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q110146983" start="68232" end="68260" title="Holt, Rinehart &amp;amp; Winston" label="Holt, Rinehart &amp;amp; Winston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654997" start="68379" end="68404" title="Harcourt Brace Jovanovich" label="Harcourt Brace Jovanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991198" start="68612" end="68644" title="Nemo, the Classic Comics Library" label="Nemo, the Classic Comics Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197573" start="68753" end="68771" title="Kitchen Sink Press" label="Kitchen Sink Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663952" start="68850" end="68865" title="Abbeville Press" label="Abbeville Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q15707472" start="69216" end="69242" title="Journal of Popular Culture" label="Journal of Popular Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q895457" start="69336" end="69366" title="Bowling Green State University" label="Bowling Green State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395850" start="69430" end="69449" title="Fantagraphics Books" label="Fantagraphics Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755744" start="69623" end="69637" title="Overlook Press" label="Overlook Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="69737" end="69754" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740997" start="69970" end="70000" title="The Library of American Comics" label="The Library of American Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q568642" start="70348" end="70369" title="Bloomsbury Publishing" label="Bloomsbury Publishing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3013" wikidata="Q27167" url="?curid=3013" title="Ann Druyan">
<text>Ann Druyan ( ;) is an American documentary producer and director specializing in the communication of science. She co-wrote the 1980 PBS documentary series &quot;&quot;, hosted by Carl Sagan, whom she married in 1981. She is the creator, producer, and writer of the 2014 sequel, &quot;&quot; and its sequel series, &quot;&quot;, as well as the book of the same name. She directed episodes of both series.

In the late 1970s, she became the creative director of NASA&#x27;s Voyager Interstellar Message Project, which produced the golden discs affixed to both the &quot;Voyager 1&quot; and &quot;Voyager 2&quot; spacecraft. She also published a novel, &quot;A Famous Broken Heart&quot;, in 1977, and later co-wrote several best selling non-fiction books with Sagan.

== Early life and education ==
Ann Druyan was born in Queens, New York, the daughter of Pearl A. () and Harry Druyan, who co-owned a knitwear firm. Her family was Jewish.

Druyan&#x27;s early interest in math and science was, in her word, &quot;derailed&quot; when a junior high-school teacher ridiculed a question she asked about the universality of . &quot;I raised my hand and said, &#x27;You mean this applies to every circle in the universe?&#x27;, and the teacher told me not to ask stupid questions. And there I was having this religious experience, and she made me feel like such a fool. I was completely flummoxed from then on until after college.&quot; Druyan characterized her three years at New York University as &quot;disastrous&quot;, and it was only after she left school without graduating that she discovered the pre-Socratic philosophers and began educating herself, thus leading to a renewed interest in science.

==Career==
In the late 1970s, Druyan became the creative director of NASA&#x27;s Voyager Interstellar Message Project. As creative director, Druyan worked with a team to design a complex message, including music and images, for possible alien civilizations. These golden phonograph records affixed to the &quot;Voyager 1&quot; and &quot;Voyager 2&quot; spacecraft are now beyond the outermost planets of the solar system, and &quot;Voyager 1&quot; has entered interstellar space. Both records have a projected shelf life of one billion years.

Druyan&#x27;s role on the project was discussed on the July 8, 2018, 60 Minutes segment &quot;The Little Spacecraft That Could&quot;. In the segment, Druyan explained her insistence that Chuck Berry&#x27;s &quot;Johnny B. Goode&quot; be included on the Golden Record, saying: &quot;...&quot;Johnny B. Goode&quot;, rock and roll, was the music of motion, of moving, getting to someplace you&#x27;ve never been before, and the odds are against you, but you want to go. That was Voyager.&quot; The segment also discussed Sagan&#x27;s suggestion, in 1990, that Voyager 1 turn its cameras back towards Earth to take a series of photographs showing the planets of our solar system. The shots, showing Earth from a distance of 3.7 billion miles as a small point of bluish light, became the basis for Sagan&#x27;s famous &quot;Pale Blue Dot&quot; passage, first published in &quot;Pale Blue Dot: A Vision of the Human Future in Space&quot; (1994).

During that time, Druyan also co-wrote (with Carl Sagan and Steven Soter) the 1980 PBS documentary series &quot;&quot;, hosted by Carl Sagan. The thirteen-part series covered a wide range of scientific subjects, including the origin of life and a perspective of our place in the universe. It was highly acclaimed, and became the most widely watched series in the history of American public television at that time. The series won two Emmys and a Peabody Award, and has since been broadcast in more than 60 countries and seen by over 500 million people. A book was also published to accompany the series. , it is still the most widely watched PBS series in the world. Several revised versions of the series were later broadcast; one version, telecast after Sagan&#x27;s death, opens with Druyan paying tribute to her late husband and the impact of &quot;Cosmos&quot; over the years.

Druyan wrote and produced the 1987 PBS &quot;NOVA&quot; episode &quot;Confessions of a Weaponeer&quot; on the life of President Eisenhower&#x27;s Science Advisor George Kistiakowsky.

In 2000, Druyan, together with Steve Soter, co-wrote &quot;Passport to the Universe&quot;, the inaugural planetarium show for the Rose Center for Earth and Space at the American Natural History Museum&#x27;s Hayden Planetarium. The attraction is narrated by Tom Hanks. Druyan and Soter also co-wrote &quot;The Search for Life: Are We Alone&quot;, narrated by Harrison Ford, which also debuted at the Hayden&#x27;s Rose Center.

In 2000, Druyan co-founded Cosmos Studios, Inc, with Joseph Firmage. As CEO of Cosmos Studios, Druyan produces science-based entertainment for all media. In addition to &quot;&quot;, Cosmos Studios has produced &quot;Cosmic Africa&quot;, &quot;Lost Dinosaurs of Egypt&quot;, and the Emmy-nominated documentary &quot;Cosmic Journey: The Voyager Interstellar Mission and Message&quot;. In 2009, she distributed a series of podcasts called &quot;At Home in the Cosmos with Annie Druyan&quot;, in which she described her works, the life of her husband, Carl Sagan, and their marriage.

Druyan is credited, with Carl Sagan, as the co-creator and co-producer of the 1997 feature film &quot;Contact&quot;.

In 2011, it was announced that Druyan would executive produce, co-write, and be one of the episodic directors for a sequel to &quot;&quot;, to be called &quot;&quot;, which began airing in March 2014. Episodes premiered on Fox and also aired on National Geographic Channel on the following night. At the time of its release, Fox gave the series the largest global rollout of a television series ever, debuting it in 180 countries. The premiere episode was shown across nine of Fox&#x27;s cable properties in addition to the broadcast network in a &quot;roadblock&quot; style premiere. The series went on to become the most-watched series ever for National Geographic Channel International, with at least some part of the 13-episode series watched by 135 million people, including 45 million in the U.S.

In March 2020, a third season of &quot;Cosmos&quot;, named &quot;&quot;, for which Druyan was executive producer, writer, and director, premiered on National Geographic. Druyan also said: &quot;I very much have season four in mind, and I know what it&#x27;s going to be. And I even know some of the stories that I want to tell in it.&quot;

===Writing===
Druyan&#x27;s first novel, &quot;A Famous Broken Heart&quot;, was published in 1977.

Druyan co-wrote six &quot;New York Times&quot; bestsellers with Carl Sagan, including: &quot;Comet&quot;, &quot;Shadows of Forgotten Ancestors&quot;, and &quot;The Demon-Haunted World&quot;. She is co-author, along with Carl Sagan, F. D. Drake, Timothy Ferris, Jon Lomberg and Linda Salzman Sagan, of &quot;Murmurs Of Earth: The Voyager Interstellar Record&quot;. She also wrote the updated introduction to Sagan&#x27;s book &quot;The Cosmic Connection&quot; and the epilogue of &quot;Billions and Billions&quot;. She wrote the introduction to, and edited &quot;The Varieties of Scientific Experience&quot;, published from Sagan&#x27;s 1985 Gifford lectures.

In February 2020, Druyan published &quot;Cosmos: Possible Worlds&quot;, a companion volume to , which premiered in March 2020.

===Work in science===
Druyan is a fellow of the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal (CSICOP).

Druyan served as program director of the first solar-sail deep-space mission, Cosmos 1, launched on a Russian ICBM in 2005.

Druyan is involved in multiple Breakthrough Initiatives. With Frank Drake, Druyan is the co-chair of Breakthrough Message and also a member of Breakthrough Starshot.

She is a member of the advisory board of The Carl Sagan Institute.

==Activism==
Druyan has for many years been a vocal advocate for nuclear disarmament. She was arrested three times at the Mercury, Nevada nuclear test site during Mikhail Gorbachev&#x27;s unilateral moratorium on underground nuclear testing, with which President Ronald Reagan did not cooperate. This included an arrest in June 1986, when she crossed a white painted line indicating the test site&#x27;s boundary. Sagan, who attended the same protest with Druyan, was not arrested.

In the early 1990s, Druyan worked with Sagan and then-Senator Al Gore Jr. and a host of religious and scientific leaders to bring the scientific and religious worlds together in a unified effort to preserve the environment, resulting in the &quot;Declaration of the &#x27;Mission to Washington″&quot;.

She was a founding director of the Children&#x27;s Health Fund until the spring of 2004, a project that provides mobile pediatric care to homeless and disadvantaged children in more than half a dozen cities. She is currently a member of their advisory board.

She has been on the board of directors of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws (NORML) for over 10 years and was its president from 2006 to 2010.

==Honors==
An asteroid discovered in 1988 was named in Druyan&#x27;s honor by its discoverer Eleanor F. Helin. In a 2020 interview with &quot;Skeptical Inquirer&quot;, Druyan discussed 4970 Druyan and the asteroid named after her late husband, saying that 4970 Druyan is in a &quot;wedding ring orbit&quot; around the Sun with 2709 Sagan. Druyan was presented with a plaque on Sagan&#x27;s sixtieth birthday, which is inscribed: &quot;Asteroid 2709 Sagan in eternal companion orbit with asteroid 4970 Druyan, symbolic of their love and admiration for each other.&quot;

In November 2006, Druyan was a speaker at &quot;Beyond Belief: Science, Religion, Reason and Survival&quot;.

In January 2007, she was a juror at the 2007 Sundance Film Festival, responsible for selecting the winner of the Alfred P. Sloan Prize for films about science and technology.

In November 2007, Druyan was awarded the title of &quot;Humanist Laureate&quot; by the International Academy of Humanism.

In October 2019, the Center for Inquiry West opened the Carl Sagan–Ann Druyan Theater in Los Angeles.

==Religious and philosophical views==
In an interview with Joel Achenbach of &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, Druyan said that her early interest in science stemmed from a fascination with Karl Marx. Achenbach commented that &quot;She had, at the time, rather vaporous standards of evidence&quot;, a reference to her belief in the ancient astronauts of Erich von Däniken and the theories of Immanuel Velikovsky pertaining to the solar system.

Concerning the death of her husband she stated:

When my husband died, because he was so famous and known for not being a believer, many people would come up to me—it still sometimes happens—and ask me if Carl changed at the end and converted to a belief in an afterlife. They also frequently ask me if I think I will see him again. Carl faced his death with unflagging courage and never sought refuge in illusions. The tragedy was that we knew we would never see each other again. I don&#x27;t ever expect to be reunited with Carl.
==Personal life==

Druyan and Sagan&#x27;s working and resulting romantic relationship has been the subject of numerous treatments in popular culture, including the Radiolab episode &quot;Carl Sagan and Ann Druyan&#x27;s Ultimate Mix Tape&quot;, a segment of the Comedy Central program &quot;Drunk History&quot;″s episode &quot;Space&quot;, and the song &quot;Sounds of Earth&quot; by Jim Moray. The asteroid 4970 Druyan, which is in a companion orbit with asteroid 2709 Sagan named after Druyan&#x27;s late husband, is named after Druyan. In 2015, it was announced that Warner Brothers was in development on a drama about Sagan and Druyan&#x27;s relationship, to be produced by producer Lynda Obst and Druyan.

In 2020, Sagan and Druyan&#x27;s daughter Sasha Sagan released a book &quot;For Small Creatures Such As We: Rituals for Finding Meaning in our Unlikely World&quot;, which discusses life with her parents and her father&#x27;s death when she was fourteen years old.

Druyan also gave Sasha a recurring role in &quot;&quot;, where she played her own grandmother, including in the episode &quot;Man of a Trillion Worlds&quot;, which featured the life of Carl Sagan.

==Awards==
* 2004 Richard Dawkins Award
* 2014 Outstanding Writing for Nonfiction Programming Primetime Emmy Award
* 2015 The Award for Outstanding Producer of Non-Fiction Television from Producers Guild of America
* 2015 Writers Guild Award for &quot;Documentary Script – Other than Current Events&quot;
* 2017 Harvard Humanist of the Year Award
* 2020 National Geographic Further Award

==See also==
* Women in science
* List of peace activists

==References==
==External links==
* Ann Druyan: The Observatory</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27167" start="0" end="10" title="Ann Druyan" label="Ann Druyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="133" end="136" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="137" end="148" title="Documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="180" end="190" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q156315" start="473" end="509" title="Voyager Golden Record" label="Voyager Interstellar Message Project"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="569" end="578" title="Voyager 1" label="Voyager 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="595" end="604" title="Voyager 2" label="Voyager 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="820" end="836" title="Queens, New York" label="Queens, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q167" start="1117" end="1117" title="pi" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="1469" end="1488" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q178540" start="1597" end="1622" title="pre-Socratic philosophers" label="pre-Socratic philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q156315" start="1781" end="1817" title="Voyager Golden Record" label="Voyager Interstellar Message Project"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2011" end="2020" title="Voyager 1" label="Voyager 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2037" end="2046" title="Voyager 2" label="Voyager 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q931481" start="2456" end="2471" title="Johnny B. Goode" label="Johnny B. Goode"/>
<link wikidata="Q474472" start="3063" end="3076" title="Pale Blue Dot" label="Pale Blue Dot"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3117" end="3169" title="Pale Blue Dot: A Vision of the Human Future in Space" label="Pale Blue Dot: A Vision of the Human Future in Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="3230" end="3240" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370330" start="3245" end="3257" title="Steven Soter" label="Steven Soter"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="3268" end="3271" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="3272" end="3283" title="Documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="3411" end="3425" title="origin of life" label="origin of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="3568" end="3585" title="public television" label="public television"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="3619" end="3624" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmys"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="3631" end="3644" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194705" start="3740" end="3744" title="Cosmos (Sagan book)" label="book"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071768" start="4103" end="4123" title="Nova (American TV series)" label="PBS &amp;quot;NOVA&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="4186" end="4206" title="President Eisenhower" label="President Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q902967" start="4230" end="4249" title="George Kistiakowsky" label="George Kistiakowsky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4733" end="4747" title="Joseph Firmage" label="Joseph Firmage"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="4963" end="4967" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="5101" end="5109" title="podcasts" label="podcasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="5229" end="5239" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q270215" start="5364" end="5371" title="Contact (1997 American film)" label="Contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="5603" end="5606" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q157118" start="5625" end="5652" title="National Geographic Channel" label="National Geographic Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q157118" start="6333" end="6352" title="National Geographic (American TV channel)" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="6645" end="6683" title="The New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;New York Times&amp;quot; bestsellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151579" start="6718" end="6723" title="Comet (book)" label="Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460818" start="6737" end="6767" title="Shadows of Forgotten Ancestors (book)" label="Shadows of Forgotten Ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482106" start="6785" end="6808" title="The Demon-Haunted World" label="The Demon-Haunted World"/>
<link wikidata="Q299149" start="6857" end="6868" title="F. D. Drake" label="F. D. Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807192" start="6870" end="6884" title="Timothy Ferris" label="Timothy Ferris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271150" start="6886" end="6897" title="Jon Lomberg" label="Jon Lomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526447" start="6902" end="6921" title="Linda Salzman Sagan" label="Linda Salzman Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727697" start="7056" end="7077" title="The Cosmic Connection" label="The Cosmic Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152287" start="7110" end="7131" title="Billions and Billions" label="Billions and Billions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772070" start="7187" end="7225" title="The Varieties of Scientific Experience" label="The Varieties of Scientific Experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q750883" start="7266" end="7282" title="Gifford lectures" label="Gifford lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115728" start="7461" end="7531" title="Committee for Skeptical Inquiry" label="Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q847714" start="7621" end="7629" title="Cosmos 1" label="Cosmos 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706451" start="7699" end="7723" title="Breakthrough Initiatives" label="Breakthrough Initiatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q299149" start="7730" end="7741" title="Frank Drake" label="Frank Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706451" start="7769" end="7789" title="Breakthrough Message" label="Breakthrough Message"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808109" start="7811" end="7832" title="Breakthrough Starshot" label="Breakthrough Starshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715490" start="7880" end="7900" title="Carl Sagan Institute" label="Carl Sagan Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761769" start="8025" end="8040" title="Mercury, Nevada" label="Mercury, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967560" start="8995" end="9049" title="National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws" label="National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q58962" start="9211" end="9227" title="Eleanor F. Helin" label="Eleanor F. Helin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214082" start="9260" end="9278" title="Skeptical Inquirer" label="Skeptical Inquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q313541" start="9303" end="9314" title="4970 Druyan" label="4970 Druyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313541" start="9374" end="9385" title="4970 Druyan" label="4970 Druyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q149975" start="9445" end="9455" title="2709 Sagan" label="2709 Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9736" end="9789" title="Beyond Belief: Science, Religion, Reason and Survival" label="Beyond Belief: Science, Religion, Reason and Survival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976986" start="9838" end="9865" title="2007 Sundance Film Festival" label="2007 Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763328" start="9911" end="9932" title="Alfred P. Sloan Prize" label="Alfred P. Sloan Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q648015" start="10118" end="10136" title="Center for Inquiry" label="Center for Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q410" start="10153" end="10163" title="Carl Sagan" label="Carl Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213170" start="10259" end="10273" title="Joel Achenbach" label="Joel Achenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="10283" end="10302" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="10389" end="10398" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q646988" start="10531" end="10549" title="ancient astronauts" label="ancient astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q122965" start="10553" end="10570" title="Erich von Däniken" label="Erich von Däniken"/>
<link wikidata="Q349749" start="10591" end="10610" title="Immanuel Velikovsky" label="Immanuel Velikovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q623282" start="10905" end="10914" title="afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856080" start="11342" end="11350" title="Radiolab" label="Radiolab"/>
<link wikidata="Q14650447" start="11469" end="11482" title="Drunk History" label="Drunk History"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197010" start="11562" end="11571" title="Jim Moray" label="Jim Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q313541" start="11586" end="11597" title="4970 Druyan" label="4970 Druyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q149975" start="11643" end="11653" title="2709 Sagan" label="2709 Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q74829058" start="11931" end="11942" title="Sasha Sagan" label="Sasha Sagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981673" start="12370" end="12391" title="Richard Dawkins Award" label="Richard Dawkins Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q253075" start="12540" end="12566" title="Producers Guild of America" label="Producers Guild of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q113616" start="12756" end="12772" title="Women in science" label="Women in science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921049" start="12775" end="12798" title="List of peace activists" label="List of peace activists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3014" wikidata="Q239589" url="?curid=3014" title="Analcime">
<text>Analcime (; ) or analcite is a white, gray, or colorless tectosilicate mineral. Analcime consists of hydrated sodium aluminium silicate in cubic crystalline form. Its chemical formula is NaAlSi2O6 · H2O. Minor amounts of potassium and calcium substitute for sodium. A silver-bearing synthetic variety also exists (Ag-analcite). Analcime is usually classified as a zeolite mineral, but structurally and chemically it is more similar to the feldspathoids. Analcime is not classified as an isometric crystal, as although the crystal structure appears to be isometric, it is usually off only by a fraction of an angle. However, there are truly isometric samples of the mineral, which makes its classification even more difficult. Due to the differences between the samples being too slight, there&#x27;s no merit from having multiple species names, so as a result analcime is a common example for minerals occurring in multiple crystal systems and space groups. It was first described by French geologist Déodat de Dolomieu, who called it zéolithe dure, meaning hard zeolite. It was found in lava in Cyclops, Italy. The mineral is IMA approved, and had been grandfathered, meaning the name analcime is believed to refer to a valid species til this day.

== Properties ==
Analcime crystals always look pseudocubic. Its common crystal forms include trapezohedron, truncated trapezohedron with cubic faces, and more rarely either as a truncated trapezohedron, or the crystals can take the shape of a truncated cube that is typical to bixbyites. The crystals can occur either individually, as interconnected, form groups on plates or even in druzy form. Crystal masses can also form veins sometimes. Individual crystals are euhedral, meaning they have well defined faces. When on a matrix, the mineral takes a granular habit, meaning the crystals become anhedral. The color of the mineral varies due to trace impurities. The mineral is weakly piezoelectric and pyroelectric, meaning it produces a weak electric charge when it&#x27;s rubbed or heated, hence the name analcime. Other characteristics include the fact that the mineral can have a blueish white fluorescence when inspected under short UV light, and a creamy white-yellow one inspected under long UV light. It does not show any pleochroic or radioactive properties. Analyses regarding the mineral&#x27;s symmetry vary in results, however the most prevalent one being tetragonal. The mineral usually has polysynthetic twins, which are only visible in thin sections when the specimen is inspected under polarized analyzed light. Analcime mainly consists of oxygen (50.87%), silicon (25.51%), aluminum (12.26%), sodium (10.44%) but otherwise has a negligible amount of hydrogen (0.92%) as well. The highest quality specimens take the form of a trapezohedron, and can reach up to 25 cm. These specimens are associated with serandite, aegyrine and natrolite, and can be found at Mont Saint-Hilaire, Quebec. Of the pinkish-white specimens, the mineral takes the shape of well-formed cubes which can exceed 10 cm, originating from several sites in Val di Fassa, Trentino, Italy.

== Formation and associated minerals ==
Analcime occurs as a primary mineral in analcime basalt and other alkaline igneous rocks. It also occurs as cavity and vesicle fillings associated with prehnite, calcite, and zeolites. Analcime forms in sedimentary rocks at temperatures below about , and so its presence indicates that the rock has experienced shallow diagenesis. Although it is common in igneous rocks (namely basalts and trachy-basalts), it is more rarely found in phonolites. Associations include zeolites, calcite and prehnite; however, it is also found in nepheline syenites and their pegmatites. It forms a series with pollucite.

== Locations ==
Well known locations for sourcing analcime include Croft Quarry in Leicestershire, UK; the Cyclopean Islands east off Sicily and near Trentino in northern Italy; Victoria in Australia; Kerguelen Island in the Indian Ocean; in the Lake Superior copper district of Michigan, Bergen Hill, New Jersey, Golden, Colorado, and at Searles Lake, California in the United States; and at Cape Blomidon, Nova Scotia and Mont Saint-Hilaire, Quebec in Canada; and in Iceland, and in Namibia. Siberian samples from Nidym and Toura provide us with white crystals of 18 cm. Samples of the Cyclopean Islands are known for their beautiful and clear crystals, just like the crystals of Kings Valley and Springfield in Oregon, which can reach up to 6 cm. Coleman, Alberta in Canada is known for producing beautiful red crystals.

== Usage ==
Other than its aesthetic values, analcime currently presents no use. Crystallized specimens are sought after by collectors, and the mineral is hardly ever made into jewelry. The crystals made into jewelries are uncut and handcrafted. It has lacking use as a microporous material. This is due to the fact that analcime has a compact structure and thus it has a strong resistance to diffusion of both molecules and cations. Analcime-bearing tuffs are sometimes used as building materials.

==See also==

== References ==

* Hurlbut, Cornelius S.; Klein, Cornelis, 1985, Manual of Mineralogy, 20th ed., 
* Mineral Galleries
* Mindat.org
* Webmineral.com

==External links==

*structure type ANA</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q239589" start="0" end="8" title="Analcime" label="Analcime"/>
<link wikidata="Q239589" start="17" end="25" title="Analcime" label="analcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q178977" start="57" end="70" title="tectosilicate" label="tectosilicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q724424" start="110" end="135" title="Sodium aluminosilicate" label="sodium aluminium silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="145" end="152" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="167" end="183" title="chemical formula" label="chemical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="199" end="202" title="Water" label="H2O"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="221" end="230" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="235" end="242" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="268" end="274" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q181332" start="364" end="371" title="zeolite" label="zeolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006122" start="439" end="451" title="feldspathoid" label="feldspathoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q380520" start="1001" end="1019" title="Déodat de Dolomieu" label="Déodat de Dolomieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q245578" start="1096" end="1103" title="Cyclopean Isles" label="Cyclops"/>
<link wikidata="Q268771" start="1127" end="1130" title="International Mineralogical Association" label="IMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q492700" start="1716" end="1724" title="euhedral" label="euhedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q492700" start="1846" end="1854" title="Euhedral and anhedral" label="anhedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q13119" start="2872" end="2881" title="serandite" label="serandite"/>
<link wikidata="Q380674" start="2883" end="2891" title="aegyrine" label="aegyrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415318" start="2896" end="2905" title="natrolite" label="natrolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760736" start="2927" end="2945" title="Mont Saint-Hilaire" label="Mont Saint-Hilaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="2947" end="2953" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397570" start="3094" end="3106" title="Val di Fassa" label="Val di Fassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16289" start="3108" end="3116" title="Trentino" label="Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="3215" end="3221" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="3241" end="3254" title="igneous rocks" label="igneous rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q422128" start="3318" end="3326" title="prehnite" label="prehnite"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="3328" end="3335" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="3369" end="3386" title="sedimentary rocks" label="sedimentary rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q180621" start="3485" end="3495" title="diagenesis" label="diagenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q262232" start="3556" end="3570" title="Trachybasalt" label="trachy-basalts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257550" start="3600" end="3609" title="phonolite" label="phonolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q419274" start="3758" end="3767" title="pollucite" label="pollucite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3837" end="3849" title="Croft, Leicestershire#Industry and Business" label="Croft Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23106" start="3853" end="3867" title="Leicestershire" label="Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q245578" start="3877" end="3894" title="Cyclopean Islands" label="Cyclopean Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="3904" end="3910" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="3948" end="3956" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q46772" start="3971" end="3987" title="Kerguelen Island" label="Kerguelen Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="3995" end="4007" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066" start="4016" end="4029" title="Lake Superior" label="Lake Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="4049" end="4057" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="4072" end="4082" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q983543" start="4084" end="4100" title="Golden, Colorado" label="Golden, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332953" start="4109" end="4121" title="Searles Lake" label="Searles Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="4178" end="4189" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="4239" end="4246" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="4255" end="4262" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4286" end="4291" title="Nidym" label="Nidym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996810" start="4296" end="4301" title="Toura" label="Toura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459543" start="4452" end="4464" title="Kings Valley, Oregon" label="Kings Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q40268" start="4469" end="4480" title="Springfield, Oregon" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4520" end="4527" title="Coleman (Canada)" label="Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="4529" end="4536" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3017" wikidata="Q92600" url="?curid=3017" title="Alexey Pajitnov">
<text>Alexey Leonidovich Pajitnov (born April 16, 1955) is a Russian and American computer engineer and video game designer. He is best known for creating, designing, and developing &quot;Tetris&quot; in 1985 while working at the Dorodnitsyn Computing Centre under the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union (now the Russian Academy of Sciences). After &quot;Tetris&quot; was released internationally in 1987, he released a sequel in 1989, entitled &quot;Welltris&quot;.

In 1991, he moved to the United States and later became a U.S. citizen. In 1996, Pajitnov founded The Tetris Company alongside Dutch video game designer Henk Rogers. Despite the game&#x27;s high popularity, Pajitnov did not receive royalties from &quot;Tetris&quot; prior to this time; the Soviet Union had disintegrated by 1991.

==Early life==
Pajitnov was born to Russian parents, who were both writers, his father was an art critic, his mother was a journalist who wrote for both newspapers and a film magazine. It was through his parents that Pajitnov gained exposure to the arts, eventually developing a passion for cinema. He accompanied his mother to many film screenings, including the Moscow Film Festival. Pajitnov was also mathematically inclined, enjoying puzzles and problem solving.

In 1967, when he was 11 years old, Pajitnov&#x27;s parents divorced. For several years, he lived with his mother in a one-bedroom apartment owned by the state. The two were eventually able to move into a private apartment at 49 Gertsen Street, when Pajitnov was 17. He later went on to study applied mathematics at the Moscow Aviation Institute.

== Career ==
In 1977, Pajitnov worked as a summer intern at the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Once he graduated in 1979, he accepted a job there working on speech recognition at the academy&#x27;s Dorodnitsyn Computing Centre. When the Computing Centre received new equipment, its researchers would write a small program for it in order to test its computing capabilities. According to Pajitnov, this &quot;became [his] excuse for making games&quot;. Computer games were fascinating to him because they offered a way to bridge the gap between logic and emotion, and Pajitnov held interests in both mathematics and puzzles, as well as the psychology of computing.

Searching for inspiration, Pajitnov recalled his childhood memories of playing pentominoes, a game in which the user creates pictures using its shapes. Remembering the difficulty he had in putting the pieces back into their box, Pajitnov felt inspired to create a game based on that concept. Using an Electronika 60 in the Computing Centre, he began working on what would become the first version of &quot;Tetris&quot;. Building the first prototype in two weeks, Pajitnov spent longer playtesting and adding to the game, completing it on June 6, 1985. This primitive version did not have levels or a scoring system, but Pajitnov knew he had a potentially great game, since he could not stop playing it at work.

The game attracted the interest of coworkers like fellow programmer Dmitri Pevlovsky, who helped Pajitnov connect with Vadim Gerasimov, a 16-year-old intern at the Soviet Academy. Pajitnov wanted to make a color version of &quot;Tetris&quot; for the IBM Personal Computer, and enlisted the intern to help. Gerasimov created the PC version in less than three weeks, and with contributions from Pevlovsky, spent an additional month adding new features like scorekeeping and sound effects. The game, first available in the Soviet Union, received international releases through Mirrorsoft and Spectrum Holobyte in 1988.

Pajitnov created a sequel to &quot;Tetris&quot;, entitled &quot;Welltris&quot;, which has the same principle, but in a three-dimensional environment where the player sees the playing area from above.

&quot;Tetris&quot; was licensed and managed by Soviet company ELORG, which had a monopoly on the import and export of computer hardware and software in the Soviet Union, and advertised with the slogan &quot;From Russia with Love&quot; (on NES: &quot;From Russia with Fun!&quot;). Because he was employed by the Soviet Academy of Sciences, Pajitnov did not receive royalties.

Pajitnov, together with Vladimir Pokhilko, moved to the United States following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, and in 1996 founded The Tetris Company with Henk Rogers, which, in combination with the rights reverting to him in 1995 or 1996, finally allowed him to collect royalties from his game. He helped design the puzzles in the Super NES versions of &quot;Yoshi&#x27;s Cookie&quot; and designed the game &quot;Pandora&#x27;s Box&quot;, which incorporates more traditional jigsaw-style puzzles. Pajitnov and Pokhilko founded the 3D software technology company AnimaTek, which developed the game / screensaver El-Fish.

He was employed by Microsoft from October 1996 until 2005. While there, he worked on the &quot;Microsoft Entertainment Pack: The Puzzle Collection&quot;, MSN Mind Aerobics and MSN Games groups. Pajitnov&#x27;s new, enhanced version of &quot;Hexic&quot;, &quot;Hexic HD&quot;, was included with every new Xbox 360 Premium package.

In August 2005, WildSnake Software announced that Pajitnov would be collaborating with them to release a new line of puzzle games.

== Personal life ==
Pajitnov moved to the United States in 1991, was naturalized as a U.S. citizen and now lives in Clyde Hill, Washington. He has a wife, Nina, with whom he had two sons named Peter and Dmitri.

=== Political views ===
After the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, Pajitnov issued a statement condemning the war and stating that he was &quot;sure that Putin and his hateful regime will fall down and the normal peaceful way of living will be restored in Ukraine and, hopefully, in Russia&quot;.

==Games==
==Awards and recognition==
In 1996, GameSpot named him as the fourth most influential computer game developer of all time. In March 2007, he received the Game Developers Choice Awards First Penguin Award. The award was given for pioneering the casual games market.

In June 2009, he received the honorary award at the LARA - Der Deutsche Games Award in Cologne, Germany. In 2012, IGN included Pajitnov on their list of 5 Memorable Video Game Industry One-Hit Wonders, calling him &quot;the ultimate video game one-hit wonder.&quot; In 2015, Pajitnov won the Bizkaia Award at the Fun &amp; Serious Game Festival.

Pajitnov was portrayed by Russian actor Nikita Yefremov in the 2023 movie &quot;Tetris&quot;, a dramatised retelling of the licensing bidding war for Tetris in the late 1980s.

==See also==

*&quot;BreakThru!&quot;, video game endorsed by Pajitnov
*&quot;ClockWerx&quot;, video game endorsed by Pajitnov

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

*&quot;Alexey L. Pajitnov&quot; profile at MobyGames
*Tetris Creator Claims &quot;Free and Open Source Software&quot; Destroys the Market.
*&quot;Tetris — From Russia with Love&quot;, BBC documentary</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92600" start="0" end="27" title="Alexey Pajitnov" label="Alexey Leonidovich Pajitnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q428691" start="76" end="93" title="Computer engineering" label="computer engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12336660" start="98" end="115" title="video game design" label="video game design"/>
<link wikidata="Q71910" start="182" end="188" title="Tetris" label="Tetris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129931" start="224" end="252" title="Dorodnitsyn Computing Centre" label="Dorodnitsyn Computing Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370801" start="263" end="302" title="Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union" label="Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q83172" start="312" end="339" title="Russian Academy of Sciences" label="Russian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981796" start="450" end="458" title="Welltris" label="Welltris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522981" start="565" end="583" title="The Tetris Company" label="The Tetris Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291549" start="620" end="631" title="Henk Rogers" label="Henk Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="699" end="708" title="royalties" label="royalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="753" end="795" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="the Soviet Union had disintegrated by 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="834" end="841" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33521" start="1558" end="1577" title="applied mathematics" label="applied mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719898" start="1585" end="1610" title="Moscow Aviation Institute" label="Moscow Aviation Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q83172" start="1677" end="1703" title="Russian Academy of Sciences" label="Soviet Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129931" start="1808" end="1836" title="Dorodnitsyn Computing Centre" label="Dorodnitsyn Computing Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q247406" start="2354" end="2363" title="pentomino" label="pentomino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327161" start="2576" end="2590" title="Electronika 60" label="Electronika 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="2863" end="2869" title="Level (video games)" label="levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q522344" start="2875" end="2889" title="Score (game)" label="scoring system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136981" start="3106" end="3121" title="Vadim Gerasimov" label="Vadim Gerasimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="3237" end="3258" title="IBM Personal Computer" label="IBM Personal Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981796" start="3668" end="3676" title="Welltris" label="Welltris"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="3723" end="3740" title="3D computer graphics" label="three-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358790" start="3867" end="3872" title="ELORG" label="ELORG"/>
<link wikidata="Q822879" start="4205" end="4222" title="Vladimir Pokhilko" label="Vladimir Pokhilko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522981" start="4323" end="4341" title="The Tetris Company" label="The Tetris Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291549" start="4347" end="4358" title="Henk Rogers" label="Henk Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="4524" end="4533" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328124" start="4552" end="4571" title="Yoshi&amp;#x27;s Cookie" label="Yoshi&amp;#x27;s Cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130701" start="4606" end="4624" title="Pandora&amp;#x27;s Box (1999 video game)" label="Pandora&amp;#x27;s Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q181008" start="4668" end="4688" title="jigsaw puzzle" label="jigsaw-style puzzles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049661" start="4804" end="4811" title="El-Fish" label="El-Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="4833" end="4842" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4909" end="4960" title="Microsoft Entertainment Pack: The Puzzle Collection" label="Microsoft Entertainment Pack: The Puzzle Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049573" start="4990" end="4999" title="MSN Games" label="MSN Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055379" start="5055" end="5060" title="Hexic" label="Hexic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="5118" end="5126" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5346" end="5375" title="Citizenship of the United States#Naturalized citizenship" label="naturalized as a U.S. citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505600" start="5393" end="5415" title="Clyde Hill, Washington" label="Clyde Hill, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="5523" end="5550" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="5647" end="5652" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45836" start="5837" end="5845" title="GameSpot" label="GameSpot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485157" start="5887" end="5900" title="PC game" label="computer game"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5955" end="6004" title="Game Developers Choice Awards#The Pioneer Award" label="Game Developers Choice Awards First Penguin Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="6154" end="6170" title="Cologne" label="Cologne, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="6181" end="6184" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q48893282" start="6380" end="6411" title="Fun &amp;amp; Serious Game Festival" label="Fun &amp;amp; Serious Game Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4177512" start="6454" end="6469" title="Nikita Yefremov" label="Nikita Yefremov"/>
<link wikidata="Q104044312" start="6494" end="6500" title="Tetris (film)" label="Tetris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959234" start="6612" end="6622" title="BreakThru! (video game)" label="BreakThru!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134774" start="6669" end="6678" title="ClockWerx" label="ClockWerx"/>
<link wikidata="Q612975" start="6807" end="6816" title="MobyGames" label="MobyGames"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3019" wikidata="Q216954" url="?curid=3019" title="ʻAbdu'l-Bahá">
<text>ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá (; Persian: , ;, 23 May 1844 – 28 November 1921), born ʻAbbás (, ), was the eldest son of Baháʼu&#x27;lláh, founder of the Bahá’í Faith, who designated him to be his successor and head of the Baháʼí Faith from 1892 until 1921. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was later cited as the last of three &quot;central figures&quot; of the religion, along with Baháʼu&#x27;lláh and the Báb, and his writings and authenticated talks are regarded as sources of Baháʼí sacred literature.

He was born in Tehran to an aristocratic family. At the age of eight, his father was imprisoned during a government crackdown on the Bábí Faith and the family&#x27;s possessions were looted, leaving them in virtual poverty. His father was exiled from their native Iran, and the family established their residence in Baghdad in Iraq, where they stayed for ten years. They were later called by the Ottoman state to Istanbul before entering another period of confinement in Edirne and finally the prison-city of ʻAkká (Acre). ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá remained a prisoner there until the Young Turk Revolution freed him in 1908 at the age of 64. He then made several journeys to the West to spread the Baháʼí message beyond its middle-eastern roots, but the onset of World War I left him largely confined to Haifa from 1914 to 1918. Following the war, the openly hostile Ottoman authorities were replaced by the British Mandate over Palestine, during which time he was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire for his help in averting famine following the war.

In 1892, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was appointed in his father&#x27;s will to be his successor and head of the Baháʼí Faith. His &quot;Tablets of the Divine Plan&quot; galvanized Baháʼís in North America to spread the Baháʼí teachings to new territories, and his Will and Testament laid the foundation for the current Baháʼí administrative order. Many of his writings, prayers and letters are extant, and his discourses with the Western Baháʼís emphasize the growth of the religion by the late 1890s.

ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&#x27;s given name was ʻAbbás. Depending on context, he would have gone by either Mírzá ʻAbbás (Persian) or ʻAbbás Effendi (Turkish), both of which are equivalent to the English Sir ʻAbbás. During most of his time as head of the Bahá&#x27;í Faith, he used and preferred the title of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá (&quot;servant of Bahá&quot;, a reference to his father). He is commonly referred to in Baháʼí texts as &quot;The Master&quot;.

==Early life==

ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was born in Tehran, Persia (now Iran) on 23 May 1844 (5th of Jamadiyu&#x27;l-Avval, 1260 AH), the eldest son of Baháʼu&#x27;lláh and Navváb. He was born on the same night on which the Báb declared his mission. Given the name ʻAbbás at birth, he was named after his grandfather Mírzá ʻAbbás Núrí, a prominent and powerful nobleman. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&#x27;s early years were shaped by his father&#x27;s prominent role within the Bábí community. As a child, he fondly recalled interactions with the Bábí, Táhirih, describing how she would take him on her knee, caress him, and engage in heartfelt conversations, leaving a lasting impression on him. His childhood was characterized by happiness and carefree moments. The family&#x27;s residences in Tehran and the countryside were not only comfortable but also beautifully adorned. Alongside his younger siblings – a sister, Bahíyyih, and a brother, Mihdí – he experienced a life of privilege, joy, and comfort. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá loved playing in the gardens with his younger sister, fostering a strong bond between them. During his formative years, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá observed his parents&#x27; commitment to various charitable endeavors, including the conversion of part of their home into a hospital ward for women and children.

Due to a life largely marked by exile and imprisonment, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá had limited opportunities for formal schooling. In his youth, it was customary for children of nobility, including ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá, not to attend conventional schools. Instead, noblemen typically received brief education at home, focusing on subjects such as scripture, rhetoric, calligraphy, and basic mathematics, with an emphasis on preparing for life within royal courts.

ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá spent only a short period at a traditional preparatory school at the age of seven for a single year. Rather, his mother and uncle took on the responsibility of his early education, but the primary source of his learning was his father. In 1890 Edward Granville Browne described ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá, saying that &quot;one more eloquent of speech, more ready of argument, more apt of illustration, more intimately acquainted with the sacred books of the Jews, the Christians, and the Muhammadans...could scarcely be found...&quot;

According to contemporary accounts ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was an eloquent and charming child. At the age of seven, he faced a severe health challenge when he contracted tuberculosis, and his prognosis suggested death. Though the illness abated, this marked the beginning of a lifelong struggle with recurrent bouts of various illnesses that would persist throughout his life.

One event that affected ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá greatly during his childhood was the imprisonment of his father when ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was eight years old; this circumstance led to a considerable decline in the family&#x27;s economic standing, subjecting him to poverty and exposing him to hostility from other children in the streets. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá accompanied his mother to visit Baháʼu&#x27;lláh who was then imprisoned in the infamous subterranean dungeon the Síyáh-Chál. He described how &quot;I saw a dark, steep place. We entered a small, narrow doorway, and went down two steps, but beyond those one could see nothing. In the middle of the stairway, all of a sudden we heard His [Baháʼu&#x27;lláh&#x27;s]…voice: &#x27;Do not bring him in here&#x27;, and so they took me back&quot;.

== Baghdad ==

Baháʼu&#x27;lláh was eventually released from prison but was ordered into exile, and ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá, then eight years old, joined his father on the journey to Baghdad in the winter (January to April) of 1853. During the journey ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá suffered from frost-bite. After a year of difficulties, Baháʼu&#x27;lláh absented himself rather than continuing to face the conflict with Mirza Yahya and secluded himself in the mountains of Sulaymaniyah in April 1854, a month before ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&#x27;s tenth birthday Due to mutual sorrow, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá, his mother and sister becoming constant companions. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was particularly close to both, and his mother took an active role in his education and upbringing. During the two-year absence of his father ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá took up the duty of managing the affairs of the family, before his age of maturity (14 in Middle-Eastern society) and was known to be occupied with reading and, at a time of hand-copied scriptures being the primary means of publishing, was also engaged in copying the writings of the Báb. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá also took an interest in the art of horseback riding, and as he grew, he became a renowned rider.

In 1856, news of an ascetic engaging in discourses with local Súfí leaders reached the family and friends, raising hopes that it could be Bahá’u’lláh. Immediately, family members and friends went to search for the elusive dervish – and in March brought Baháʼu&#x27;lláh back to Baghdad. On seeing his father, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá fell to his knees and wept loudly &quot;Why did you leave us?&quot;, and his mother and sister did the same. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá soon became his father&#x27;s secretary and shield. During the sojourn in the city ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá grew from a boy into a young man. He was noted as a &quot;remarkably fine looking youth&quot;, and remembered for his charity. Having passed the age of maturity, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was regularly seen in the mosques of Baghdad discussing religious topics and the scripture as a young man. Whilst in Baghdad, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá composed a commentary at the request of his father on the Muslim tradition of &quot;I was a Hidden Treasure&quot; for a Súfí leader named ʻAlí Shawkat Páshá. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was fifteen or sixteen at the time and ʻAlí Shawkat Páshá regarded the more than 11,000-word essay as a remarkable feat for someone of his age. In 1863, in what became known as the Garden of Ridván, his father Baháʼu&#x27;lláh announced to a few companions that he was the manifestation of God and He whom God shall make manifest whose coming had been foretold by the Báb. On day eight of the twelve days, it is reported that ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was the first person to whom Baháʼu&#x27;lláh revealed his claim.

== Istanbul/Adrianople ==

In 1863, Baháʼu&#x27;lláh was summoned to Istanbul, and thus his family, including ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá, then eighteen, accompanied him on his 110-day journey. The journey to Constantinople was another wearisome voyage, and ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá helped feed the exiles. It was here that his position became more prominent amongst the Baháʼís. This was further solidified by Baháʼu&#x27;lláh&#x27;s tablet of the Branch in which he constantly exalts his son&#x27;s virtues and station. Bahá’u’lláh and his family were soon exiled to Adrianople, and on this journey ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá again suffered from frostbite.

In Adrianople ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was regarded as the sole comforter of his family – in particular to his mother. At this point ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was known by the Baháʼís as &quot;the Master&quot;, and by non-Baháʼís as ʻAbbás Effendi (&quot;Effendi&quot; signifies &quot;Sir&quot;). It was in Adrianople that Baháʼu&#x27;lláh referred to his son as &quot;the Mystery of God&quot;. The title of &quot;Mystery of God&quot; symbolises, according to Baháʼís, that ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá is not a manifestation of God but that in the &quot;person of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá the incompatible characteristics of a human nature and superhuman knowledge and perfection have been blended and are completely harmonized&quot;. Baháʼu&#x27;lláh gave his son many other titles such as &quot;G͟husn-i-Aʻzam&quot; (meaning &quot;Mightiest Branch&quot; or &quot;Mightier Branch&quot;), the &quot;Branch of Holiness&quot;, &quot;the Center of the Covenant&quot; and the apple of his eye. Upon learning of yet another exile of Bahá’u’llah, this time to Palestine, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá (&quot;the Master&quot;) was devastated when hearing the news that he and his family were to be exiled separately from Baháʼu&#x27;lláh. It was, according to Baháʼís, through his intercession that the idea was reverted and the rest of the family were allowed to be exiled together.

== ʻAkká ==

At the age of 24, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was clearly chief-steward to his father and an outstanding member of the Baháʼí community. In 1868 Baháʼu&#x27;lláh and his family were exiled to the penal colony of ʻAkká, Palestine where it was expected that the family would perish. Arrival in ʻAkká was distressing for the family and exiles when they were met by a hostile local population. When told that the women were to sit on the shoulders of the men to reach the shore, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá obtained chairs to carry the women to land. His sister and father fell dangerously ill. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was able to procure some anesthetic and nursed the sick. The Baháʼís were imprisoned under horrendous conditions in a cluster of cells covered in excrement and dirt. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá himself fell dangerously ill with dysentery, and a sympathetic soldier permitted a physician to attend to him. The population shunned them, the soldiers treated them badly, and the behaviour of Siyyid Muhammad-i-Isfahani (an Azali) aggravated matters. Morale declined further with the accidental death of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&#x27;s youngest brother Mírzá Mihdí at the age of 22. The grieving ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá kept a night-long vigil beside his brother&#x27;s body.

=== Later in ʻAkká ===

Over time, he gradually assumed responsibility for the relationships between the small Baháʼí exile community and the outside world. It was through his interaction with the people of ʻAkká (Acre) that, they recognized the innocence of the Baháʼís, and thus the conditions of imprisonment were eased. Four months after the death of Mihdí the family moved from the prison to the House of ʻAbbúd. Gradually the respect of the local population for the Baháʼís increased, and in particular, for ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá who soon became very popular in the penal colony. Myron Henry Phelps a wealthy New York lawyer described how &quot;a crowd of human beings...Syrians, Arabs, Ethiopians, and many others&quot;, all waited to talk and receive ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá. With the passage of time ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was able to rent alternative accommodations for the family, and eventually the family moved to the Mansion of Bahjí around 1879 when an epidemic caused its residents to flee.

ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá undertook a history of the Bábí religion through publication of A Traveller&#x27;s Narrative (Makála-i-Shakhsí Sayyáh) in 1886, later translated and published in translation in 1891 through Cambridge University through the agency of Edward Granville Browne.

===Marriage and family life===

When ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was a young man, speculation was rife amongst the Baháʼís as to whom he would marry. Several young girls were seen as marriage prospects but ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá seemed disinclined to marriage. On 8 March 1873, at the urging of his father, the twenty-eight-year-old ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá married Fátimih Nahrí of Isfahán (1847–1938) a twenty-five-year-old from an upper-class family of the city. Her father was Mírzá Muḥammad ʻAlí Nahrí of Isfahan, an eminent Baháʼí with prominent connections. Fátimih was brought from Persia to ʻAkká after both Baháʼu&#x27;lláh and his wife Navváb expressed an interest that she marries ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá. After a wearisome journey from Isfahán to Akka she finally arrived accompanied by her brother in 1872. The young couple were betrothed for about five months before the marriage itself commenced. In the meantime, Fátimih lived in the home of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&#x27;s uncle Mírzá Músá. According to her later memoirs, Fátimih fell in love with ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá on seeing him. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá himself had showed little inkling to marriage until meeting Fátimih; who was entitled Munírih by Baháʼu&#x27;lláh. Munírih is a title meaning &quot;Luminous&quot;.

The marriage resulted in nine children. The first born was a son Mihdí Effendi who died aged about 3. He was followed by Ḍíyáʼíyyih K͟hánum, Fuʼádíyyih K͟hánum (who dies very young), Rúhangíz Khánum (d. 1893), Túbá Khánum, Husayn Effendi (d. 1887 aged 5), Túbá K͟hánum, Rúhá K͟hánum (mother of Munib Shahid), and Munnavar K͟hánum. The death of his children caused ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá immense grief – in particular the death of his son Husayn Effendi came at a difficult time following the death of his mother and uncle. The surviving children (all daughters) were; Ḍíyáʼíyyih K͟hánum (mother of Shoghi Effendi) (d. 1951) Túbá K͟hánum (1880–1959) Rúḥá K͟hánum and Munavvar K͟hánum (d. 1971). Baháʼu&#x27;lláh wished that the Baháʼís follow the example of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá and gradually move away from polygamy. The marriage of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá to one woman and his choice to remain monogamous, from advice of his father and his own wish, legitimised the practice of monogamy to a people who hitherto had regarded polygamy as a righteous way of life.

==Early years of his ministry==

After Baháʼu&#x27;lláh died on 29 May 1892, the Book of the Covenant of Baháʼu&#x27;lláh (his will) named ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá as Centre of the Covenant, successor and interpreter of Baháʼu&#x27;lláh&#x27;s writings.

Baháʼu&#x27;lláh designates his successor with the following verses:
In Baháʼu&#x27;lláh&#x27;s will, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&#x27;s half-brother, Muhammad ʻAlí, was mentioned by name as being subordinate to ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá. Muhammad ʻAlí became jealous of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá and set out to establish authority for himself as an alternative leader with the support of his brothers Badi’u&#x27;llah and Ḍíyáʼu&#x27;llah. He began correspondence with Baháʼís in Iran, initially in secret, casting doubts in others&#x27; minds about ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá. While most Baháʼís followed ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá, a handful followed Muhammad ʻAlí including such prominent Bahá’ís as Mirza Javad and Ibrahim George Kheiralla, an early Baháʼí missionary to America. 

Muhammad ʻAlí and Mirza Javad began to openly accuse ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá of assuming too much authority, suggesting that he believed himself to be a Manifestation of God, equal in status to Baháʼu&#x27;lláh. It was at this time that ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá, to counter the accusations leveled against him, stated in tablets to the West that he was to be known as &quot;ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&quot; an Arabic phrase meaning the Servant of Bahá to make it clear that he was not a Manifestation of God, and that his station was only servitude. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá left a Will and Testament that established the framework of the administration of the Baháʼí Faith, the two highest institutions of which were the Universal House of Justice, and the Guardianship, for which he appointed his grandson Shoghi Effendi as the Guardian. With the exception of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá and Shoghi Effendi, Muhammad ʻAlí was supported by all of the remaining male relatives of Baháʼu&#x27;lláh, including Shoghi Effendi&#x27;s father, Mírzá Hádí Shírází. However, in general the Bahá’ís experienced very little effect from the propaganda of Muhammad ʻAlí and his allies; in the ʻAkká area, the followers of Muhammad ʻAlí represented six families at most, had no common religious activities, and were almost wholly assimilated into Muslim society.

Religions in the past faced schism and doctrinal drift after the death of their prophet founders. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá however managed to preserve the unity and doctrinal integrity of the Baháʼí Faith, even in the face of serious threats from his half-brother’s opposition. His success is especially notable given that even in the midst of these attacks his leadership brought about considerable expansion of the Baháʼí community beyond its initial cultural and geographic roots.

=== First Western pilgrims ===

By the end of 1898, Western pilgrims started traveling to Akka on pilgrimage to visit ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá; this group of pilgrims, including Phoebe Hearst, was the first time that Baháʼís raised up in the West had met ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá. The first group arrived in 1898 and throughout late 1898 to early 1899 Western Baháʼís sporadically visited ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá. The group was relatively young containing mainly women from high American society in their 20s. The group of Westerners aroused suspicion for the authorities, and consequently ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&#x27;s confinement was tightened. During the next decade ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá would be in constant communication with Baháʼís around the world, encouraging them to teach the religion; the group included Susan Moody, Lua Getsinger, Laura Clifford Barney, Herbert Hopper and May Ellis Bolles in Paris (all Americans); Englishman Thomas Breakwell; and Frenchman . It was Laura Clifford Barney who, by asking questions of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá over many years and many visits to Haifa, compiled what later became the book Some Answered Questions.

===Ministry, 1901–1912===

During the final years of the 19th century, while ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was still officially a prisoner and confined to ʻAkka, he organized the transfer of the remains of the Báb from Iran to Palestine. He then organized the purchase of land on Mount Carmel that Baháʼu&#x27;lláh had instructed should be used to lay the remains of the Báb, and organized for the construction of the Shrine of the Báb. This process took another 10 years. With the increase of pilgrims visiting ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá, Muhammad ʻAlí conspired with the Ottoman authorities to re-introduce stricter terms on ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&#x27;s imprisonment in August 1901. By 1902, however, due to the support of the Governor of ʻAkka, the situation was greatly eased; while pilgrims were able to once again visit ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá, he was still confined to the city. In February 1903, two followers of Muhammad ʻAlí, including Badiʻu&#x27;llah and Siyyid ʻAliy-i-Afnan, broke with Muhammad ʻAli and wrote books and letters giving details of Muhammad ʻAli&#x27;s plots and noting that what was circulating about ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was fabrication.

From 1902 to 1904, even as ‘Abdu’l-Bahá directed the construction of the Shrine of the Báb, he initiated execution of two additional projects; the restoration of the House of the Báb in Shiraz, Iran and the construction of the first Baháʼí House of Worship in Ashgabat, Turkmenistan. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá asked Aqa Mirza Aqa to coordinate the restoration of the house of the Báb to its state at the time of the Báb&#x27;s declaration to Mulla Husayn in 1844; he also entrusted the work on the House of Worship to Vakil-u&#x27;d-Dawlih.

In his role as head of the Bahá’í Faith, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá would occasionally communicate with leaders of thought to offer commentary and guidance based on the Bahá’í teachings, and in defense of the Bahá’í community. During this period, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá communicated with a number of Young Turks, who sought to reform to the reign of Sultan Abdul Hamid II, including Namık Kemal, Ziya Pasha and Midhat Pasha. He emphasized Baháʼís &quot;seek freedom and love liberty, hope for equality, are well-wishers of humanity and ready to sacrifice their lives to unite humanity&quot; but on a more broad approach than the Young Turks. Abdullah Cevdet, one of the founders of the Committee of Union and Progress who considered the Baháʼí Faith an intermediary step between Islam and the ultimate abandonment of religious belief, would go on trial for defense of Baháʼís in a periodical he founded.

‛Abdu&#x27;l-Bahá also had contact with military leaders, including such individuals as Bursalı Mehmet Tahir Bey and Hasan Bedreddin. The latter, who in an earlier period was involved in the overthrow of Sultan Abdülaziz in 1876, is commonly known as Bedri Paşa or Bedri Pasha and is referred to in Persian Baháʼí sources as Bedri Bey (Badri Beg). He probably came to know ‘Abdu’l-Baha around 1898 when he served in the Ottoman administration in Akká. Persian sources cite him was a Baháʼí and he who translated ‛Abdu&#x27;l-Baha&#x27;s works into French. ‘Abdu’l-Bahá continued to communicate with him for several years when he was governor of Albania.

ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá also met Muhammad Abduh, one of the key figures of Islamic Modernism and the Salafi movement, in Beirut, at a time when the two men shared similar goals of religious reform. Rashid Rida asserts that during his visits to Beirut, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá would attend Abduh&#x27;s study sessions. Regarding the meetings of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá and Muhammad ʻAbduh, Shoghi Effendi asserts that &quot;His several interviews with the well-known Shaykh Muhammad ʻAbdu served to enhance immensely the growing prestige of the community and spread abroad the fame of its most distinguished member.&quot;

Due to Muhammad ʻAli&#x27;s accusations against him, a Commission of Inquiry interviewed ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá in 1905, almost resulting in exile to Fezzan. In response, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá wrote the sultan a letter protesting that his followers refrain from involvement in partisan politics and that his &quot;tariqa&quot; had guided many Americans to Islam. The next few years in ʻAkka were relatively free of pressures and pilgrims were able to come and visit ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá. By 1909 the mausoleum of the Shrine of the Báb was completed. 

==Journeys to the West==

The 1908 Young Turks revolution liberated all political and religious prisoners in the Ottoman Empire, and ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was freed from imprisonment. His first action after his liberation was to visit the Shrine of Baháʼu&#x27;lláh in Bahji. While ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá continued to live in ʻAkka immediately following the revolution, he soon moved to live in Haifa near the Shrine of the Báb. In 1910, with the freedom to leave the country, he embarked on a three-year journey to Egypt, Europe, and North America, spreading the Baháʼí message.

From August to December 1911, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá visited cities in Europe, including London, Bristol, and Paris. The purpose of these trips was to support the Baháʼí communities in the west and to further spread his father&#x27;s teachings.

In the following year, he undertook a much more extensive journey to the United States and Canada to once again spread his father&#x27;s teachings. He arrived in New York City on 11 April 1912, after declining an offer of passage on the RMS &quot;Titanic&quot;, telling the Baháʼí believers, instead, to &quot;Donate this to charity.&quot; He instead travelled on a slower craft, the RMS &quot;Cedric&quot;, and cited preference of a longer sea journey as the reason. After hearing of the Titanic&#x27;s sinking on 16 April he was quoted as saying &quot;I was asked to sail upon the Titanic, but my heart did not prompt me to do so.&quot; While he spent most of his time in New York, he visited Chicago, Cleveland, Pittsburgh, Washington, D.C.,Boston and Philadelphia. In August of the same year he started a more extensive journey to places including New Hampshire, the Green Acre school in Maine, and Montreal (his only visit to Canada). He then travelled west to Minneapolis, Minnesota; San Francisco; Stanford; and Los Angeles, California before returning east at the end of October. On 5 December 1912 he set sail back to Europe.

During his visit to North America he visited many missions, churches, and groups, as well as having scores of meetings in homes of Baháʼís, and offering innumerable personal meetings with hundreds of people. During his talks he proclaimed Baháʼí principles such as the unity of God, unity of the religions, oneness of humanity, equality of women and men, world peace and economic justice. He also insisted that all his meetings be open to all races.

His visit and talks were the subject of hundreds of newspaper articles. In Boston newspaper reporters asked ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá why he had come to America, and he stated that he had come to participate in conferences on peace and that just giving warning messages is not enough. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&#x27;s visit to Montreal provided notable newspaper coverage; on the night of his arrival the editor of the &quot;Montreal Daily Star&quot; met with him and that newspaper along with &quot;The Montreal Gazette&quot;, &quot;Montreal Standard&quot;, and among others reported on ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&#x27;s activities. The headlines in those papers included &quot;Persian Teacher to Preach Peace&quot;, &quot;Racialism Wrong, Says Eastern Sage, Strife and War Caused by Religious and National Prejudices&quot;, and &quot;Apostle of Peace Meets Socialists, Abdul Baha&#x27;s Novel Scheme for Distribution of Surplus Wealth.&quot; The &quot;Montreal Standard&quot;, which was distributed across Canada, took so much interest that it republished the articles a week later; the Gazette published six articles and Montreal&#x27;s largest French language newspaper published two articles about him. His 1912 visit to Montreal also inspired humourist Stephen Leacock to parody him in his bestselling 1914 book &quot;Arcadian Adventures with the Idle Rich&quot;. In Chicago one newspaper headline included &quot;His Holiness Visits Us, Not Pius X but A. Baha,&quot; and ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&#x27;s visit to California was reported in the &quot;Palo Altan&quot;.

Back in Europe, he visited London, Edinburgh, Paris (where he stayed for two months), Stuttgart, Budapest, and Vienna. Finally, on 12 June 1913, he returned to Egypt, where he stayed for six months before returning to Haifa.

On 23 February 1914, at the eve of World War I, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá hosted Baron Edmond James de Rothschild, a member of the Rothschild banking family who was a leading advocate and financier of the Zionist movement, during one of his early trips to Palestine.

==Final years (1914–1921)==

During World War I (1914–1918) ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá stayed in Palestine and was unable to travel. He carried on a limited correspondence, which included the &quot;Tablets of the Divine Plan&quot;, a collection of fourteen letters addressed to the Baháʼís of North America, later described as one of three &quot;charters&quot; of the Baháʼí Faith. The letters assign a leadership role for the North American Baháʼís in spreading the religion around the planet.

Haifa was under real threat of Allied bombardment, enough that ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá and other Baháʼís temporarily retreated to the hills east of ʻAkka.

ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was also under threats from Cemal Paşa, the Ottoman military chief who at one point expressed his desire to crucify him and destroy Baháʼí properties in Palestine. The swift Megiddo offensive of the British General Allenby swept away the Turkish forces in Palestine before harm was done to the Baháʼís, and the war was over less than two months later.

===Post-war period===

The conclusion of World War I led to the openly hostile Ottoman authorities being replaced by the more friendly British Mandate, allowing for a renewal of correspondence, pilgrims, and development of the Baháʼí World Centre properties. It was during this revival of activity that the Baháʼí Faith saw an expansion and consolidation in places like Egypt, the Caucasus, Iran, Turkmenistan, North America and South Asia under the leadership of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá.

The end of the war brought about several political developments on which ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá commented. The League of Nations formed in January 1920, representing the first instance of collective security through a worldwide organization. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá had written in 1875 for the need to establish a &quot;Union of the nations of the world&quot;, and he praised the attempt through the League of Nations as an important step towards the goal. He also said that it was &quot;incapable of establishing Universal Peace&quot; because it did not represent all nations and had only trivial power over its member states. Around the same time, the British Mandate supported the ongoing immigration of Jews to Palestine. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá mentioned the immigration as a fulfillment of prophecy, and encouraged the Zionists to develop the land and &quot;elevate the country for all its inhabitants... They must not work to separate the Jews from the other Palestinians.&quot;

The war also left the region in famine. In 1901, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá had purchased about 1704 acres of scrubland near the Jordan river and by 1907 many Baháʼís from Iran had begun sharecropping on the land. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá received between 20 and 33% of their harvest (or cash equivalent), which was shipped to Haifa. With the war still raging in 1917, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá received a large amount of wheat from the crops, and also bought other available wheat and shipped it back to Haifa. The wheat arrived just after the British captured Palestine, and as such was widely distributed to allay the famine. For this service in averting a famine in Northern Palestine he received the honour of Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire at a ceremony held in his honor at the home of the British Governor on 27 April 1920. He was later visited by General Allenby, King Faisal (later King of Iraq), Herbert Samuel (High Commissioner for Palestine), and Ronald Storrs (Military Governor of Jerusalem).

===Death and funeral===

ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá died on Monday, 28 November 1921, sometime after 1:15 a.m. (27th of Rabi&#x27; al-awwal, 1340 AH).

Then Colonial Secretary Winston Churchill telegraphed the High Commissioner for Palestine, &quot;convey to the Baháʼí Community, on behalf of His Majesty&#x27;s Government, their sympathy and condolence.&quot; Similar messages came from Viscount Allenby, the Council of Ministers of Iraq, and others.

On his funeral, which was held the next day, Esslemont notes:
Among the talks delivered at the funeral, Shoghi Effendi records Stewart Symes (Governor of the Palestine North District) giving the following tribute:
He was buried in the front room of the Shrine of the Báb on Mount Carmel. His interment there is meant to be temporary, until his own mausoleum can be built in the vicinity of Riḍván Garden, known as the Shrine of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá.

===Legacy===
ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá left a &quot;Will and Testament&quot; that was originally written between 1901 and 1908 and addressed to Shoghi Effendi, who at that time was only 4–11 years old. The will appoints Shoghi Effendi as the first in a line of Guardians of the religion, a hereditary executive role that may provide authoritative interpretations of scripture. ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá directed all Baháʼís to turn to him and obey him, and assured him of divine protection and guidance. The will also provided a formal reiteration of his teachings, such as the instructions to teach, manifest spiritual qualities, associate with all people, and shun Covenant-breakers. Many obligations of the Universal House of Justice and the Hands of the Cause were also elaborated. Shoghi Effendi later described the document as one of three &quot;charters&quot; of the Baháʼí Faith.

The authenticity and provisions of the will were almost universally accepted by Baháʼís around the world, with the exception of Ruth White and a few other Americans who tried to protest Shoghi Effendi&#x27;s leadership.

In volumes of &quot;The Baháʼí World&quot; published in 1930 and 1933, Shoghi Effendi named nineteen Baháʼís as disciples of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá and heralds of the Covenant, including Thornton Chase, , John Esslemont, Lua Getsinger, and Robert Turner. No other statements about them have been found in Shoghi Effendi&#x27;s writings.

During his lifetime there was some ambiguity among Baháʼís as to his station relative to Baháʼu&#x27;lláh, and later to Shoghi Effendi. Some American newspapers erroneously reported him to be a Baháʼí prophet or the return of Christ. Shoghi Effendi later formalized his legacy as the last of three &quot;Central Figures&quot; of the Baháʼí Faith and the &quot;Perfect exemplar&quot; of the teachings, also claiming that holding him on an equal status to Baháʼu&#x27;lláh or Jesus was heretical. Shoghi Effendi also wrote that during the anticipated Baháʼí dispensation of 1000 years there will be no equal to ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá.

== Appearance and personality ==
ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was described as handsome, and bore striking resemblance to his mother. As an adult he reached medium height but he gave the impression of being taller. He had dark hair that flowed to his shoulders, grey coloured eyes, a fair complexion and an aquiline nose. In 1890, Orientalist Edward Granville Browne met him and wrote:

After the death of Bahá’u’lláh, ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá began to visibly age. By the late 1890s his hair had turned snow-white and deep lines set on his face. As a young man he was athletic and enjoyed archery, horseback riding and swimming. Even later in his life ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá remained active going for long walks in Haifa and Acre.

ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was a major presence for the Bahá’ís during his lifetime, and he continues to influence the Bahá’í community today. Bahá’ís regard ‘Abdu’l-Bahá as the perfect example of the teachings of his father and therefore strive to emulate him. Anecdotes about him are frequently used to illustrate particular points about morality and interpersonal relations. He was remembered for his charisma, compassion, philanthropy and strength in the face of suffering. John Esslemont reflected that &quot;[‘Abdu’l-Bahá] showed that it is still possible, amid the whirl and rush of modern life, amid the self-love and struggle for material prosperity that everywhere prevail, to live the life of entire devotion to God and to the service of one&#x27;s fellows.&quot;

Even ardent enemies of the Bahá’í Faith were on occasion taken by meeting him. Mírzá &#x27;Abdu&#x27;l-Muḥammad Írání Mu&#x27;addibu&#x27;s-Sulṭán, an Iranian, and Shaykh &#x27;Alí Yúsuf, an Arab, were both newspaper editors in Egypt who had published harsh attacks on the Bahá’í Faith in their papers. They called on ‘Abdu’l-Bahá when he was in Egypt and their attitude changed. Similarly, a Christian clergyman, Rev. J.T. Bixby, who was the author of a hostile article on the Bahá’í Faith in the United States, felt compelled to witness Abdu&#x27;l-Bahá&#x27;s personal qualities. The effect of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá on those who were already committed Bahá’ís was greater still.

ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá was widely known for his encounters with the poor and dying. His generosity resulted in his own family complaining that they were left with nothing. He was sensitive to people’s feelings, and later expressed his wish to be a beloved figure of the Bahá’ís saying “I am your father...and you must be glad and rejoice, for I love you exceedingly.” According to historical accounts, he had a keen sense of humour and was relaxed and informal. He was open about personal tragedies such as the loss of his children and the sufferings he&#x27;d endured as a prisoner, further enhancing his popularity.

‘Abdu’l-Bahá directed the affairs of the Bahá’í community with care. He was inclined to allow a large range of personal interpretations of the Bahá’í teachings as long as these did not obviously contradict fundamental principles. He did, however, expel members of the religion he felt were challenging his leadership and deliberately causing disunity in the community. Outbreaks of persecution of the Bahá’ís affected him deeply. He wrote personally to the families of those who had been martyred.

==Works==

The total estimated number of tablets that ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá wrote are over 27,000 of which only a fraction have been translated into English. His works fall into two groups including first his direct writings and second his lectures and speeches as noted by others. The first group includes &quot;The Secret of Divine Civilization&quot; written before 1875, &quot;A Traveller&#x27;s Narrative&quot; written around 1886, the Resāla-ye sīāsīya or &quot;Sermon on the Art of Governance&quot; written in 1893, the &quot;Memorials of the Faithful&quot;, and a large number of tablets written to various people; including various Western intellectuals such as Auguste Forel which has been translated and published as the &quot;Tablet to Auguste-Henri Forel&quot;. The &quot;Secret of Divine Civilization&quot; and the &quot;Sermon on the Art of Governance&quot; were widely circulated anonymously.

The second group includes &quot;Some Answered Questions&quot;, which is an English translation of a series of table talks with Laura Barney, and &quot;Paris Talks&quot;, &quot;ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Baha in London&quot; and &quot;Promulgation of Universal Peace&quot; which are respectively addresses given by ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá in Paris, London and the United States.

The following is a list of some of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&#x27;s many books, tablets, and talks:
*&quot;Foundations of World Unity&quot;
* &quot;Light of the World: Selected Tablets of ‘Abdu’l-Bahá&quot;.
*&quot;Memorials of the Faithful&quot;
*&quot;Paris Talks&quot;
*&quot;Secret of Divine Civilization&quot;
*&quot;Some Answered Questions&quot;
*&quot;Tablets of the Divine Plan&quot;
*&quot;Tablet to Auguste-Henri Forel&quot;
*&quot;Tablet to The Hague&quot;
*&quot;Will and Testament of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&quot;
*&quot;Promulgation of Universal Peace&quot;
*&quot;Selections from the Writings of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá&quot;
*&quot;Divine Philosophy&quot;
*Treatise on Politics / Sermon on the Art of Governance

==See also==

*Baháʼu&#x27;lláh&#x27;s family
*Mírzá Mihdí
*Ásíyih Khánum
*Bahíyyih Khánum
*Munirih Khánum
*Shoghi Effendi
*House of ʻAbdu&#x27;l-Bahá

==Further reading==

==Explanatory notes==
==Notes==
==References==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==
* Lincoln, Joshua (2023). &quot;Abdu&#x27;l-Bahā &#x27;Abbās - Head of The Bahā&#x27;ī Faith; A Life in Social and Regional Context. Idra Publishing.

==External links==

* Writings and Talks of ‘Abdu’l‑Bahá at Bahai.org
* Bahai org: Exemplar, documentary film (2021)
* The Extraordinary Life of &#x27;Abdu&#x27;l-Bahá, by the Utterance Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216954" start="0" end="17" title="ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá" label="ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="21" end="28" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q216954" start="73" end="79" title="ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá" label="ʻAbbás"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="108" end="124" title="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q216954" start="124" end="125" title="ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá" label=","/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="210" end="222" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q104273" start="381" end="384" title="Báb" label="Báb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="496" end="502" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="509" end="521" title="Aristocracy" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204128" start="614" end="624" title="Bábism" label="Bábí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="797" end="804" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="808" end="812" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="877" end="884" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="894" end="902" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="952" end="958" title="Edirne" label="Edirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="990" end="995" title="Acre, Palestine" label="ʻAkká"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298662" start="1058" end="1079" title="Young Turk Revolution" label="Young Turk Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076269" start="1137" end="1157" title="ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá&amp;#x27;s journeys to the West" label="journeys to the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1237" end="1248" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="1278" end="1283" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970316" start="1382" end="1412" title="British Mandate Over Palestine" label="British Mandate over Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="1451" end="1502" title="Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1617" end="1621" title="Tablets of Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh#Kitáb-i-ʻAhd (Book of the Covenant)" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="1658" end="1670" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445419" start="1682" end="1708" title="Tablets of the Divine Plan" label="Tablets of the Divine Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645618" start="1810" end="1828" title="Will and Testament of ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá" label="Will and Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q225078" start="1865" end="1892" title="Baháʼí administration" label="Baháʼí administrative order"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="2074" end="2084" title="given name" label="given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q12269708" start="2148" end="2153" title="Mirza (noble)" label="Mírzá"/>
<link wikidata="Q321803" start="2181" end="2188" title="Effendi" label="Effendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19818134" start="2374" end="2381" title="abdul" label="servant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="2542" end="2548" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q852002" start="2591" end="2612" title="Jumada al-awwal" label="Jamadiyu&amp;#x27;l-Avval"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="2642" end="2658" title="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348926" start="2663" end="2669" title="Ásíyih Khánum" label="Navváb"/>
<link wikidata="Q104273" start="2714" end="2717" title="Báb" label="Báb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869240" start="2807" end="2824" title="Mírzá ʻAbbás Núrí" label="Mírzá ʻAbbás Núrí"/>
<link wikidata="Q255221" start="3032" end="3039" title="Táhirih" label="Táhirih"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889324" start="3401" end="3409" title="Bahíyyih Khánum" label="Bahíyyih"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635349" start="3426" end="3431" title="Mírzá Mihdí" label="Mihdí"/>
<link wikidata="Q982047" start="4523" end="4546" title="Edward Granville Browne" label="Edward Granville Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="5559" end="5575" title="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120320" start="5641" end="5651" title="Síyáh-Chál" label="Síyáh-Chál"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="6145" end="6152" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q923673" start="6371" end="6382" title="Mirza Yahya" label="Mirza Yahya"/>
<link wikidata="Q191204" start="6424" end="6436" title="Sulaymaniyah" label="Sulaymaniyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348926" start="6552" end="6558" title="Ásíyih Khánum" label="mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889324" start="6563" end="6569" title="Bahíyyih Khánum" label="sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q18000" start="6845" end="6860" title="age of majority" label="age of maturity"/>
<link wikidata="Q104273" start="7062" end="7065" title="Báb" label="Báb"/>
<link wikidata="Q487865" start="7406" end="7413" title="dervish" label="dervish"/>
<link wikidata="Q22569735" start="8147" end="8170" title="I was a Hidden Treasure" label="I was a Hidden Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349144" start="8420" end="8436" title="Garden of Ridván, Baghdad" label="Garden of Ridván"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699644" start="8512" end="8532" title="Manifestation of God (Baháʼí Faith)" label="manifestation of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q204128" start="8537" end="8568" title="He whom God shall make manifest" label="He whom God shall make manifest"/>
<link wikidata="Q104273" start="8607" end="8610" title="Báb" label="Báb"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="8819" end="8827" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="9144" end="9160" title="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3981611" start="9168" end="9188" title="tablet of the Branch" label="tablet of the Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387" start="9302" end="9312" title="Adrianople" label="Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348926" start="9488" end="9494" title="Ásíyih Khánum" label="mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699644" start="9870" end="9890" title="Manifestation of God (Baháʼí Faith)" label="manifestation of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="10554" end="10570" title="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="10933" end="10949" title="Acre, Palestine" label="ʻAkká, Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="11538" end="11547" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560976" start="11729" end="11734" title="Azalism" label="Azali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635349" start="11851" end="11862" title="Mírzá Mihdí" label="Mírzá Mihdí"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="12080" end="12086" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149036" start="12370" end="12385" title="House of ʻAbbúd" label="House of ʻAbbúd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13044" end="13072" title="A Traveller&amp;#x27;s Narrative" label="A Traveller&amp;#x27;s Narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q982047" start="13213" end="13236" title="Edward Granville Browne" label="Edward Granville Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867232" start="13583" end="13607" title="Munírih Khánum" label="Fátimih Nahrí of Isfahán"/>
<link wikidata="Q42053" start="13727" end="13734" title="Isfahan" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="13807" end="13813" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="13834" end="13850" title="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348926" start="13864" end="13870" title="Navváb" label="Navváb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869242" start="14201" end="14211" title="Mírzá Músá" label="Mírzá Músá"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="14419" end="14435" title="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q27709335" start="14781" end="14793" title="Munib Shahid" label="Munib Shahid"/>
<link wikidata="Q318441" start="15080" end="15094" title="Shoghi Effendi" label="Shoghi Effendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="15176" end="15192" title="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15618" end="15638" title="Tablets of Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh#Kitáb-i-ʻAhd (Book of the Covenant)" label="Book of the Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920275" start="15926" end="15939" title="Mírzá Muhammad ʻAlí" label="Muhammad ʻAlí"/>
<link wikidata="Q27178518" start="16456" end="16480" title="Ibrahim George Kheiralla" label="Ibrahim George Kheiralla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699644" start="16670" end="16690" title="Manifestation of God (Baháʼí Faith)" label="Manifestation of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645618" start="17076" end="17094" title="Will and Testament of ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá" label="Will and Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q318441" start="17252" end="17264" title="Guardian (Baháʼí Faith)" label="Guardianship"/>
<link wikidata="Q318441" start="17302" end="17316" title="Shoghi Effendi" label="Shoghi Effendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300911" start="17446" end="17480" title="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh&amp;#x27;s family" label="male relatives of Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q463046" start="18484" end="18497" title="Phoebe Hearst" label="Phoebe Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796550" start="19171" end="19187" title="May Maxwell" label="May Ellis Bolles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787854" start="19225" end="19241" title="Thomas Breakwell" label="Thomas Breakwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q812978" start="19412" end="19435" title="Some Answered Questions" label="Some Answered Questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q104273" start="19636" end="19639" title="Báb" label="Báb"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="19706" end="19718" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462314" start="19844" end="19861" title="Shrine of the Báb" label="Shrine of the Báb"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="19990" end="20009" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462314" start="20646" end="20663" title="Shrine of the Báb" label="Shrine of the Báb"/>
<link wikidata="Q800193" start="20739" end="20755" title="House of the Báb" label="House of the Báb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397066" start="20759" end="20771" title="Shiraz, Iran" label="Shiraz, Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568313" start="20806" end="20829" title="Baháʼí House of Worship" label="Baháʼí House of Worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q23438" start="20833" end="20841" title="Ashgabat" label="Ashgabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q924126" start="21007" end="21019" title="Mulla Husayn" label="Mulla Husayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007296" start="21083" end="21104" title="Vakil-u&amp;#x27;d-Dawlih" label="Vakil-u&amp;#x27;d-Dawlih"/>
<link wikidata="Q83896" start="21388" end="21398" title="Young Turk" label="Young Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="21438" end="21459" title="Abdul Hamid II" label="Sultan Abdul Hamid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q337500" start="21471" end="21482" title="Namık Kemal" label="Namık Kemal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207009" start="21484" end="21494" title="Ziya Pasha" label="Ziya Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q369930" start="21499" end="21511" title="Midhat Pasha" label="Midhat Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q317592" start="21730" end="21745" title="Abdullah Cevdet" label="Abdullah Cevdet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559352" start="21774" end="21805" title="Committee of Union and Progress" label="Committee of Union and Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000583" start="22081" end="22105" title="Bursalı Mehmet Tahir Bey" label="Bursalı Mehmet Tahir Bey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22110" end="22125" title="Hasan Bedreddin" label="Hasan Bedreddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151500" start="22197" end="22213" title="Abdülaziz of the Ottoman Empire" label="Sultan Abdülaziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q311826" start="22675" end="22689" title="Muhammad Abduh" label="Muhammad Abduh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935373" start="22717" end="22734" title="Islamic Modernism" label="Islamic Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191057" start="22743" end="22758" title="Salafi movement" label="Salafi movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q471046" start="22840" end="22851" title="Rashid Rida" label="Rashid Rida"/>
<link wikidata="Q188258" start="23397" end="23403" title="Fezzan" label="Fezzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q816321" start="23557" end="23563" title="tariqa" label="tariqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83896" start="23827" end="23838" title="Young Turks" label="Young Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298662" start="23839" end="23849" title="Young Turk Revolution" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q187499" start="24027" end="24053" title="Shrine of Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Shrine of Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q187499" start="24057" end="24062" title="Bahji" label="Bahji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149036" start="24167" end="24174" title="House of ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá" label="to live"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="24178" end="24183" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="24842" end="24865" title="RMS Titanic" label="RMS &amp;quot;Titanic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042501" start="24989" end="25011" title="RMS Cedric" label="RMS &amp;quot;Cedric&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="25309" end="25318" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="25320" end="25330" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="25360" end="25372" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="25457" end="25470" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602256" start="25476" end="25486" title="Green Acre" label="Green Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="25497" end="25502" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="25508" end="25516" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="25571" end="25582" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="25610" end="25618" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="25624" end="25635" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407554" start="26010" end="26022" title="God in the Baháʼí Faith" label="unity of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842962" start="26024" end="26046" title="Baháʼí Faith and the unity of religion" label="unity of the religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842960" start="26048" end="26067" title="Baháʼí Faith and the unity of humanity" label="oneness of humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4842958" start="26069" end="26094" title="Baháʼí Faith and gender equality" label="equality of women and men"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521910" start="26601" end="26620" title="Montreal Daily Star" label="Montreal Daily Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549535" start="26676" end="26696" title="The Montreal Gazette" label="The Montreal Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906333" start="26710" end="26727" title="Montreal Standard" label="Montreal Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q508029" start="27426" end="27441" title="Stephen Leacock" label="Stephen Leacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785183" start="27491" end="27529" title="Arcadian Adventures with the Idle Rich" label="Arcadian Adventures with the Idle Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="27820" end="27829" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="27831" end="27839" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="27845" end="27851" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="27952" end="27957" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q467167" start="28039" end="28065" title="Edmond James de Rothschild" label="Edmond James de Rothschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q159386" start="28083" end="28108" title="Rothschild family" label="Rothschild banking family"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="28256" end="28267" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445419" start="28409" end="28435" title="Tablets of the Divine Plan" label="Tablets of the Divine Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4843023" start="28493" end="28517" title="Baháʼí Faith in North America" label="Baháʼís of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="28738" end="28744" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q317011" start="28903" end="28913" title="Djemal Pasha" label="Cemal Paşa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29049" end="29066" title="Sinai and Palestine Campaign#Megiddo offensive" label="Megiddo offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q334846" start="29082" end="29097" title="Edmund Allenby, 1st Viscount Allenby" label="General Allenby"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="29269" end="29280" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="29363" end="29378" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British Mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q494706" start="29455" end="29474" title="Baháʼí World Centre" label="Baháʼí World Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="29609" end="29617" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="29818" end="29835" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237584" start="29895" end="29914" title="collective security" label="collective security"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="30393" end="30425" title="Aliyah" label="immigration of Jews to Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="30520" end="30528" title="Zionism" label="Zionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="30802" end="30814" title="Jordan river" label="Jordan river"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098047" start="30860" end="30873" title="sharecropping" label="sharecropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="30993" end="30998" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="31373" end="31424" title="Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q334846" start="31535" end="31550" title="Edmund Allenby, 1st Viscount Allenby" label="General Allenby"/>
<link wikidata="Q212486" start="31552" end="31563" title="Faisal I of Iraq" label="King Faisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284551" start="31571" end="31583" title="King of Iraq" label="King of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q335218" start="31586" end="31600" title="Herbert Samuel, 1st Viscount Samuel" label="Herbert Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748699" start="31640" end="31653" title="Ronald Storrs" label="Ronald Storrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q474167" start="31800" end="31819" title="Rabi&amp;#x27; al-awwal" label="Rabi&amp;#x27; al-awwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146861" start="31826" end="31828" title="Hijri year" label="AH"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="31856" end="31873" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q334846" start="32069" end="32085" title="Edmund Allenby, 1st Viscount Allenby" label="Viscount Allenby"/>
<link wikidata="Q15105" start="32091" end="32111" title="Council of Ministers" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q318441" start="32238" end="32252" title="Shoghi Effendi" label="Shoghi Effendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q432860" start="32261" end="32274" title="Stewart Symes" label="Stewart Symes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="32292" end="32301" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462314" start="32387" end="32404" title="Shrine of the Báb" label="Shrine of the Báb"/>
<link wikidata="Q185318" start="32408" end="32420" title="Mount Carmel" label="Mount Carmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852980" start="32552" end="32579" title="Shrine of ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá" label="Shrine of ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645618" start="32626" end="32644" title="Will and Testament of ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá" label="Will and Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q318441" start="32794" end="32808" title="Shoghi Effendi" label="Shoghi Effendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q318441" start="32835" end="32844" title="Guardian (Baháʼí Faith)" label="Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178966" start="33233" end="33249" title="Covenant-breaker" label="Covenant-breaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163783" start="33276" end="33302" title="Universal House of Justice" label="Universal House of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q964630" start="33311" end="33329" title="Hands of the Cause" label="Hands of the Cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q15937985" start="33583" end="33593" title="Ruth White (Baháʼí author)" label="Ruth White"/>
<link wikidata="Q339380" start="33696" end="33712" title="The Baháʼí World" label="The Baháʼí World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428994" start="33858" end="33872" title="Thornton Chase" label="Thornton Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q447842" start="33876" end="33890" title="John Esslemont" label="John Esslemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3837940" start="33892" end="33905" title="Lua Getsinger" label="Lua Getsinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q106606231" start="33911" end="33924" title="Robert Turner (Bahá&amp;#x27;í)" label="Robert Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="34225" end="34241" title="Second Coming" label="return of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q982047" start="34970" end="34993" title="Edward Granville Browne" label="Edward Granville Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q447842" start="35817" end="35831" title="John Esslemont" label="John Esslemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123827" start="37943" end="37950" title="Tablet (religious)" label="tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168176" start="38211" end="38244" title="The Secret of Divine Civilization" label="The Secret of Divine Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123827" start="38485" end="38492" title="tablets (religious)" label="tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q22530" start="38568" end="38581" title="August Forel" label="Auguste Forel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673459" start="38635" end="38664" title="Tablet to Dr. Forel" label="Tablet to Auguste-Henri Forel"/>
<link wikidata="Q812978" start="38839" end="38862" title="Some Answered Questions" label="Some Answered Questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q570111" start="38958" end="38969" title="Paris Talks" label="Paris Talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474569" start="39265" end="39291" title="Foundations of World Unity" label="Foundations of World Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q570111" start="39412" end="39423" title="Paris Talks" label="Paris Talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168176" start="39437" end="39466" title="Secret of Divine Civilization" label="Secret of Divine Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q812978" start="39480" end="39503" title="Some Answered Questions" label="Some Answered Questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445419" start="39517" end="39543" title="Tablets of the Divine Plan" label="Tablets of the Divine Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673459" start="39557" end="39586" title="Tablet to Dr. Forel" label="Tablet to Auguste-Henri Forel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673460" start="39600" end="39619" title="Tablet to The Hague" label="Tablet to The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645618" start="39633" end="39672" title="Will and Testament of ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá" label="Will and Testament of ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300911" start="39890" end="39920" title="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh&amp;#x27;s family" label="Baháʼu&amp;#x27;lláh&amp;#x27;s family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635349" start="39922" end="39933" title="Mírzá Mihdí" label="Mírzá Mihdí"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348926" start="39935" end="39948" title="Ásíyih Khánum" label="Ásíyih Khánum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889324" start="39950" end="39965" title="Bahíyyih Khánum" label="Bahíyyih Khánum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867232" start="39967" end="39981" title="Munirih Khánum" label="Munirih Khánum"/>
<link wikidata="Q318441" start="39983" end="39997" title="Shoghi Effendi" label="Shoghi Effendi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39999" end="40025" title="Baháʼí World Centre buildings#The House of ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá" label="House of ʻAbdu&amp;#x27;l-Bahá"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3020" wikidata="Q459774" url="?curid=3020" title="Ambrose of Alexandria">
<text>Ambrose of Alexandria (before 212 – c. 250) was a friend of the Christian theologian Origen.

==Life==
Ambrose was attracted by Origen&#x27;s fame as a teacher, and visited the Catechetical School of Alexandria in 212. At first a gnostic Valentinian and Marcionist, Ambrose, through Origen&#x27;s teaching, eventually rejected this theology and became Origen&#x27;s constant companion, and was ordained deacon. He plied Origen with questions, and urged him to write his Commentaries (treating him as &quot;&quot; in &quot;Commentary on John&quot; V,1) on the books of the Bible, and, as a wealthy nobleman and courtier, he provided his teacher with books for his studies and secretaries to lighten the labor of composition.

He suffered during the persecution under the Roman emperor Maximinus Thrax in 235. He was later released and died a confessor. The last mention of Ambrose in the historical record is in Origen&#x27;s &quot;Contra Celsum,&quot; which the latter wrote at the solicitation of Ambrose.

Origen often speaks of Ambrose affectionately as a man of education with excellent literary and scholarly tastes. All of Origen&#x27;s works written after 218 are dedicated to Ambrose, including his &quot;On Martyrdom&quot;, &quot;Contra Celsum&quot;, &quot;Commentary on St. John&#x27;s Gospel&quot;, and &quot;On Prayer&quot;. Ambrose&#x27;s letters to Origen (praised by Jerome) are lost, although part of one exists.

==Veneration==
Ambrose is venerated as a saint by some branches of Christianity. His feast day in the Catholic Church falls on 17 March.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q459774" start="0" end="21" title="Ambrose of Alexandria" label="Ambrose of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="64" end="73" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="74" end="84" title="theologian" label="theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170472" start="85" end="91" title="Origen" label="Origen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470799" start="177" end="210" title="Catechetical School of Alexandria" label="Catechetical School of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="230" end="237" title="gnostic" label="gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q309864" start="238" end="249" title="Valentinus (Gnostic)" label="Valentinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q754941" start="254" end="264" title="Marcionism" label="Marcionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="403" end="409" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="572" end="577" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777" start="784" end="799" title="Maximinus Thrax" label="Maximinus Thrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827718" start="841" end="850" title="confessor" label="confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q917141" start="931" end="944" title="Contra Celsum" label="Contra Celsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="1382" end="1388" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1532" end="1547" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3022" wikidata="Q261150" url="?curid=3022" title="Autonomous building">
<text>An autonomous building is a building designed to be operated independently from infrastructural support services such as the electric power grid, gas grid, municipal water systems, sewage treatment systems, storm drains, communication services, and in some cases, public roads. The literature mostly refers to housing, or the autonomous house.

Advocates of autonomous building describe advantages that include reduced environmental impacts, increased security, and lower costs of ownership. Some cited advantages satisfy tenets of green building, not independence per se (see below). Off-grid buildings often rely very little on civil services and are therefore safer and more comfortable during civil disaster or military attacks. For example, off-grid buildings would not lose power or water if public supplies were compromised.

==History==
===1970s===

In the 1970s, groups of activists and engineers were inspired by the warnings of imminent resource depletion and starvation. In the United States, a group calling themselves the New Alchemists were famous for the depth of research effort placed in their projects. Using conventional construction techniques, they designed a series of &quot;bioshelter&quot; projects, the most famous of which was The Ark bioshelter community for Prince Edward Island. They published the plans for all of these, with detailed design calculations and blueprints. The Ark used wind-based water pumping and electricity and was self-contained in food production. It had living quarters for people, fish tanks raising tilapia for protein, a greenhouse watered with fish water, and a closed-loop sewage reclamation system that recycled human waste into sanitized fertilizer for the fish tanks. 

Around 1975–1977, Australian architect and lecturer at University of Sydney School of Architecture, Col James, in collaboration with urban designer, architect, artist, and university tutor Nick Hollo, designed and built an autonomous house on university grounds, in collaboration with students. This taught self-build sustainability to hundreds of students.

===1990s===
The 1990s saw the development of Earthships, similar in intent to the Ark project, but organised as a for-profit venture, with construction details published in a series of three books by American architect Mike Reynolds. The building material is tires filled with earth. This makes a wall that has large amounts of thermal mass (see earth sheltering). Berms are placed on exposed surfaces to further increase the house&#x27;s temperature stability. The water system starts with rain water, processed for drinking, then washing, then plant watering, then toilet flushing, and finally black water is recycled again for more plant watering. The cisterns are placed and used as thermal masses. Power, including electricity, heat and water heating, is from solar power.

Some 1990s architects such as William McDonough and Ken Yeang applied environmentally responsible building design to large commercial buildings, such as office buildings, making them largely self-sufficient in energy production. One major bank building (ING Group&#x27;s Amsterdam headquarters) in the Netherlands was constructed to be autonomous and artistic as well.

===2000s===
In 2002, British architects Brenda and Robert Vale wrote:It is quite possible in all parts of Australia to construct a &#x27;house with no bills&#x27;, which would be comfortable without heating and cooling, which would make its own electricity, collect its own water and deal with its own waste...These houses can be built now, using off-the-shelf techniques. It is possible to build a &quot;house with no bills&quot; for the same price as a conventional house, but it would be (25%) smaller.

==Advantages==
As an architect or engineer becomes more concerned with the disadvantages of transportation networks, and dependence on distant resources, their designs tend to include more autonomous elements. The historic path to autonomy was a concern for secure sources of heat, power, water and food. A nearly parallel path toward autonomy has been to start with a concern for environmental impacts, which cause disadvantages.

Autonomous buildings can increase security and reduce environmental impacts by using on-site resources (such as sunlight and rain) that would otherwise be wasted. Autonomy often dramatically reduces the costs and impacts of networks that serve the building, because autonomy short-circuits the multiplying inefficiencies of collecting and transporting resources. Other impacted resources, such as oil reserves and the retention of the local watershed, can often be cheaply conserved by thoughtful designs.

Autonomous buildings are usually energy-efficient in operation, and therefore cost-efficient, for the obvious reason that smaller energy needs are easier to satisfy off-grid. But they may substitute energy production or other techniques to avoid diminishing returns in extreme conservation.

An autonomous structure is not always environmentally friendly. The goal of independence from support systems is associated with, but not identical to, other goals of environmentally responsible green building. However, autonomous buildings also usually include some degree of sustainability through the use of renewable energy and other renewable resources, producing no more greenhouse gases than they consume, and other measures.

==Disadvantages==
First and fundamentally, independence is a matter of degree. For example, eliminating dependence on the electrical grid is relatively easy. In contrast, running an efficient, reliable food source can be a chore.

Living within an autonomous shelter may also require sacrifices in lifestyle or social opportunities. Even the most comfortable and technologically advanced autonomous homes could require alterations of residents&#x27; behavior. Some may not welcome the extra chores. The Vails described some clients&#x27; experiences as inconvenient, irritating, isolating, or even as an unwanted full-time job. A well-designed building can reduce this issue, but usually at the expense of reduced autonomy.

An autonomous house must be custom-built (or extensively retrofitted) to suit the climate and location. Passive solar techniques, alternative toilet and sewage systems, thermal massing designs, basement battery systems, efficient windowing, and the array of other design tactics require some degree of non-standard construction, added expense, ongoing experimentation and maintenance, and also have an effect on the psychology of the space.

==Systems==
===Water===

There are many methods of collecting and conserving water. Use reduction is cost-effective.

Greywater systems reuse drained wash water to flush toilets or to water lawns and gardens. Greywater systems can halve the water use of most residential buildings; however, they require the purchase of a sump, greywater pressurization pump, and secondary plumbing. Some builders are installing waterless urinals and even composting toilets that eliminate water usage in sewage disposal.

The classic solution with minimal life-style changes is using a well. Once drilled, a well-foot requires substantial power. However, advanced well-foots can reduce power usage by twofold or more from older models. Well water can be contaminated in some areas. The Sono arsenic filter eliminates unhealthy arsenic in well water. However drilling a well is an uncertain activity, with aquifers depleted in some areas. It can also be expensive.

In regions with sufficient rainfall, it is often more economical to design a building to use rainwater harvesting, with supplementary water deliveries in a drought. Rain water makes excellent soft washwater, but needs antibacterial treatment. If used for drinking, mineral supplements or mineralization is necessary.

Most desert and temperate climates get at least of rain per year. This means that a typical one-story house with a greywater system can supply its year-round water needs from its roof alone. In the driest areas, it might require a cistern of . Many areas average of rain per week, and these can use a cistern as small as .

In many areas, it is difficult to keep a roof clean enough for drinking. To reduce dirt and bad tastes, systems use a metal collecting-roof and a &quot;roof cleaner&quot; tank that diverts the first 40 liters. Cistern water is usually chlorinated, though reverse osmosis systems provide even better quality drinking water.

In the classic Roman house (&quot;Domus&quot;), household water was provided from a cistern (the &quot;impluvium&quot;), which was a decorative feature of the atrium, the house&#x27;s main public space. It was fed by downspout tiles from the inward-facing roof-opening (the &quot;compluvium&quot;). Often water lilies were grown in it to purify the water. Wealthy households often supplemented the rain with a small fountain fed from a city&#x27;s cistern. The impluvium always had an overflow drain so it could not flood the house.

Modern cisterns are usually large plastic tanks. Gravity tanks on short towers are reliable, so pump repairs are less urgent. The least expensive bulk cistern is a fenced pond or pool at ground level.

Reducing autonomy reduces the size and expense of cisterns. Many autonomous homes can reduce water use below per person per day, so that in a drought a month of water can be delivered inexpensively via truck. Self-delivery is often possible by installing fabric water tanks that fit the bed of a pick-up truck.

It can be convenient to use the cistern as a heat sink or trap for a heat pump or air conditioning system; however this can make cold drinking water warm, and in drier years may decrease the efficiency of the HVAC system.

Solar stills can efficiently produce drinking water from ditch water or cistern water, especially high-efficiency multiple effect humidification designs, which separate the evaporator(s) and condenser(s).

New technologies, like reverse osmosis can create unlimited amounts of pure water from polluted water, ocean water, and even from humid air. Watermakers are available for yachts that convert seawater and electricity into potable water and brine. Atmospheric water generators extract moisture from dry desert air and filter it to pure water.

===Sewage===
====Resource====

Composting toilets use bacteria to decompose human feces into useful, odourless, sanitary compost. The process is sanitary because soil bacteria eat the human pathogens as well as most of the mass of the waste. Nevertheless, most health authorities forbid direct use of &quot;humanure&quot; for growing food. The risk is microbial and viral contamination, as well as heavy metal toxicity. In a dry composting toilet, the waste is evaporated or digested to gas (mostly carbon dioxide) and vented, so a toilet produces only a few pounds of compost every six months. To control the odor, modern toilets use a small fan to keep the toilet under negative pressure, and exhaust the gasses to a vent pipe.

Some home sewage treatment systems use biological treatment, usually beds of plants and aquaria, that absorb nutrients and bacteria and convert greywater and sewage to clear water. This odor- and color-free reclaimed water can be used to flush toilets and water outside plants. When tested, it approaches standards for potable water. In climates that freeze, the plants and aquaria need to be kept in a small greenhouse space. Good systems need about as much care as a large aquarium.

Electric incinerating toilets turn excrement into a small amount of ash. They are cool to the touch, have no water and no pipes, and require an air vent in a wall. They are used in remote areas where use of septic tanks is limited, usually to reduce nutrient loads in lakes.

NASA&#x27;s bioreactor is an extremely advanced biological sewage system. It can turn sewage into air and water through microbial action. NASA plans to use it in the crewed Mars mission. Another method is NASA&#x27;s urine-to-water distillation system. A big disadvantage of complex biological sewage treatment systems is that if the house is empty, the sewage system biota may starve to death.

====Waste====
Sewage handling is essential for public health. Many diseases are transmitted by poorly functioning sewage systems.

The standard system is a tiled leach field combined with a septic tank. The basic idea is to provide a small system with primary sewage treatment. Sludge settles to the bottom of the septic tank, is partially reduced by anaerobic digestion, and fluid is dispersed in the leach field. The leach field is usually under a yard growing grass. Septic tanks can operate entirely by gravity, and if well managed, are reasonably safe.

Septic tanks have to be pumped periodically by a vacuum truck to eliminate non reducing solids. Failure to pump a septic tank can cause overflow that damages the leach field, and contaminates ground water. Septic tanks may also require some lifestyle changes, such as not using garbage disposals, minimizing fluids flushed into the tank, and minimizing non-digestible solids flushed into the tank. For example, septic safe toilet paper is recommended. However, septic tanks remain popular because they permit standard plumbing fixtures, and require few or no lifestyle sacrifices.

Composting or packaging toilets make it economical and sanitary to throw away sewage as part of the normal garbage collection service. They also reduce water use by half, and eliminate the difficulty and expense of septic tanks. However, they require the local landfill to use sanitary practices.

Incinerator systems are quite practical. The ashes are biologically safe, and less than 1/10 the volume of the original waste, but like all incinerator waste, are usually classified as hazardous waste.

Traditional methods of sewage handling include pit toilets, latrines, and outhouses. These can be safe, inexpensive and practical. They are still used in many regions.

===Storm drains===
Drainage systems are a crucial compromise between human habitability and a secure, sustainable watershed. Paved areas and lawns or turf do not allow much precipitation to filter through the ground to recharge aquifers. They can cause flooding and damage in neighbourhoods, as the water flows over the surface towards a low point.

Typically, elaborate, capital-intensive storm sewer networks are engineered to deal with stormwater. In some cities, such as the Victorian era London sewers or much of the old City of Toronto, the storm water system is combined with the sanitary sewer system. In the event of heavy precipitation, the load on the sewage treatment plant at the end of the pipe becomes too great to handle and raw sewage is dumped into holding tanks, and sometimes into surface water.

Autonomous buildings can address precipitation in a number of ways. If a water-absorbing swale for each yard is combined with permeable concrete streets, storm drains can be omitted from the neighbourhood. This can save more than $800 per house (1970s) by eliminating storm drains. One way to use the savings is to purchase larger lots, which permits more amenities at the same cost. Permeable concrete is an established product in warm climates, and in development for freezing climates. In freezing climates, the elimination of storm drains can often still pay for enough land to construct swales (shallow water collecting ditches) or water impeding berms instead. This plan provides more land for homeowners and can offer more interesting topography for landscaping. Additionally, a green roof captures precipitation and uses the water to grow plants. It can be built into a new building or used to replace an existing roof.

===Electricity===

Since electricity is an expensive utility, the first step towards autonomy is to design a house and lifestyle to reduce demand. LED lights, laptop computers and gas-powered refrigerators save electricity, although gas-powered refrigerators are not very efficient. There are also superefficient electric refrigerators, such as those produced by the Sun Frost company, some of which use only about half as much electricity as a mass-market energy star-rated refrigerator.

Using a solar roof, solar cells can provide electric power. Solar roofs can be more cost-effective than retrofitted solar power, because buildings need roofs anyway. Modern solar cells last about 40 years, which makes them a reasonable investment in some areas. At a sufficient angle, solar cells are cleaned by run-off rain water and therefore have almost no life-style impact.

Many areas have long winter nights or dark cloudy days. In these climates, a solar installation might not pay for itself or large battery storage systems are necessary to achieve electric self-sufficiency. In stormy or windy climates, wind turbines can replace or significantly supplement solar power. The average autonomous house needs only one small wind turbine, 5 metres or less in diameter. On a 30-metre (100-foot) tower, this turbine can provide enough power to supplement solar power on cloudy days. Commercially available wind turbines use sealed, one-moving-part AC generators and passive, self-feathering blades for years of operation without service.

The main advantage of wind power is that larger wind turbines have a lower per-watt cost than solar cells, provided there is wind. Turbine location is critical: just as some locations lack sun for solar cells, many areas lack enough wind to make a turbine pay for itself. In the Great Plains of the United States, a 10-metre (33-foot) turbine can supply enough energy to heat and cool a well-built all-electric house. Economic use in other areas requires research, and possibly a site survey.

Some sites have access to a stream with a change in elevation. These sites can use small hydropower systems to generate electricity. If the difference in elevation is above 30 metres (100 feet), and the stream runs in all seasons, this can provide continuous power with a small, inexpensive installation. Lower changes of elevation require larger installations or dams, and can be less efficient. Clogging at the turbine intake can be a practical problem. The usual solution is a small pool and waterfall (a penstock) to carry away floating debris. Another solution is to utilize a turbine that resists debris, such as a Gorlov helical turbine or Ossberger turbine.

During times of low demand, excess power can be stored in batteries for future use. However, batteries need to be replaced every few years. In many areas, battery expenses can be eliminated by attaching the building to the electric power grid and operating the power system with net metering. Utility permission is required, but such cooperative generation is legally mandated in some areas (for example, California).

A grid-based building is less autonomous, but more economical and sustainable with fewer lifestyle sacrifices. In rural areas the grid&#x27;s cost and impacts can be reduced by using single-wire earth return systems (for example, the MALT-system).

In areas that lack access to the grid, battery size can be reduced with a generator to recharge the batteries during energy droughts such as extended fogs. Auxiliary generators are usually run from propane, natural gas, or sometimes diesel. An hour of charging usually provides a day of operation. Modern residential chargers permit the user to set the charging times, so the generator is quiet at night. Some generators automatically test themselves once per week.

Recent advances in passively stable magnetic bearings may someday permit inexpensive storage of power in a flywheel in a vacuum. Research groups like Canada&#x27;s Ballard Power Systems are also working to develop a &quot;regenerative fuel cell&quot;, a device that can generate hydrogen and oxygen when power is available, and combine these efficiently when power is needed.

Earth batteries tap electric currents in the earth called telluric current. They can be installed anywhere in the ground. They provide only low voltages and current. They were used to power telegraphs in the 19th century. As appliance efficiencies increase, they may become practical.

Microbial fuel cells and thermoelectric generators allow electricity to be generated from biomass. The plant can be dried, chopped and converted or burned as a whole, or it can be left alive so that waste saps from the plant can be converted by bacteria.

===Heating===

Most autonomous buildings are designed to use insulation, thermal mass and passive solar heating and cooling. Examples of these are trombe walls and other technologies as skylights.

Passive solar heating can heat most buildings in even the mild and chilly climates. In colder climates, extra construction costs can be as little as 15% more than new, conventional buildings. In warm climates, those having less than two weeks of frosty nights per year, there is no cost impact. The basic requirement for passive solar heating is that the solar collectors must face the prevailing sunlight (south in the Northern Hemisphere, north in the Southern Hemisphere), and the building must incorporate thermal mass to keep it warm in the night.

A recent, somewhat experimental solar heating system &quot;Annualized geo solar heating&quot; is practical even in regions that get little or no sunlight in winter. It uses the ground beneath a building for thermal mass. Precipitation can carry away the heat, so the ground is shielded with skirts of plastic insulation. The thermal mass of this system is sufficiently inexpensive and large that it can store enough summer heat to warm a building for the whole winter, and enough winter cold to cool the building in summer.

In annualized geo solar systems, the solar collector is often separate from (and hotter or colder than) the living space. The building may actually be constructed from insulation, for example, straw-bale construction. Some buildings have been aerodynamically designed so that convection via ducts and interior spaces eliminates any need for electric fans.

A more modest &quot;daily solar&quot; design is practical. For example, for about a 15% premium in building costs, the Passivhaus building codes in Europe use high performance insulating windows, R-30 insulation, HRV ventilation, and a small thermal mass. With modest changes in the building&#x27;s position, modern krypton- or argon-insulated windows permit normal-looking windows to provide passive solar heat without compromising insulation or structural strength. If a small heater is available for the coldest nights, a slab or basement cistern can inexpensively provide the required thermal mass. Passivhaus building codes, in particular, bring unusually good interior air quality, because the buildings change the air several times per hour, passing it through a heat exchanger to keep heat inside.

In all systems, a small supplementary heater increases personal security and reduces lifestyle impacts for a small reduction of autonomy. The two most popular heaters for ultra-high-efficiency houses are a small heat pump, which also provides air conditioning, or a central hydronic (radiator) air heater with water recirculating from the water heater. Passivhaus designs usually integrate the heater with the ventilation system.

Earth sheltering and windbreaks can also reduce the absolute amount of heat needed by a building. Several feet below the earth, temperature ranges from in North Dakota to , in Southern Florida. Wind breaks reduce the amount of heat carried away from a building.

Rounded, aerodynamic buildings also lose less heat.

An increasing number of commercial buildings use a combined cycle with cogeneration to provide heating, often water heating, from the output of a natural gas reciprocating engine, gas turbine or stirling electric generator.

Houses designed to cope with interruptions in civil services generally incorporate a wood stove, or heat and power from diesel fuel or bottled gas, regardless of their other heating mechanisms.

Electric heaters and electric stoves may provide pollution-free heat (depending on the power source), but use large amounts of electricity. If enough electricity is provided by solar panels, wind turbines, or other means, then electric heaters and stoves become a practical autonomous design.

===Water heating===

Hot water heat recycling units recover heat from water drain lines. They increase a building&#x27;s autonomy by decreasing the heat or fuel used to heat water. They are attractive because they have no lifestyle changes.

Current practical, comfortable domestic water-heating systems combine a solar preheating system with a thermostatic gas-powered flow-through heater, so that the temperature of the water is consistent, and the amount is unlimited. This reduces life-style impacts at some cost in autonomy.

Solar water heaters can save large amounts of fuel. Also, small changes in lifestyle, such as doing laundry, dishes and bathing on sunny days, can greatly increase their efficiency. Pure solar heaters are especially useful for laundries, swimming pools and external baths, because these can be scheduled for use on sunny days.

The basic trick in a solar water heating system is to use a well-insulated holding tank. Some systems are vacuum- insulated, acting something like large thermos bottles. The tank is filled with hot water on sunny days, and made available at all times. Unlike a conventional tank water heater, the tank is filled only when there is sunlight. Good storage makes a smaller, higher-technology collector feasible. Such collectors can use relatively exotic technologies, such as vacuum insulation, and reflective concentration of sunlight.

Cogeneration systems produce hot water from waste heat. They usually get the heat from the exhaust of a generator or fuel cell.

Heat recycling, cogeneration and solar pre-heating can save 50–75% of the gas otherwise used. Also, some combinations provide redundant reliability by having several sources of heat.
Some authorities advocate replacing bottled gas or natural gas with biogas. However, this is usually impractical unless live-stock are on-site. The wastes of a single family are usually insufficient to produce enough methane for anything more than small amounts of cooking.

===Cooling===
Annualized geo solar buildings often have buried, sloped water-tight skirts of insulation that extend from the foundations, to prevent heat leakage between the earth used as thermal mass, and the surface.

Less dramatic improvements are possible. Windows can be shaded in summer. Eaves can be overhung to provide the necessary shade. These also shade the walls of the house, reducing cooling costs.

Another trick is to cool the building&#x27;s thermal mass at night, perhaps with a whole-house fan and then cool the building from the thermal mass during the day. It helps to be able to route cold air from a sky-facing radiator (perhaps an air heating solar collector with an alternate purpose) or evaporative cooler directly through the thermal mass. On clear nights, even in tropical areas, sky-facing radiators can cool below freezing.

If a circular building is aerodynamically smooth, and cooler than the ground, it can be passively cooled by the &quot;dome effect.&quot; Many installations have reported that a reflective or light-colored dome induces a local vertical heat-driven vortex that sucks cooler overhead air downward into a dome if the dome is vented properly (a single overhead vent, and peripheral vents). Some people have reported a temperature differential as high as () between the inside of the dome and the outside. Buckminster Fuller discovered this effect with a simple house design adapted from a grain silo, and adapted his Dymaxion house and geodesic domes to use it.

Refrigerators and air conditioners operating from the waste heat of a diesel engine exhaust, heater flue or solar collector are entering use. These use the same principles as a gas refrigerator. Normally, the heat from a flue powers an &quot;absorptive chiller&quot;. The cold water or brine from the chiller is used to cool air or a refrigerated space.

Cogeneration is popular in new commercial buildings. In current cogeneration systems small gas turbines or stirling engines powered from natural gas produce electricity and their exhaust drives an absorptive chiller.

A truck trailer refrigerator operating from the waste heat of a tractor&#x27;s diesel exhaust was demonstrated by NRG Solutions, Inc. NRG developed a hydronic ammonia gas heat exchanger and vaporizer, the two essential new, not commercially available components of a waste heat driven refrigerator.

A similar scheme (multiphase cooling) can be by a multistage evaporative cooler. The air is passed through a spray of salt solution to dehumidify it, then through a spray of water solution to cool it, then another salt solution to dehumidify it again. The brine has to be regenerated, and that can be done economically with a low-temperature solar still. Multiphase evaporative coolers can lower the air&#x27;s temperature by 50 °F (28 °C), and still control humidity. If the brine regenerator uses high heat, it also partially sterilises to the air.

If enough electric power is available, cooling can be provided by conventional air conditioning using a heat pump.

===Food production===
Food production has often been included in historic autonomous projects to provide security.
Skilled, intensive gardening can support an adult from as little as 100 square meters of land per person,
possibly requiring the use of organic farming and aeroponics. Some proven intensive, low-effort food-production systems include urban gardening (indoors and outdoors). Indoor cultivation may be set up using hydroponics, while outdoor cultivation may be done using permaculture, forest gardening, no-till farming, and do nothing farming.

Greenhouses are also sometimes included. Sometimes they are also outfitted with irrigation systems or heat sink systems which can respectively irrigate the plants or help to store energy from the sun and redistribute it at night (when the greenhouses starts to cool down).

==See also==
==Notes==
==External links==
* Buckminster Fuller Institute 
*GreenSpec, a UK resources site which endorses green building products, systems, and services
* Brenda and Robert Vale. Sustainable development begins at home. March 15, 2002.
*The Cropthorne House (December 28, 2009)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q261150" start="3" end="22" title="Autonomous building" label="autonomous building"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="80" end="95" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructural"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137" start="125" end="139" title="electric power" label="electric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="146" end="154" title="gas grid" label="gas grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="181" end="197" title="sewage treatment" label="sewage treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="207" end="218" title="storm drain" label="storm drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="264" end="275" title="public road" label="public road"/>
<link wikidata="Q261150" start="326" end="342" title="Autonomous building" label="autonomous house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144359" start="419" end="439" title="environmental impact" label="environmental impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445479" start="472" end="490" title="costs of ownership" label="costs of ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q242606" start="532" end="546" title="green building" label="green building"/>
<link wikidata="Q267162" start="585" end="593" title="Off-grid" label="Off-grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="630" end="644" title="Civil service" label="civil services"/>
<link wikidata="Q203764" start="882" end="891" title="activists" label="activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="896" end="905" title="engineers" label="engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3737914" start="948" end="966" title="resource depletion" label="resource depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005265" start="1036" end="1050" title="New Alchemy Institute" label="New Alchemists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="1141" end="1153" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915283" start="1198" end="1208" title="bioshelter" label="bioshelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q65058235" start="1254" end="1261" title="The Ark (Prince Edward Island)" label="The Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915283" start="1262" end="1272" title="bioshelter" label="bioshelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="1287" end="1307" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q209894" start="1534" end="1538" title="fish farming" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q47793" start="1553" end="1560" title="tilapia" label="tilapia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="1565" end="1572" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="1576" end="1586" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="1661" end="1681" title="Recycling" label="recycled human waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896376" start="1785" end="1828" title="University of Sydney School of Architecture, Design and Planning" label="University of Sydney School of Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q131947028" start="1830" end="1839" title="Col James (architect)" label="Col James"/>
<link wikidata="Q261150" start="1953" end="1969" title="autonomous house" label="autonomous house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296205" start="2134" end="2143" title="Earthship" label="Earthship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313515" start="2308" end="2321" title="Mike Reynolds (architect)" label="Mike Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="2348" end="2352" title="tire" label="tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="2366" end="2371" title="soil" label="earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150682" start="2417" end="2429" title="thermal mass" label="thermal mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q110453750" start="2435" end="2451" title="earth sheltering" label="earth sheltering"/>
<link wikidata="Q81957" start="2454" end="2458" title="Berm" label="Berm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783241" start="2685" end="2696" title="blackwater (waste)" label="black water"/>
<link wikidata="Q838858" start="2744" end="2751" title="cistern" label="cistern"/>
<link wikidata="Q40015" start="2854" end="2865" title="solar energy" label="solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662745" start="2898" end="2915" title="William McDonough" label="William McDonough"/>
<link wikidata="Q522879" start="2920" end="2929" title="Ken Yeang" label="Ken Yeang"/>
<link wikidata="Q645708" start="3122" end="3131" title="ING Group" label="ING Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="3139" end="3148" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960794" start="3278" end="3300" title="Brenda and Robert Vale" label="Brenda and Robert Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q242606" start="4717" end="4733" title="Green building" label="energy-efficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q242606" start="5171" end="5185" title="green building" label="green building"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="5253" end="5267" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="5287" end="5303" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="5353" end="5367" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937" start="6217" end="6224" title="climate" label="climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043452" start="6507" end="6518" title="Maintenance (technical)" label="maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="6551" end="6561" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075169" start="6695" end="6704" title="Greywater" label="Greywater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857" start="6747" end="6753" title="toilet" label="toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107656" start="6777" end="6783" title="garden" label="garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241671" start="6950" end="6958" title="plumbing" label="plumbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q152285" start="6989" end="7005" title="waterless urinal" label="waterless urinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q178496" start="7016" end="7033" title="composting toilet" label="composting toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="7147" end="7151" title="water well" label="well"/>
<link wikidata="Q890886" start="7158" end="7165" title="Drilling" label="drilled"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562148" start="7347" end="7366" title="Sono arsenic filter" label="Sono arsenic filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="7388" end="7395" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="7466" end="7473" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137507" start="7619" end="7639" title="rainwater harvesting" label="rainwater harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="7682" end="7689" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="7849" end="7855" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="7860" end="7869" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="7895" end="7899" title="rain" label="rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3947" start="7946" end="7951" title="house" label="house"/>
<link wikidata="Q838858" start="8075" end="8082" title="cistern" label="cistern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075344" start="8403" end="8414" title="water chlorination" label="chlorinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q272175" start="8423" end="8438" title="reverse osmosis" label="reverse osmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="9370" end="9377" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q131313" start="9609" end="9618" title="heat pump" label="heat pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798773" start="9622" end="9638" title="HVAC" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030716" start="9763" end="9774" title="Solar still" label="Solar still"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070179" start="9877" end="9907" title="multiple effect humidification" label="multiple effect humidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q272175" start="9992" end="10007" title="reverse osmosis" label="reverse osmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444189" start="10110" end="10120" title="Watermaker" label="Watermaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892" start="10190" end="10203" title="drinking water" label="potable water"/>
<link wikidata="Q214403" start="10208" end="10213" title="brine" label="brine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817125" start="10215" end="10242" title="Atmospheric water generator" label="Atmospheric water generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q178496" start="10342" end="10359" title="Composting toilet" label="Composting toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="10393" end="10398" title="feces" label="feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q212254" start="10618" end="10626" title="humanure" label="humanure"/>
<link wikidata="Q19904193" start="10709" end="10729" title="heavy metal toxicity" label="heavy metal toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267830" start="11249" end="11264" title="reclaimed water" label="reclaimed water"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="11517" end="11525" title="aquarium" label="aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409556" start="11537" end="11556" title="incinerating toilet" label="incinerating toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="11804" end="11808" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q864699" start="11816" end="11826" title="bioreactor" label="bioreactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="11977" end="11981" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="12021" end="12026" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="12036" end="12043" title="distill" label="distill"/>
<link wikidata="Q386300" start="12390" end="12401" title="septic tank" label="septic tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="12460" end="12476" title="sewage treatment" label="sewage treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q555853" start="12551" end="12570" title="anaerobic digestion" label="anaerobic digestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227441" start="12808" end="12820" title="Cesspool emptier" label="vacuum truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q30680599" start="13355" end="13371" title="packaging toilet" label="packaging toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097999" start="13889" end="13899" title="pit toilet" label="pit toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615741" start="13902" end="13909" title="latrine" label="latrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q153938" start="13916" end="13924" title="outhouse" label="outhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="14401" end="14412" title="storm sewer" label="storm sewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421263" start="14450" end="14460" title="stormwater" label="stormwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="14490" end="14503" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="14545" end="14552" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344823" start="14917" end="14922" title="swale (geographical feature)" label="swale"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="14964" end="14972" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q48741" start="15614" end="15624" title="green roof" label="green roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553201" start="15904" end="15913" title="LED light" label="LED light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054823" start="16214" end="16225" title="energy star" label="energy star"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="16267" end="16277" title="solar cell" label="solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q49833" start="16862" end="16874" title="wind turbine" label="wind turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939248" start="16973" end="16991" title="small wind turbine" label="small wind turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="17313" end="17323" title="wind power" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="17570" end="17582" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3917224" start="17868" end="17892" title="Micro hydro" label="small hydropower systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792996" start="18406" end="18428" title="Gorlov helical turbine" label="Gorlov helical turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q853093" start="18432" end="18449" title="Ossberger turbine" label="Ossberger turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q861135" start="18675" end="18694" title="distributed generation" label="electric power grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685471" start="18731" end="18743" title="net metering" label="net metering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289211" start="19054" end="19078" title="single-wire earth return" label="single-wire earth return"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19105" end="19109" title="MALT (electricity system)" label="MALT"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="19318" end="19325" title="propane" label="propane"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="19327" end="19338" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38423" start="19353" end="19359" title="Diesel fuel" label="diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061251" start="19606" end="19640" title="magnetic levitation" label="passively stable magnetic bearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q183576" start="19694" end="19702" title="flywheel" label="flywheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q474383" start="19751" end="19772" title="Ballard Power Systems" label="Ballard Power Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3904949" start="19809" end="19831" title="regenerative fuel cell" label="regenerative fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327149" start="19964" end="19979" title="Earth battery" label="Earth batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007184" start="20022" end="20038" title="telluric current" label="telluric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="20154" end="20164" title="Telegraphy" label="telegraphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q902723" start="20250" end="20269" title="Microbial fuel cell" label="Microbial fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11569191" start="20275" end="20299" title="thermoelectric generator" label="thermoelectric generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192544" start="20653" end="20664" title="trombe wall" label="trombe wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611845" start="20692" end="20701" title="Steve Baer" label="skylights"/>
<link wikidata="Q385817" start="20704" end="20725" title="passive solar building design" label="Passive solar heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="21124" end="21143" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="21158" end="21177" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150682" start="21214" end="21226" title="thermal mass" label="thermal mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q837515" start="21290" end="21303" title="solar heating" label="solar heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441920" start="21317" end="21337" title="Annualized geo solar" label="Annualized geo solar"/>
<link wikidata="Q918306" start="21951" end="21961" title="Thermal insulation" label="insulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255891" start="21976" end="21999" title="straw-bale construction" label="straw-bale construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q464221" start="22259" end="22269" title="passive house" label="Passivhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q888" start="22456" end="22463" title="krypton" label="krypton"/>
<link wikidata="Q696" start="22468" end="22473" title="argon" label="argon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150682" start="22729" end="22741" title="thermal mass" label="thermal mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q131313" start="23159" end="23168" title="heat pump" label="heat pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="23190" end="23206" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q27098513" start="23286" end="23298" title="water heating" label="water heater"/>
<link wikidata="Q110453750" start="23378" end="23394" title="Earth sheltering" label="Earth sheltering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039061" start="23399" end="23408" title="windbreak" label="windbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q900729" start="23745" end="23759" title="combined cycle" label="combined cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q221620" start="23765" end="23777" title="cogeneration" label="cogeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q630010" start="23852" end="23872" title="reciprocating engine" label="reciprocating engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193470" start="23874" end="23885" title="gas turbine" label="gas turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186212" start="23889" end="23897" title="stirling engine" label="stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q131502" start="23898" end="23916" title="electric generator" label="electric generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370219" start="24004" end="24014" title="wood stove" label="wood stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q38423" start="24039" end="24050" title="diesel fuel" label="diesel fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8539331" start="24054" end="24065" title="bottled gas" label="bottled gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q336178" start="24429" end="24453" title="Hot water heat recycling" label="Hot water heat recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953359" start="24753" end="24797" title="Tankless water heater" label="thermostatic gas-powered flow-through heater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136659" start="24939" end="24957" title="Solar water heater" label="Solar water heater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136659" start="25288" end="25307" title="solar water heating" label="solar water heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="25373" end="25379" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23664" start="25420" end="25427" title="thermos" label="thermos"/>
<link wikidata="Q221620" start="25802" end="25814" title="Cogeneration" label="Cogeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q288706" start="25846" end="25856" title="waste heat" label="waste heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q221620" start="25947" end="25959" title="cogeneration" label="cogeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8539331" start="26150" end="26161" title="bottled gas" label="bottled gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="26165" end="26176" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q171076" start="26182" end="26188" title="biogas" label="biogas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="26331" end="26338" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q322418" start="26886" end="26901" title="whole-house fan" label="whole-house fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q102289" start="27744" end="27762" title="Buckminster Fuller" label="Buckminster Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q213643" start="27828" end="27838" title="grain silo" label="grain silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497291" start="27856" end="27870" title="Dymaxion house" label="Dymaxion house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135180" start="27875" end="27888" title="geodesic dome" label="geodesic dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q332868" start="28144" end="28162" title="absorptive refrigeration" label="absorptive chiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q186212" start="28364" end="28379" title="stirling engine" label="stirling engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q332868" start="28454" end="28472" title="absorptive chiller" label="absorptive chiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q336041" start="28554" end="28568" title="diesel exhaust" label="diesel exhaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="28634" end="28641" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131313" start="29431" end="29440" title="heat pump" label="heat pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107656" start="29577" end="29583" title="garden" label="garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q381640" start="29714" end="29724" title="aeroponics" label="aeroponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194826" start="29792" end="29807" title="urban agriculture" label="urban gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611612" start="29832" end="29850" title="Grow house" label="Indoor cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191667" start="29871" end="29882" title="hydroponics" label="hydroponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572" start="29928" end="29940" title="permaculture" label="permaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q397350" start="29942" end="29958" title="forest gardening" label="forest gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227672" start="29960" end="29975" title="no-till farming" label="no-till farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787367" start="29981" end="29999" title="do nothing farming" label="do nothing farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="30002" end="30012" title="Greenhouse" label="Greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142963" start="30104" end="30113" title="Thermal energy storage" label="heat sink"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960794" start="30446" end="30468" title="Brenda and Robert Vale" label="Brenda and Robert Vale"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3027" wikidata="Q47534" url="?curid=3027" title="Anubis">
<text>Anubis (; ), also known as Inpu, Inpw, Jnpw, or Anpu in Ancient Egyptian (), is the god of funerary rites, protector of graves, and guide to the underworld, in ancient Egyptian religion, usually depicted as a canine or a man with a canine head.

Like many ancient Egyptian deities, Anubis assumed different roles in various contexts. Depicted as a protector of graves as early as the First Dynasty (), Anubis was also an embalmer. By the Middle Kingdom (c. 2055–1650 BC) he was replaced by Osiris in his role as lord of the underworld. One of his prominent roles was as a god who ushered souls into the afterlife. He attended the weighing scale during the &quot;Weighing of the Heart&quot;, in which it was determined whether a soul would be allowed to enter the realm of the dead. Anubis is one of the most frequently depicted and mentioned gods in the Egyptian pantheon; however, few major myths involved him.

Anubis was depicted in black, a color that symbolized regeneration, life, the soil of the Nile River, and the discoloration of the corpse after embalming. Anubis is associated with Wepwawet, another Egyptian god portrayed with a dog&#x27;s head or in canine form, but with grey or white fur. Historians assume that the two figures were eventually combined. Anubis&#x27; female counterpart is Anput. His daughter is the serpent goddess Kebechet.

==Name==

&quot;Anubis&quot; is a Greek rendering of this god&#x27;s Egyptian name. Before the Greeks arrived in Egypt, around the 7th century BC, the god was known as &quot;Anpu&quot; or &quot;Inpu.&quot; The root of the name in ancient Egyptian language means &quot;a royal child.&quot; &quot;Inpu&quot; has a root to &quot;inp&quot;, which means &quot;to decay.&quot; The god was also known as &quot;First of the Westerners,&quot; &quot;Lord of the Sacred Land,&quot; &quot;He Who is Upon his Sacred Mountain,&quot; &quot;Ruler of the Nine Bows,&quot; &quot;The Dog who Swallows Millions,&quot; &quot;Master of Secrets,&quot; &quot;He Who is in the Place of Embalming,&quot; and &quot;Foremost of the Divine Booth.&quot; The positions that he had were also reflected in the titles he held such as &quot;He Who Is upon His Mountain,&quot; &quot;Lord of the Sacred Land,&quot; &quot;Foremost of the Westerners,&quot; and &quot;He Who Is in the Place of Embalming.&quot;
In the Old Kingdom (), the standard way of writing his name in hieroglyphs was composed of the sound signs inpw followed by a jackal over a &quot;ḥtp&quot; sign: i-n:p-w-C6 A new form with the jackal on a tall stand appeared in the late Old Kingdom and became common thereafter: i-n:p-w-E16

Anubis&#x27; name &quot;jnpw&quot; was possibly pronounced , based on Coptic &quot;Anoup&quot; and the Akkadian transcription () in the name &lt;ri-a-na-pa&gt; &quot;Reanapa&quot; that appears in Amarna letter EA 315. However, this transcription may also be interpreted as &quot;rˁ-nfr&quot;, a name similar to that of Prince Ranefer of the Fourth Dynasty.

==History==
In Egypt&#x27;s Early Dynastic period (), Anubis was portrayed in full animal form, with a &quot;jackal&quot; head and body. A jackal god, probably Anubis, is depicted in stone inscriptions from the reigns of Hor-Aha, Djer, and other pharaohs of the First Dynasty. Since Predynastic Egypt, when the dead were buried in shallow graves, jackals had been strongly associated with cemeteries because they were scavengers which uncovered human bodies and ate their flesh. In the spirit of &quot;fighting like with like,&quot; a jackal was chosen to protect the dead, because &quot;a common problem (and cause of concern) must have been the digging up of bodies, shortly after burial, by jackals and other wild dogs which lived on the margins of the cultivation.&quot;

In the Old Kingdom, Anubis was the most important god of the dead. He was replaced in that role by Osiris during the Middle Kingdom (2000–1700 BC). In the Roman era, which started in 30 BC, tomb paintings depict him holding the hand of deceased persons to guide them to Osiris.

The parentage of Anubis varied between myths, times and sources. In early mythology, he was portrayed as a son of Ra. In the Coffin Texts, which were written in the First Intermediate Period (c. 2181–2055 BC), Anubis is the son of either the cow goddess Hesat or the cat-headed Bastet. Another tradition depicted him as the son of Ra and Nephthys. More commonly, however, he is recognized as the offspring of Osiris and Isis.In later periods, particularly during the Ptolemaic era, Anubis was sometimes described as the son of Isis and Serapis, a Hellenized form of Osiris designed to appeal to Egypt&#x27;s growing Greek population. The Greek Plutarch (c. 40–120 AD) reported a tradition that Anubis was the illegitimate son of Nephthys and Osiris, but that he was adopted by Osiris&#x27;s wife Isis:
George Hart sees this story as an &quot;attempt to incorporate the independent deity Anubis into the Osirian pantheon.&quot; An Egyptian papyrus from the Roman period (30–380 AD) simply called Anubis the &quot;son of Isis.&quot; In Nubia, Anubis was seen as the husband of his mother Nephthys.
In the Ptolemaic period (350–30 BC), when Egypt became a Hellenistic kingdom ruled by Greek pharaohs, Anubis was merged with the Greek god Hermes, becoming Hermanubis. The two gods were considered similar because they both guided souls to the afterlife. The center of this cult was in &quot;uten-ha&quot;/&quot;Sa-ka&quot;/ Cynopolis, a place whose Greek name means &quot;city of dogs.&quot; In Book XI of &quot;The Golden Ass&quot; by Apuleius, there is evidence that the worship of this god was continued in Rome through at least the 2nd century. Indeed, Hermanubis also appears in the alchemical and hermetical literature of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance.

Although the Greeks and Romans typically scorned Egyptian animal-headed gods as bizarre and primitive (Anubis was mockingly called &quot;Barker&quot; by the Greeks), Anubis was sometimes associated with Sirius in the heavens and Cerberus and Hades in the underworld. In his dialogues, Plato often has Socrates utter oaths &quot;by the dog&quot; (Greek: &quot;kai me ton kuna&quot;), &quot;by the dog of Egypt&quot;, and &quot;by the dog, the god of the Egyptians&quot;, both for emphasis and to appeal to Anubis as an arbiter of truth in the underworld.

==Roles==

===Embalmer===

As &quot;jmy-wt&quot; (Imiut or the Imiut fetish) &quot;He who is in the place of embalming&quot;, Anubis was associated with mummification. He was also called &quot;ḫnty zḥ-nṯr&quot; &quot;He who presides over the god&#x27;s booth&quot;, in which &quot;booth&quot; could refer either to the place where embalming was carried out or the pharaoh&#x27;s burial chamber.

In the Osiris myth, Anubis helped Isis to embalm Osiris. Indeed, when the Osiris myth emerged, it was said that after Osiris had been killed by Set, Osiris&#x27;s organs were given to Anubis as a gift. With this connection, Anubis became the patron god of embalmers; during the rites of mummification, illustrations from the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot; often show a wolf-mask-wearing priest supporting the upright mummy.

===Protector of tombs===

Anubis was a protector of graves and cemeteries. Several epithets attached to his name in Egyptian texts and inscriptions referred to that role. &quot;Khenty-Amentiu&quot;, which means &quot;foremost of the westerners&quot; and was also the name of a different canine funerary god, alluded to his protecting function because the dead were usually buried on the west bank of the Nile. He took other names in connection with his funerary role, such as &quot;tpy-ḏw.f&quot; (Tepy-djuef) &quot;He who is upon his mountain&quot; (i.e. keeping guard over tombs from above) and &quot;nb-t3-ḏsr&quot; (Neb-ta-djeser) &quot;Lord of the sacred land&quot;, which designates him as a god of the desert necropolis.

The Jumilhac papyrus recounts another tale where Anubis protected the body of Osiris from Set. Set attempted to attack the body of Osiris by transforming himself into a leopard. Anubis stopped and subdued Set, however, and he branded Set&#x27;s skin with a hot iron rod. Anubis then flayed Set and wore his skin as a warning against evil-doers who would desecrate the tombs of the dead. Priests who attended to the dead wore leopard skin in order to commemorate Anubis&#x27; victory over Set. The legend of Anubis branding the hide of Set in leopard form was used to explain how the leopard got its spots.

Most ancient tombs had prayers to Anubis carved on them.

===Guide of souls===
By the late pharaonic era (664–332 BC), Anubis was often depicted as guiding individuals across the threshold from the world of the living to the afterlife. Though a similar role was sometimes performed by the cow-headed Hathor, Anubis was more commonly chosen to fulfill that function. Greek writers from the Roman period of Egyptian history designated that role as that of &quot;psychopomp&quot;, a Greek term meaning &quot;guide of souls&quot; that they used to refer to their own god Hermes, who also played that role in Greek religion. Funerary art from that period represents Anubis guiding either men or women dressed in Greek clothes into the presence of Osiris, who by then had long replaced Anubis as ruler of the underworld.

===Weigher of hearts===
One of the roles of Anubis was as the &quot;Guardian of the Scales.&quot; The critical scene depicting the weighing of the heart, in the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;, shows Anubis performing a measurement that determined whether the person was worthy of entering the realm of the dead (the underworld, known as &quot;Duat&quot;). By weighing the heart of a deceased person against &quot;ma&#x27;at&quot;, who was often represented as an ostrich feather, Anubis dictated the fate of souls. Souls heavier than a feather would be devoured by Ammit, and souls lighter than a feather would ascend to a heavenly existence.

==Portrayal in art==
Anubis was one of the most frequently represented deities in ancient Egyptian art. He is depicted in royal tombs as early as the First Dynasty. The god is typically treating a king&#x27;s corpse, providing sovereign to mummification rituals and funerals, or standing with fellow gods at the Weighing of the Heart of the Soul in the Hall of Two Truths. One of his most popular representations is of him, with the body of a man and the head of a jackal with pointed ears, standing or kneeling, holding a gold scale while a heart of the soul is being weighed against Ma&#x27;at&#x27;s white truth feather.

In the early dynastic period, he was depicted in animal form, as a black canine. Anubis&#x27;s distinctive black color did not represent the animal, rather it had several symbolic meanings. It represented &quot;the discolouration of the corpse after its treatment with natron and the smearing of the wrappings with a resinous substance during mummification.&quot; Being the color of the fertile silt of the River Nile, to Egyptians, black also symbolized fertility and the possibility of rebirth in the afterlife. In the Middle Kingdom, Anubis was often portrayed as a man with the head of a jackal. The African jackal was the species depicted and the template of numerous Ancient Egyptian deities, including Anubis. An extremely rare depiction of him in fully human form was found in a chapel of Ramesses II in Abydos.

Anubis is often depicted wearing a ribbon and holding a &quot;nḫ3ḫ3&quot; &quot;flail&quot; in the crook of his arm. Another of Anubis&#x27;s attributes was the &quot;jmy-wt&quot; or imiut fetish, named for his role in embalming. In funerary contexts, Anubis is shown either attending to a deceased person&#x27;s mummy or sitting atop a tomb protecting it. New Kingdom tomb-seals also depict Anubis sitting atop the nine bows that symbolize his domination over the enemies of Egypt.

==Worship==
Although he does not appear in many myths, he was extremely popular with Egyptians and those of other cultures. The Greeks linked him to their god Hermes, the god who guided the dead to the afterlife. The pairing was later known as Hermanubis. Anubis was heavily worshipped because, despite modern beliefs, he gave the people hope. People marveled in the guarantee that their body would be respected at death, their soul would be protected and justly judged.

Anubis had male priests who sported wood masks with the god&#x27;s likeness when performing rituals. His cult center was at Cynopolis in Upper Egypt but memorials were built everywhere and he was universally revered in every part of the nation.

== See also ==
* Abatur, Mandaean uthra who weighs the souls of the dead to determine their fate
* Anput
* &quot;Anubias&quot;
* Bhairava
* Hades

==References==
===Informational notes===
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


===Further reading===
* 

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47534" start="0" end="6" title="Anubis" label="Anubis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47534" start="27" end="31" title="Anubis" label="Inpu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47534" start="33" end="37" title="Anubis" label="Inpw"/>
<link wikidata="Q47534" start="39" end="43" title="Anubis" label="Jnpw"/>
<link wikidata="Q47534" start="48" end="52" title="Anubis" label="Anpu"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="56" end="72" title="Egyptian language" label="Ancient Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q871389" start="145" end="155" title="Duat" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q447131" start="160" end="185" title="ancient Egyptian religion" label="ancient Egyptian religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q149892" start="209" end="215" title="Canis" label="canine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122064" start="232" end="243" title="cynocephaly" label="canine head"/>
<link wikidata="Q146083" start="256" end="280" title="ancient Egyptian deities" label="ancient Egyptian deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q203859" start="384" end="397" title="First Dynasty of Egypt" label="First Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q332997" start="421" end="429" title="Embalming" label="embalmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="438" end="452" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q46491" start="490" end="496" title="Osiris" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q154365" start="524" end="534" title="underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q634304" start="572" end="612" title="psychopomp" label="god who ushered souls into the afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q134566" start="630" end="644" title="weighing scale" label="weighing scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076616" start="854" end="871" title="List of Egyptian gods" label="Egyptian pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="1003" end="1013" title="Nile" label="Nile River"/>
<link wikidata="Q372560" start="1094" end="1102" title="Wepwawet" label="Wepwawet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302818" start="1305" end="1310" title="Anput" label="Anput"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353960" start="1348" end="1356" title="Kebechet" label="Kebechet"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="1428" end="1436" title="Egyptian language" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338367" start="1454" end="1477" title="Greeks in Egypt" label="Greeks arrived in Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q177819" start="2337" end="2348" title="Old Kingdom of Egypt" label="Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="2393" end="2404" title="Egyptian hieroglyphs" label="hieroglyphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q104670789" start="2476" end="2479" title="Hotep" label="ḥtp"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="2725" end="2733" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301400" start="2788" end="2794" title="Reanap" label="Reanap"/>
<link wikidata="Q235502" start="2818" end="2831" title="Amarna letters" label="Amarna letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q760610" start="2948" end="2955" title="Ranefer" label="Ranefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q211001" start="2963" end="2977" title="Fourth Dynasty of Egypt" label="Fourth Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q187979" start="3008" end="3029" title="Early Dynastic Period of Egypt" label="Early Dynastic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q105272263" start="3089" end="3095" title="African golden wolf" label="jackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q106771" start="3201" end="3208" title="Hor-Aha" label="Hor-Aha"/>
<link wikidata="Q152375" start="3210" end="3214" title="Djer" label="Djer"/>
<link wikidata="Q203859" start="3242" end="3255" title="First Dynasty of Egypt" label="First Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q208520" start="3263" end="3280" title="Predynastic Egypt" label="Predynastic Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q177819" start="3763" end="3774" title="Old Kingdom" label="Old Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="3873" end="3887" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="3911" end="3920" title="History of Roman Egypt" label="Roman era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252904" start="4149" end="4151" title="Ra" label="Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q532105" start="4160" end="4172" title="Coffin Texts" label="Coffin Texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q232211" start="4200" end="4225" title="First Intermediate Period" label="First Intermediate Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035843" start="4289" end="4294" title="Hesat" label="Hesat"/>
<link wikidata="Q129106" start="4313" end="4319" title="Bastet" label="Bastet"/>
<link wikidata="Q169040" start="4373" end="4381" title="Nephthys" label="Nephthys"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="4679" end="4687" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q79876" start="4831" end="4835" title="Isis" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q106310764" start="4837" end="4848" title="George Hart (Egyptologist)" label="George Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q28246" start="4938" end="4954" title="Osiris myth" label="Osirian pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="4991" end="5003" title="Egypt (Roman province)" label="Roman period"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="5069" end="5074" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="5138" end="5147" title="Ptolemaic Egypt" label="Ptolemaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="5188" end="5199" title="Hellenistic civilization" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="5260" end="5265" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="5270" end="5276" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319713" start="5287" end="5297" title="Hermanubis" label="Hermanubis"/>
<link wikidata="Q634304" start="5354" end="5366" title="psychopomp" label="guided souls"/>
<link wikidata="Q756820" start="5404" end="5408" title="Cult (religious practice)" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008796" start="5455" end="5464" title="Cynopolis" label="Cynopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044767" start="5543" end="5557" title="The Golden Ass" label="The Golden Ass"/>
<link wikidata="Q170512" start="5567" end="5575" title="Apuleius" label="Apuleius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="5641" end="5645" title="Ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="5719" end="5729" title="alchemy" label="alchemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q192933" start="5734" end="5744" title="Hermeticism" label="hermetical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="5763" end="5774" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="5783" end="5794" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="5821" end="5827" title="Ancient Romans" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="6000" end="6006" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q83496" start="6026" end="6034" title="Cerberus" label="Cerberus"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="6082" end="6087" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="6098" end="6106" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="6143" end="6148" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q917392" start="6415" end="6427" title="Imiut fetish" label="Imiut fetish"/>
<link wikidata="Q332997" start="6461" end="6470" title="embalming" label="embalming"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="6505" end="6518" title="mummification" label="mummification"/>
<link wikidata="Q28246" start="6755" end="6766" title="Osiris myth" label="Osiris myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q174361" start="7079" end="7095" title="Book of the Dead" label="Book of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q173387" start="7223" end="7228" title="grave" label="grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q39614" start="7234" end="7244" title="cemeteries" label="cemeteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q29410" start="7287" end="7318" title="Ancient Egyptian literature" label="Egyptian texts and inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q620863" start="7348" end="7362" title="Khenti-Amentiu" label="Khenty-Amentiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q620863" start="7458" end="7477" title="Khenti-Amentiu" label="canine funerary god"/>
<link wikidata="Q200141" start="7887" end="7897" title="necropolis" label="necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7904" end="7920" title="Jumilhac papyrus" label="Jumilhac papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34706" start="8069" end="8076" title="leopard" label="leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602017" start="8126" end="8133" title="human branding" label="branded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145315" start="8183" end="8189" title="flaying" label="flayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q200141" start="8268" end="8285" title="necropolis" label="tombs of the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q621917" start="8593" end="8611" title="Late Period of ancient Egypt" label="late pharaonic era"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8732" end="8741" title="Ancient Egyptian religion#Afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q133343" start="8807" end="8813" title="Hathor" label="Hathor"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="8896" end="8908" title="Egypt (Roman province)" label="Roman period"/>
<link wikidata="Q634304" start="8967" end="8977" title="psychopomp" label="psychopomp"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="9074" end="9080" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="9111" end="9125" title="ancient Greek religion" label="Greek religion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9127" end="9139" title="Funerary art#Ancient Egypt and Nubia" label="Funerary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q174361" start="9490" end="9506" title="Book of the Dead" label="Book of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q154365" start="9637" end="9647" title="underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q871389" start="9664" end="9668" title="Duat" label="Duat"/>
<link wikidata="Q170471" start="9728" end="9750" title="Maat" label="&amp;quot;ma&amp;#x27;at&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q131483" start="9886" end="9891" title="Ammit" label="Ammit"/>
<link wikidata="Q318394" start="10047" end="10067" title="Art of ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egyptian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q203859" start="10115" end="10128" title="First Dynasty of Egypt" label="First Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687413" start="10277" end="10310" title="Weighing of the Heart" label="Weighing of the Heart of the Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q187979" start="10597" end="10618" title="Early Dynastic Period of Egypt" label="early dynastic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q427329" start="10859" end="10865" title="natron" label="natron"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="10985" end="10989" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="10997" end="11007" title="Nile" label="River Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="11111" end="11125" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q105272263" start="11194" end="11208" title="African wolf" label="African jackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="11345" end="11361" title="anthropomorphism" label="fully human form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523" start="11387" end="11398" title="Ramesses II" label="Ramesses II"/>
<link wikidata="Q192268" start="11402" end="11408" title="Abydos, Egypt" label="Abydos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931086" start="11491" end="11496" title="crook and flail" label="flail"/>
<link wikidata="Q917392" start="11594" end="11606" title="imiut fetish" label="imiut fetish"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="11768" end="11779" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338616" start="11827" end="11836" title="nine bows" label="nine bows"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="12023" end="12029" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319713" start="12139" end="12149" title="Hermanubis" label="Hermanubis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008796" start="12491" end="12500" title="Cynopolis" label="Cynopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q203751" start="12504" end="12515" title="Upper Egypt" label="Upper Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q305678" start="12630" end="12636" title="Abatur" label="Abatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503273" start="12647" end="12652" title="uthra" label="uthra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302818" start="12712" end="12717" title="Anput" label="Anput"/>
<link wikidata="Q112429" start="12726" end="12733" title="Anubias" label="Anubias"/>
<link wikidata="Q854730" start="12742" end="12750" title="Bhairava" label="Bhairava"/>
<link wikidata="Q41410" start="12753" end="12758" title="Hades" label="Hades"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3029" wikidata="Q710027" url="?curid=3029" title="Arthur Jensen">
<text>Arthur Robert Jensen (August 24, 1923 – October 22, 2012) was an American psychologist and writer. He was a professor of educational psychology at the University of California, Berkeley. Jensen was known for his work in psychometrics and differential psychology, the study of how and why individuals differ behaviorally from one another.

He was a major proponent of the hereditarian position in the nature and nurture debate, the position that genetics play a significant role in behavioral traits, such as intelligence and personality. He was the author of over 400 scientific papers published in refereed journals and sat on the editorial boards of the scientific journals &quot;Intelligence&quot; and &quot;Personality and Individual Differences&quot;.

Jensen was controversial, largely for his conclusions regarding the causes of race-based differences in IQ.

==Early life and education==
Jensen was born August 24, 1923, in San Diego, California, the son of Linda Mary (née Schachtmayer) and Arthur Alfred Jensen, who operated and owned a lumber and building materials company. His paternal grandparents were Danish immigrants and his mother was of half-Polish Jewish and half-German descent.

As a child, Jensen was interested in herpetology and classical music, playing clarinet in the San Diego Symphony orchestra.

Jensen received a B.A. in psychology from the University of California, Berkeley in 1945 and went on to obtain his M.A. in psychology in 1952 from San Diego State College. He earned his Ph.D. in clinical psychology from Columbia University in 1956 under the supervision of Percival Symonds on the thematic apperception test. From 1956 through 1958, he did postdoctoral research at the University of London, Institute of Psychiatry with Hans Eysenck.

Upon returning to the United States, he became a researcher and professor at the University of California, Berkeley, where he focused on individual differences in learning, especially the influences of culture, development, and genetics on intelligence and learning. He received tenure at Berkeley in 1962. He concentrated on the learning difficulties of culturally disadvantaged students.

Jensen had a lifelong interest in classical music and was, early in his life, attracted by the idea of becoming a conductor himself. At 14, he conducted a band that won a nationwide contest held in San Francisco. Later, he conducted orchestras and attended a seminar given by Nikolai Sokoloff. Soon after graduating from Berkeley, he moved to New York, mainly to be near the conductor Arturo Toscanini. He was also deeply interested in the life and example of Gandhi, producing an unpublished book-length manuscript on his life. During Jensen&#x27;s period in San Diego he spent time working as a social worker with the San Diego Department of Public Welfare.

==IQ and academic achievement==
Jensen&#x27;s interest in learning differences directed him to the extensive testing of school children. The results led him to distinguish between two separate types of learning ability. &quot;Level I&quot;, or associative learning, may be defined as retention of input and rote memorization of simple facts and skills. &quot;Level II&quot;, or conceptual learning, is roughly equivalent to the ability to manipulate and transform inputs, that is, the ability to solve problems.

Later, Jensen was an important advocate in the mainstream acceptance of the general factor of intelligence, a concept which was essentially synonymous with his &quot;Level II&quot; conceptual learning. The general factor, or &quot;g&quot;, is an abstraction that stems from the observation that scores on all forms of cognitive tests correlate positively with one another.

Jensen claimed, on the basis of his research, that general cognitive ability is essentially an inherited trait, determined predominantly by genetic factors rather than by environmental conditions. He also contended that while associative learning, or memorizing ability, is equally distributed among the races, conceptual learning, or synthesizing ability, occurs with significantly greater frequency in some races than in others.

Jensen&#x27;s most controversial work, published in February 1969 in the &quot;Harvard Educational Review&quot;, was titled &quot;How Much Can We Boost IQ and Scholastic Achievement?&quot; It concluded, among other things, that Head Start programs designed to boost African-American IQ scores had failed, and that this was likely never to be remedied, largely because, in Jensen&#x27;s estimation, 80% of the variance in IQ in the population studied was the result of genetic factors and the remainder was due to environmental influences.

The paper immediately prompted weeks of violent protest on the Berkley campus, with additional protests occurring throughout the 1970s.

The work became one of the most cited papers in the history of psychological testing and intelligence research, although a large number of citations consisted of rebuttals of Jensen&#x27;s work, or references to it as an example of a controversial paper.

Jensen was among the most frequent contributors to the German journal &quot;Neue Anthropologie&quot;, a publication founded by the neo-Nazi Jürgen Rieger, and served alongside Rieger on this journal&#x27;s editorial board.

In 1994 he was one of 52 signatories on &quot;Mainstream Science on Intelligence,&quot; an essay written by Linda Gottfredson and published in &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, which declared the consensus of the signing scholars on the meaning and significance of IQ following the publication of the book &quot;The Bell Curve&quot;. Jensen received $1.1 million from the Pioneer Fund,
an organization frequently described as racist and white supremacist in nature.
The fund contributed a total of $3.5 million to researchers cited in The Bell Curve&#x27;s most controversial chapter &quot;that suggests some races are naturally smarter than others&quot; with Jensen&#x27;s works being cited twenty-three times in the book&#x27;s bibliography.

==Death==
He died on October 22, 2012, at his home in Kelseyville, California, at age 89.

==Assessment==
According to David Lubinski of Vanderbilt University, the &quot;extent to which [Jensen&#x27;s] work was either admired or reviled by many distinguished scientists is unparalleled.&quot;

After Jensen&#x27;s death, James Flynn of the University of Otago, a prominent advocate of the environmental position, told &quot;The New York Times&quot; that Jensen was without racial bias and had not initially foreseen that his research would be used to argue for racial supremacy and that his career was &quot;emblematic of the extent to which American scholarship is inhibited by political orthodoxy&quot;, though he noted that Jensen shifted towards genetic explanations later in life.

===Support===

After psychologist Paul E. Meehl was honored by the APA in 1998, he wrote in the journal &quot;Psychological Reports&quot; that Jensen&#x27;s &quot;contributions, in both quality and quantity, certainly excelled mine&quot; and that he was &quot;embarrassed&quot; that APA had not also honored Jensen, which Meeh claimed was due to political correctness.

Psychologist Sandra Scarr wrote in the journal &quot;Intelligence&quot; in 1998 that Jensen possessed an &quot;uncompromising personal integrity&quot; and set the standard for &quot;honest psychological science&quot;. She described his critics as &quot;politically driven liars, who distort scientific facts in a misguided and condescending effort to protect an impossible myth about human equality&quot;.

Steven J. Haggbloom, writing for &quot;Review of General Psychology&quot; in 2002, rated Jensen as one of the 100 most eminent psychologists of the 20th century, based on six different metrics chosen by Haggbloom.

In 1980 Jensen published a book in defense of the tests used to measure mental abilities, titled &quot;Bias in Mental Testing&quot;. Reviewing this book, psychologist Kenneth Kaye endorsed Jensen&#x27;s distinction between bias and discrimination, saying that he found many of Jensen&#x27;s opponents to be more politically biased than Jensen was.

===Criticism===

Melvin Konner of Emory University, wrote:
Lisa Suzuki and Joshua Aronson of New York University wrote that Jensen had largely ignored evidence which failed to support his position that IQ test score gaps represent genetic racial differences.

Paleontologist and evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould criticized Jensen&#x27;s work in his 1981 book &quot;The Mismeasure of Man&quot;. Gould writes that Jensen misapplies the concept of &quot;heritability&quot;, which is defined as a measure of the variation of a trait due to inheritance &quot;within&quot; a population (Gould 1981: 127; 156–157). According to Gould, Jensen uses heritability to measure differences &quot;between&quot; populations. Gould also disagrees with Jensen&#x27;s belief that IQ tests measure a real variable, &quot;g&quot;, or &quot;the general factor common to a large number of cognitive abilities&quot; which can be measured along a unilinear scale. This is a claim most closely identified with Charles Spearman. According to Gould, Jensen misunderstood the research of L. L. Thurstone to ultimately support this claim; Gould, however, argues that Thurstone&#x27;s factor analysis of intelligence revealed &quot;g&quot; to be an illusion (1981: 159; 13-314). Gould criticizes Jensen&#x27;s sources including his use of Catharine Cox&#x27;s 1926 &quot;Genetic Studies of Genius&quot;, which examines historiometrically the IQs of historic intellectuals after their deaths (Gould 1981: 153–154).

==Books==

=== &quot;Bias in Mental Testing&quot; ===
&quot;Bias in Mental Testing&quot; (1980) is a book examining the question of test bias in commonly used standardized tests. The book runs almost 800 pages and has been called &quot;exhaustive&quot; by three researchers who reviewed the field 19 years after the book&#x27;s publication. It reviewed in detail the available evidence about test bias across major US racial/ethnic groups. Jensen concluded that &quot;the currently most widely used standardized tests of mental ability -- IQ, scholastic aptitude, and achievement tests -- are, by and large, not biased against any of the native-born English-speaking minority groups on which the amount of research evidence is sufficient for an objective determination of bias, if the tests were in fact biased. For most nonverbal standardized tests, this generalization is not limited to English-speaking minorities.&quot; (p. ix). Jensen also published a summary of the book the same year which was a target article in the journal &quot;Behavioral and Brain Sciences&quot; to which 27 commentaries were printed along with the author&#x27;s reply.

=== &quot;Straight Talk about Mental Tests&quot; ===
&quot;Straight Talk about Mental Tests&quot; (1981) is a book written about psychometrics for the general public. John B. Carroll reviewed it favorably in 1982, saying it was a useful summary of the issues, as did Paul Cline writing for the &quot;British Journal of Psychiatry&quot;. In 2016, Richard J. Haier called it &quot;a clear examination of all issues surrounding mental testing&quot;.

===&quot;The g Factor&quot;===
&quot;The &quot;g&quot; Factor: The Science of Mental Ability&quot; (1998) is a book on the general intelligence factor (&quot;g&quot;). The book deals with the intellectual history of g and various models of how to conceptualize intelligence, and with the biological correlates of g, its heritability, and its practical predictive power.

===&quot;Clocking the Mind&quot;===
&quot;Clocking the Mind: Mental Chronometry and Individual Differences&quot; (2006) deals with mental chronometry (MC), and covers the speed with which the brain processes information and different ways this is measured. Jensen argues mental chronometry represents a true natural science of mental ability, which is in contrast to IQ, which merely represents an interval (ranking) scale and thus possesses no true ratio scale properties.

Joseph Glicksohn wrote in a 2007 review for &quot;Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology&quot; that &quot;The book should be perused with care in order to ensure the further profitable use of [reaction time] in both experimental and differential lines of research.&quot;

Douglas Detterman reviewed it in 2008 for &quot;Intelligence&quot;, writing that &quot;the book would make a good introduction to the field of the measurement of individual differences in cognitive tasks for beginning graduate students.&quot; Eric-Jan Wagenmakers and Han van der Mass, also writing for &quot;Intelligence&quot; in 2018, faulted the book for omitting the work by mathematical psychologists, advocating standardization of chronometric methods (which the authors consider problematic because it can hide method variance), and because it does not discuss topics such as the mutualism model of the &quot;g-&quot;factor and the Flynn effect. They describe the book&#x27;s breadth as useful, despite its simplistic approach. Jensen was on the editorial board of &quot;Intelligence&quot; when these reviews were published.

==Awards==
In 2003, Jensen was awarded the Kistler Prize for original contributions to the understanding of the connection between the human genome and human society. In 2006, the International Society for Intelligence Research awarded Jensen its Lifetime Achievement Award.

==See also==

*Heritability of IQ
*Race and intelligence
*History of the race and intelligence controversy
* Jensen box

==References==
==Further reading==

===Interviews===
*&quot;Profiles in Research. Arthur Jensen. Interview by Daniel H. Robinson and Howard Wainer.&quot; Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics Fall 2006, Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 327–352
*&quot;Intelligence, Race, and Genetics: Conversations with Arthur R. Jensen.&quot; (2002) Frank Miele (of &quot;Skeptic Magazine&quot;). Westview Press. 

===Selected articles, books, and book chapters===
*Jensen. A. R. (1973). &quot;Educational differences&quot;. London. Methuen. google books link
*
*
*Jensen, A. R. (1993). Spearman&#x27;s g: Links between psychometrics and biology. In F. M. Crinella, &amp; J. Yu (Eds.), &quot;Brain mechanisms: Papers in memory of Robert Thompson&quot; (pp. 103–129). New York: Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences.
*Jensen, A. R. (1996). Giftedness and genius: Crucial differences. In C. P. Benbow, &amp; D. J. Lubinski (Eds), &quot;Intellectual talent: Psychometric and social issues&quot; (pp. 393–411). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University.
*Jensen, A. R. (1998) The g factor and the design of education. In R. J. Sternberg &amp; W. M. Williams (Eds.), &quot;Intelligence, instruction, and assessment: Theory into practice.&quot; (pp. 111–131). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
*
*Jensen, A. R. (2002). Psychometric g: Definition and substantiation. In R. J. Sternberg, &amp; E. L. Grigorenko (Eds.). &quot;The general factor of intelligence: How general is it?&quot; (pp. 39–53). Mahwah, NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum.
*Rushton, J. P., &amp; Jensen, A. R.. (2005). Thirty years of research on Black-White differences in cognitive ability. &quot;Psychology, Public Policy, &amp; the Law, 11,&quot; 235–294. (pdf)
*Rushton, J. P., &amp; Jensen, A. R. (2003). African-White IQ differences from Zimbabwe on the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised are mainly on the &quot;g&quot; factor. &quot;Personality and Individual Differences, 34,&quot; 177–183. (pdf)
*Rushton, J. P., &amp; Jensen, A. R. (2005). Wanted: More race-realism, less moralistic fallacy. &quot;Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 11,&quot; 328–336. (pdf)

==External links==

*Arthur Robert Jensen memorial site
*Jensen&#x27;s Response to Gould&#x27;s Criticisms
*Jensen biography at Southern Poverty Law Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q710027" start="0" end="20" title="Arthur Jensen" label="Arthur Robert Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q59157" start="121" end="143" title="educational psychology" label="educational psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="151" end="185" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q506132" start="220" end="233" title="psychometrics" label="psychometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224394" start="238" end="261" title="differential psychology" label="differential psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503927" start="371" end="383" title="hereditarianism" label="hereditarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773859" start="400" end="418" title="nature and nurture" label="nature and nurture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="445" end="453" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="508" end="520" title="intelligence (trait)" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q271716" start="525" end="536" title="personality psychology" label="personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633421" start="656" end="675" title="scientific journals" label="scientific journals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665657" start="682" end="694" title="Intelligence (journal)" label="Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170649" start="711" end="749" title="Personality and Individual Differences" label="Personality and Individual Differences"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041074" start="836" end="864" title="race and intelligence" label="race-based differences in IQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="932" end="941" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="1162" end="1175" title="History of the Jews in Poland" label="Polish Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q174416" start="1239" end="1250" title="herpetology" label="herpetology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920427" start="1296" end="1314" title="San Diego Symphony" label="San Diego Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="1373" end="1407" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q913861" start="1474" end="1497" title="San Diego State College" label="San Diego State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q199906" start="1522" end="1541" title="clinical psychology" label="clinical psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="1547" end="1566" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q56677613" start="1600" end="1616" title="Percival Symonds" label="Percival Symonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q29320" start="1624" end="1650" title="thematic apperception test" label="thematic apperception test"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="1712" end="1732" title="University of London" label="University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q631045" start="1734" end="1757" title="Institute of Psychiatry" label="Institute of Psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q58632" start="1763" end="1775" title="Hans Eysenck" label="Hans Eysenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="1859" end="1893" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="2367" end="2380" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080502" start="2445" end="2461" title="Nikolai Sokoloff" label="Nikolai Sokoloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2512" end="2520" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q13003" start="2554" end="2570" title="Arturo Toscanini" label="Arturo Toscanini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="2629" end="2635" title="Gandhi" label="Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="2729" end="2738" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="3074" end="3094" title="associative learning" label="associative learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753797" start="3419" end="3449" title="g factor (psychometrics)" label="general factor of intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022593" start="3768" end="3827" title="Heritability of IQ" label="general cognitive ability is essentially an inherited trait"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676377" start="4228" end="4254" title="Harvard Educational Review" label="Harvard Educational Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q5918000" start="4279" end="4331" title="How Much Can We Boost IQ and Scholastic Achievement?" label="How Much Can We Boost IQ and Scholastic Achievement?"/>
<link wikidata="Q10973208" start="4377" end="4387" title="Head Start (education)" label="Head Start"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="4415" end="4431" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q170277" start="4432" end="4434" title="IQ" label="IQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="4878" end="4885" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q873512" start="4889" end="4910" title="psychological testing" label="psychological testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q506132" start="4915" end="4936" title="Psychometrics" label="intelligence research"/>
<link wikidata="Q65063830" start="5158" end="5176" title="Neue Anthropologie" label="Neue Anthropologie"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="5213" end="5221" title="Neo-Nazism" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q68080" start="5222" end="5235" title="Jürgen Rieger" label="Jürgen Rieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278378" start="5352" end="5386" title="Mainstream Science on Intelligence" label="Mainstream Science on Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q274893" start="5414" end="5431" title="Linda Gottfredson" label="Linda Gottfredson"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="5455" end="5478" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q575800" start="5621" end="5635" title="The Bell Curve" label="The Bell Curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196688" start="5681" end="5693" title="Pioneer Fund" label="Pioneer Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="5746" end="5763" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839339" start="6108" end="6131" title="Kelseyville, California" label="Kelseyville, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236802" start="6173" end="6187" title="David Lubinski" label="David Lubinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383120" start="6375" end="6386" title="James Flynn (academic)" label="James Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="6478" end="6496" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059366" start="6875" end="6888" title="Paul E. Meehl" label="Paul E. Meehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="7187" end="7208" title="political correctness" label="political correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471944" start="7224" end="7236" title="Sandra Scarr" label="Sandra Scarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318373" start="7657" end="7685" title="Review of General Psychology" label="Review of General Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902573" start="7936" end="7958" title="Bias in Mental Testing" label="Bias in Mental Testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390306" start="8000" end="8012" title="Kenneth Kaye" label="Kenneth Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814009" start="8199" end="8212" title="Melvin Konner" label="Melvin Konner"/>
<link wikidata="Q41440520" start="8257" end="8271" title="Joshua Aronson" label="Joshua Aronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="8275" end="8294" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q180619" start="8484" end="8501" title="Stephen Jay Gould" label="Stephen Jay Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473730" start="8555" end="8576" title="The Mismeasure of Man" label="The Mismeasure of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503548" start="8641" end="8653" title="heritability" label="heritability"/>
<link wikidata="Q585259" start="8698" end="8707" title="Genetic diversity" label="variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753797" start="9013" end="9027" title="general factor" label="general factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q356611" start="9174" end="9190" title="Charles Spearman" label="Charles Spearman"/>
<link wikidata="Q914054" start="9249" end="9264" title="L. L. Thurstone" label="L. L. Thurstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q726474" start="9344" end="9359" title="factor analysis" label="factor analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050816" start="9498" end="9511" title="Catharine Cox" label="Catharine Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620818" start="9578" end="9596" title="Historiometry" label="historiometrically"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902573" start="9734" end="9756" title="Bias in Mental Testing" label="Bias in Mental Testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244907" start="9833" end="9850" title="standardized test" label="standardized test"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10066" end="10075" title="Intelligence quotient#Test bias" label="test bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q814445" start="10713" end="10742" title="Behavioral and Brain Sciences" label="Behavioral and Brain Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q132336" start="10991" end="11006" title="John Bissell Carroll" label="John B. Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035428" start="11124" end="11153" title="British Journal of Psychiatry" label="British Journal of Psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326731" start="11170" end="11186" title="Richard J. Haier" label="Richard J. Haier"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11309" end="11364" title="The g Factor: The Science of Mental Ability" label="The &amp;quot;g&amp;quot; Factor: The Science of Mental Ability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753797" start="11395" end="11422" title="general intelligence factor" label="general intelligence factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18907383" start="11774" end="11792" title="mental chronometry" label="mental chronometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030236" start="12168" end="12211" title="Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology" label="Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301671" start="12395" end="12412" title="Douglas K. Detterman" label="Douglas Detterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665657" start="12443" end="12455" title="Intelligence (journal)" label="Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q54269438" start="12638" end="12658" title="Eric-Jan Wagenmakers" label="Eric-Jan Wagenmakers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12663" end="12679" title="Han van der Mass" label="Han van der Mass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12982" end="12997" title="G factor (psychometrics)#Mutualism" label="mutualism model"/>
<link wikidata="Q508736" start="13034" end="13046" title="Flynn effect" label="Flynn effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048164" start="13271" end="13284" title="Kistler Prize" label="Kistler Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="13369" end="13375" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="13386" end="13393" title="society" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666903" start="13408" end="13455" title="International Society for Intelligence Research" label="International Society for Intelligence Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022593" start="13519" end="13537" title="Heritability of IQ" label="Heritability of IQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041074" start="13539" end="13560" title="Race and intelligence" label="Race and intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870895" start="13562" end="13610" title="History of the race and intelligence controversy" label="History of the race and intelligence controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923093" start="13613" end="13623" title="Jensen box" label="Jensen box"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301770" start="13980" end="13996" title="The Skeptics Society" label="Skeptic Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362428" start="15129" end="15143" title="J. Philippe Rushton" label="Rushton, J. P."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3032" wikidata="Q862709" url="?curid=3032" title="A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum">
<text>A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum is a musical with music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim and book by Burt Shevelove and Larry Gelbart.

Inspired by the farces of the ancient Roman playwright Plautus (254–184 BC), specifically &quot;Curculio&quot;, &quot;Pseudolus&quot;, &quot;Miles Gloriosus&quot;, and &quot;Mostellaria&quot;, the musical tells the bawdy story of a slave named Pseudolus and his attempts to win his freedom by helping his young master woo the girl next door. The plot displays many classic elements of farce, including puns, the slamming of doors, cases of mistaken identity (frequently involving characters disguising themselves as one another), and satirical comments on social class. The title derives from a line often used by vaudeville comedians to begin a story: &quot;A funny thing happened on the way to the theater&quot;.

The musical&#x27;s original 1962 Broadway run won several Tony Awards, including Best Musical and Best Author (Musical). &quot;A Funny Thing&quot; has enjoyed several Broadway and West End revivals and was made into a successful film starring the original lead of the stage musical, Zero Mostel.

==Productions==

===Original Broadway===
&quot;A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum&quot; opened on Broadway on May 8, 1962, at the Alvin Theatre, and then transferred to the Mark Hellinger Theatre and the Majestic Theatre, where the show closed on August 29, 1964, after 964 performances and 8 previews.

The show&#x27;s creators sought Phil Silvers for the lead role of Pseudolus, but he turned them down, allegedly because he would have to perform onstage without his glasses, and his vision was so poor that he feared tripping into the orchestra pit. He is also quoted as turning down the role for being &quot;Sgt. Bilko in a toga&quot;. (Silvers eventually played the role – wearing his glasses – in a 1972 revival. In the film, he played Marcus Lycus.) Milton Berle also passed on the role. Eventually, Zero Mostel was cast.

During out-of-town tryouts the show attracted little business and did not play well. Jerome Robbins, to whom the show had originally been offered but who turned it down, was called in to give advice and make changes. In the interim, Joshua Logan was invited to direct, but according to Sondheim was rejected &quot;because he wanted too much male nudity.&quot; It was then offered to veteran director George Abbott, who found it to be difficult to handle alone. The biggest change Robbins made was adding a new opening number to replace &quot;Love Is in the Air&quot; and introduce the show as a bawdy, wild comedy. Stephen Sondheim wrote the song &quot;Comedy Tonight&quot; for this new opening. From that point on, the show was a success.

It was directed by George Abbott and produced by Hal Prince, with choreography by Jack Cole and uncredited staging and choreography by Robbins. The scenic and costume design was by Tony Walton. The wardrobe is on display at the Costume World Broadway Collection in Pompano Beach, Florida. The lighting design was by Jean Rosenthal. Along with Mostel, the musical featured a cast of seasoned performers, including Jack Gilford (Mostel&#x27;s friend and fellow blacklist member), David Burns, John Carradine, Ruth Kobart, and Raymond Walburn. The young lovers were played by Brian Davies and Preshy Marker. Karen Black, originally cast as the ingenue, was replaced out of town.

The show won six Tony Awards, including Best Musical, Best Actor (Mostel), Best Supporting Actor (Burns), Best Book, and Best Director. The score, Sondheim&#x27;s first Broadway production for which he wrote both music and lyrics, did not earn a nomination.

===London===
The show was presented twice in London&#x27;s West End. The 1963 production and its 1986 revival were staged at the Strand Theatre and the Piccadilly Theatre respectively, and starred Frankie Howerd as Pseudolus and Leon Greene as Miles Gloriosus in both. In the 1963 production, Kenneth Connor appeared as Hysterium, &#x27;Monsewer&#x27; Eddie Gray as Senex and Jon Pertwee as Marcus Lycus. In the 1986 revival, Patrick Cargill was Senex with Ronnie Stevens as Hysterium and Derek Royle as Erronius.

In 2004 there was a limited-run revival at the Royal National Theatre, starring Desmond Barrit as Pseudolus, Philip Quast as Miles Gloriosus, Hamish McColl as Hysterium and Isla Blair as Domina (who had previously played Philia in the 1963 production). This production was nominated for the 2005 Olivier Award, Outstanding Musical Production.

===Motion picture adaptation===

Both Mostel and Gilford re-created their Broadway roles for the 1966 musical film directed by Richard Lester. Leon Greene reprised his West End role (Miles Gloriosus), while Phil Silvers portrayed Lycus, Michael Crawford portrayed Hero, and Michael Hordern played Senex. Buster Keaton made his final film appearance in the role of Erronius.

===Broadway revivals===
A revival opened on Broadway at the Lunt-Fontanne Theatre on April 4, 1972, and closed on August 12, 1972, after 156 performances. Directed by co-author Burt Shevelove the cast starred Phil Silvers as Pseudolus (later replaced by Tom Poston), Lew Parker as Senex, Carl Ballantine as Lycus and Reginald Owen as Erronius. Larry Blyden, who played Hysterium, the role created by Jack Gilford, also co-produced. &quot;Pretty Little Picture&quot; and &quot;That&#x27;ll Show Him&quot; were dropped from the show, and were replaced with &quot;Echo Song&quot; (sung by Hero and Philia), and &quot;Farewell&quot; (added for Nancy Walker as Domina, as she and Senex depart for the country). &quot;Echo Song&quot; and &quot;Farewell&quot; had been added to a production staged in Los Angeles the previous year and were composed by Sondheim. They had to close soon after Phil Silvers suffered a stroke. The show won two Tony Awards, Best Leading Actor in a Musical for Silvers, and Best Featured Actor in a Musical for Blyden.

The musical was revived again with great success in 1996, opening at the St. James Theatre on April 18, 1996, and closing on January 4, 1998, after 715 performances. The cast starred Nathan Lane as Pseudolus (replaced by Whoopi Goldberg and later by David Alan Grier), Mark Linn-Baker as Hysterium, Ernie Sabella as Lycus, Jim Stanek as Hero, Lewis J. Stadlen as Senex, and Cris Groenendaal as Miles Gloriosus. The production was directed by Jerry Zaks, with choreography by Rob Marshall. Lane won the 1996 Tony Award for Best Leading Actor and the Drama Desk Award, Outstanding Actor in a Musical; the production was nominated for the 1996 Tony Award and Drama Desk Award, Revival of a Musical.

Every actor who has opened in the role of Pseudolus on Broadway (Zero Mostel, Phil Silvers, and Nathan Lane) has won a Best Leading Actor Tony Award for his performance. In addition, Jason Alexander, who performed as Pseudolus in one scene in &quot;Jerome Robbins&#x27; Broadway&quot;, also won a Tony for Best Actor in a Musical.

===Other productions===
The original Australian production with American actor Jack Collins as Pseudolus opened at the Theatre Royal in Sydney in July 1964, and toured other Australian cities through 1965.

A production was directed by Stephen R. Buss at Boise State University in 1995, starring James B. Fisk, Randy Davison, Karen Wennstrom and Daniel Taylor.

In 1998, Jon English starred as Pseudolus in Essgee Entertainment&#x27;s production that opened New Year&#x27;s Day at the State Theatre, Melbourne and toured Australia and New Zealand, closing September 1999.

The Stephen Sondheim Center for the Performing Arts produced a limited-run revival of the musical from January 11 to 27, 2008. The production was directed by Randal K. West, with Justin Hill as musical director and Adam Cates as choreographer. The cast featured Richard Kind as Pseudolus, Joel Blum as Senex, Stephen DeRosa as Marcus Lycus, Sean McCall as Hysterium, and Steve Wilson as Miles Gloriosus. It also featured Diana Upton-Hill, Ryan Gaffney, Stephen Mark Crisp, Jack Kloppenborg, and Margret Clair.

The Chung Ying Theatre Company in Hong Kong staged a Cantonese version of the musical at Kwai Tsing Theatre, to celebrate the company&#x27;s 30th anniversary. It was directed by Chung King Fai and Ko Tin Lung and ran from March 14 to 21, 2009.

The Stratford Shakespeare Festival in Stratford, Ontario, Canada production ran from June 11 to November 7, 2009, with Des McAnuff directing and Wayne Cilento as choreographer. Bruce Dow originally performed the role of Pseudolus, but was forced to withdraw from the entire 2009 season due to an injury, and the role was then performed by Seán Cullen as of September 5, 2009. Stephen Ouimette played Hysterium. Mirvish Productions presented the earlier Stratford production at the Canon Theatre, Toronto, in December 2010 through January 2011. Bruce Dow and Sean Cullen were alternates in the lead role.

In October 2012 the play opened at Her Majesty&#x27;s Theatre, Melbourne, Australia, with Geoffrey Rush as Pseudolus, Magda Szubanski as Domina and Shane Bourne as Senex.

&quot;A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum&quot; was produced at the Two River Theater in Red Bank, New Jersey from November 14, 2015, to December 13, 2015, with an all-male cast (Paul Castree, Eddie Cooper, Kevin Isola, David Josefsberg, Max Kumangai, Graham Rowat, Manny Stark, Bobby Conte Thornton, David Turner, Michael Urie, Tom Deckman, and Christopher Fitzgerald).

==Plot==

In ancient Rome, some neighbors live in three adjacent houses. In the center is the house of Senex, who lives there with wife Domina, son Hero, and several slaves, including head slave Hysterium and the musical&#x27;s main character Pseudolus. A slave belonging to Hero, Pseudolus wishes to buy, win, or steal his freedom. One of the neighboring houses is owned by Marcus Lycus, who is a buyer and seller of beautiful women; the other belongs to the ancient Erronius, who is abroad searching for his long-lost children (stolen in infancy by pirates).

One day, Senex and Domina go on a trip and leave Pseudolus in charge of Hero. Hero confides in Pseudolus that he is in love with the lovely Philia, one of the courtesans in the House of Lycus who is nevertheless still a virgin. Pseudolus promises to help him win Philia&#x27;s love in exchange for his own freedom. Unfortunately (as the two find out when they visit Lycus), Philia has been sold to the renowned warrior, Captain Miles Gloriosus, who is expected to claim her very soon. Pseudolus, an excellent liar, uses Philia&#x27;s cheery disposition to convince Lycus that she has picked up a plague from Crete, which causes its victims to smile endlessly in its terminal stages. By offering to isolate her in Senex&#x27;s house, he is able to give Philia and Hero some time alone together, and the two fall in love. But Philia insists that, even though she is in love with Hero, she must honor her contract with the captain, for &quot;that is the way of a courtesan.&quot; To appease her, he tells her to wait (&quot;that&#x27;s what virgins do best, isn&#x27;t it?&quot;) inside, and that he will have the captain knock three times when he arrives. Pseudolus comes up with a plan to slip Philia a sleeping potion. He will then tell Lycus that she has died of the Cretan plague and will offer to remove the body. Hero will stow away with Philia on a ship headed for Greece. Pseudolus steals Hysterium&#x27;s book of potions and has Hero read him the recipe for the sleeping potion; the only ingredient he lacks is a cup of mare&#x27;s sweat, and Pseudolus goes to search for it.

Unexpectedly, Senex returns home early from his trip, and knocks three times on his own door. Philia comes out of the house, and, thinking that Senex is the captain, offers herself up to him. Surprised but game, Senex instructs Philia to wait in the house for him, and she does. Hysterium arrives and nervously tells Senex that Philia is the new maid that he has hired. Pseudolus returns, having procured the mare&#x27;s sweat; seeing that Senex has returned and grasping the need to keep him out of the way, Pseudolus discreetly sprinkles some of the horse-sweat onto him, then suggests that the road trip has left Senex in dire need of a bath. Taking the bait, Senex instructs Hysterium to draw him a bath in the long-empty house of Erronius. But while this is happening, Erronius returns home, finally having given up the search for his long-lost children. Hysterium, desperate to keep him out of the house where his master is bathing, tells the old man that his house has become haunted – a story seemingly confirmed by the sound of Senex singing in his bath. Erronius immediately determines to have a soothsayer come and banish the spirit from his house, and Pseudolus obligingly poses as one, telling Erronius that, in order to banish the spirit, he must travel seven times around the seven hills of Rome (thus keeping the old man occupied and out of the way for quite a while).

When Miles Gloriosus arrives to claim his courtesan-bride, Pseudolus hides Philia on the roof of Senex&#x27;s house; told that she has &quot;escaped&quot;, Lycus is terrified to face the captain&#x27;s wrath. Pseudolus offers to impersonate Lycus and talk his way out of the mess but, his ingenuity flagging, he ends up merely telling the captain that Philia has disappeared, and that he, &quot;Lycus&quot;, will search for her. Displeased and suspicious, Miles insists that his soldiers accompany Pseudolus, but the wily slave loses them in Rome&#x27;s winding streets.

Complicating matters further, Domina returns from her trip early, suspicious that her husband Senex is &quot;up to something low.&quot; She disguises herself in virginal white robes and a veil (much like Philia&#x27;s) to try to catch Senex being unfaithful. Pseudolus convinces Hysterium to help him by dressing in drag and pretending to be Philia, &quot;dead&quot; from the plague. Unfortunately, it turns out that Miles Gloriosus has just returned from Crete, where there is of course no actual plague. With the ruse thus revealed, the main characters run for their lives, resulting in a madcap chase across the stage with both Miles and Senex pursuing all three &quot;Philia&quot;s (Domina, Hysterium, and the actual Philia – all wearing identical white robes and veils). Meanwhile, the courtesans from the house of Marcus Lycus, who had been recruited as mourners at &quot;Philia&quot;&#x27;s ersatz funeral, have escaped, and Lycus sends his eunuchs out to bring them all back, adding to the general pandemonium.

Finally, the captain&#x27;s troops are able to round everyone up. His plot thoroughly unraveled, Pseudolus appears to be in deep trouble – but Erronius, completing his third circuit of the Roman hills, shows up fortuitously to discover that Miles Gloriosus and Philia are wearing matching rings which mark them as his long-lost children. Philia&#x27;s betrothal to the captain is nullified by the unexpected revelation that he is her brother, and, as the daughter of a free-born citizen, she is freed from Marcus Lycus. Philia weds Hero with Erronius&#x27; blessing; Pseudolus gets his freedom and the lovely courtesan Gymnasia; Gloriosus receives twin courtesans to replace Philia; and Erronius is reunited with his children. A happy ending prevails for all – except for poor Senex, stuck with his shrewish wife Domina.

==Characters==
*Pseudolus: A Roman slave, owned by Hero, who seeks to win freedom by helping Hero win the heart of Philia. The slave name &quot;Pseudolus&quot; means &quot;Faker&quot;. While originally written as a male role, it has been performed by female actors as well.
*Hero: Young son of Senex who falls in love with the virgin, Philia.
*Philia: (Greek for &quot;love&quot;) A virgin in the house of Marcus Lycus, and Hero&#x27;s love interest. Her name is also a homophone of the Latin word &quot;Filia&quot;, which means daughter. This foreshadows her status as the daughter of Erronius.
* Hysterium: (Latin for &quot;Hysterical&quot;, or &quot;Anxious&quot;, the suffix &quot;-um&quot; makes the name neuter, and the character&#x27;s gender is often mistaken throughout the piece) The chief slave in the house of Senex.
*Senex: (Latin for &quot;old man&quot;) A henpecked, sardonic Roman senator living in a less fashionable suburb of Rome.
*Domina: (Latin for &quot;mistress&quot;) The wife of Senex. A manipulative, shrewish woman who is loathed by even her husband.
*Marcus Lycus: A purveyor of courtesans, who operates from the house to the left of Senex. (Name based on Lycus, the pimp in Plautus&#x27;s &quot;Poenulus&quot;.)
*Miles Gloriosus: (Latin for &quot;boastful soldier&quot;, the archetype of the braggart soldier in Roman comedies) A captain in the Roman army to whom Marcus Lycus has promised Philia.
*Erronius: (Latin for &quot;wandering&quot;) Senex&#x27;s elderly neighbor in the house to the right. He has spent the past twenty years searching for his two children, kidnapped in infancy by pirates.
*Gymnasia: (Greek for &quot;Athletic&quot;, with the connotation of nakedness) A courtesan from the house of Lycus with whom Pseudolus falls in love.
*Tintinabula: (Latin for &quot;Bells&quot;) A jingling, bell-wearing courtesan in the house of Lycus.
*Vibrata: (Latin for &quot;Vibrant&quot;) A wild, vibrant courtesan in the house of Lycus.
*Geminae: (Latin for &quot;Twins&quot;) Twin courtesans in the house of Lycus.
*Panacea: (Greek for &quot;Cure All&quot;) A courtesan in the house of Lycus.
*Proteans: Choristers who play multiple roles (slaves, citizens, soldiers, and eunuchs). They accompany Pseudolus in &quot;Comedy Tonight&quot;. On Broadway, three people played all of these roles.

==Cast==
==Songs==
Act I
* &quot;Comedy Tonight&quot; – Pseudolus and Company
* &quot;Love, I Hear&quot; – Hero
* &quot;Free&quot; – Pseudolus and Hero
* &quot;The House of Marcus Lycus&quot; – Lycus, Pseudolus and Courtesans
* &quot;Lovely&quot; – Philia and Hero
* &quot;Pretty Little Picture&quot; – Pseudolus, Hero, and Philia
* &quot;Everybody Ought to Have a Maid&quot; – Senex, Pseudolus, Hysterium and Lycus
* &quot;I&#x27;m Calm&quot; – Hysterium
* &quot;Impossible&quot; – Senex and Hero
* &quot;Bring Me My Bride&quot; – Miles Gloriosus, Pseudolus and Company

Act II
* &quot;That Dirty Old Man&quot; – Domina
* &quot;That&#x27;ll Show Him&quot; – Philia
* &quot;Lovely&quot; (reprise) – Pseudolus and Hysterium
* &quot;Funeral Sequence&quot; – Pseudolus, Miles Gloriosus and Company
* &quot;Finale&quot; – Company
Cut songs: 
*&quot;Love Is in the Air&quot; – Prologus (Played by Senex) and Proteans &quot;(Originally intended as the opening number, replaced with &quot;Comedy Tonight&quot;. The song was later featured in the film The Birdcage (1996) where it was performed by Robin Williams and Christine Baranski.)&quot; 
*&quot;Invocation and Instructions to the Audience&quot; (Another version of the opening number. Used in subsequent revues of Sondheim songs and was sung by Nathan Lane in the musical &quot;The Frogs&quot;.)
*&quot;I Do Like You&quot; – Pseudolus and Hysterium
*&quot;There&#x27;s Something About a War&quot; – Miles Gloriosus
*&quot;Echo Song&quot; – Philia and Hero
*&quot;Your Eyes Are Blue&quot; – Hero
*&quot;The Gaggle of Geese&quot; – Erronius
*&quot;What Do You Do With a Woman?&quot; – Hero
Notes:

&quot;Pretty Little Picture&quot; is frequently dropped from productions, and one verse of &quot;I&#x27;m Calm&quot; is also often trimmed. A song for Domina entitled &quot;Farewell&quot; was added for the 1972 revival as she and Senex depart for the country. &quot;Echo Song&quot; was reinstated in the same revival.

==Awards and honors==

===Original Broadway production===
===1972 Broadway revival===
===1996 Broadway revival===
.

==References==
Notes
Bibliography
*&quot;&#x27;A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum&#x27; plot summary &amp; character descriptions&quot; from StageAgent.com
*&quot;Plot and production information&quot;, guidetomusicaltheatre.com

==External links==
*&quot;A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum&quot; at the Sondheim Database
* &quot;&quot;A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum&quot; Sondheim Guide
* &quot;A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum&quot; at the Music Theatre International website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="52" end="59" title="Musical theatre" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q153579" start="85" end="101" title="Stephen Sondheim" label="Stephen Sondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136301" start="114" end="128" title="Burt Shevelove" label="Burt Shevelove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806065" start="133" end="146" title="Larry Gelbart" label="Larry Gelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q193979" start="165" end="170" title="farce" label="farce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="179" end="192" title="Ancient Rome" label="ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q47160" start="204" end="211" title="Plautus" label="Plautus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215764" start="245" end="253" title="Curculio (play)" label="Curculio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233667" start="267" end="276" title="Pseudolus" label="Pseudolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230918" start="290" end="305" title="Miles Gloriosus (play)" label="Miles Gloriosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235754" start="323" end="334" title="Mostellaria" label="Mostellaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="381" end="386" title="Slavery in ancient Rome#Roman comedy" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q193979" start="534" end="539" title="farce" label="farce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880044" start="589" end="606" title="mistaken identity" label="mistaken identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="763" end="773" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="898" end="906" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="923" end="933" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="1045" end="1053" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971276" start="1081" end="1098" title="A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum (film)" label="a successful film"/>
<link wikidata="Q191952" start="1148" end="1159" title="Zero Mostel" label="Zero Mostel"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1272" end="1280" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974872" start="1304" end="1317" title="Neil Simon Theatre" label="Alvin Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767988" start="1347" end="1369" title="Mark Hellinger Theatre" label="Mark Hellinger Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393081" start="1378" end="1394" title="Majestic Theatre (Broadway)" label="Majestic Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q601358" start="1510" end="1522" title="Phil Silvers" label="Phil Silvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233667" start="1544" end="1553" title="Pseudolus" label="Pseudolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756888" start="1786" end="1796" title="The Phil Silvers Show" label="Sgt. Bilko"/>
<link wikidata="Q558933" start="1931" end="1943" title="Milton Berle" label="Milton Berle"/>
<link wikidata="Q353019" start="2089" end="2103" title="Jerome Robbins" label="Jerome Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q505141" start="2237" end="2249" title="Joshua Logan" label="Joshua Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506831" start="2764" end="2777" title="George Abbott" label="George Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q605924" start="2794" end="2804" title="Hal Prince" label="Hal Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677001" start="2827" end="2836" title="Jack Cole (choreographer)" label="Jack Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803671" start="2926" end="2937" title="Tony Walton" label="Tony Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q671458" start="3010" end="3032" title="Pompano Beach, Florida" label="Pompano Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174416" start="3061" end="3075" title="Jean Rosenthal" label="Jean Rosenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q555182" start="3158" end="3170" title="Jack Gilford" label="Jack Gilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231929" start="3223" end="3234" title="David Burns (actor)" label="David Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q312878" start="3236" end="3250" title="John Carradine" label="John Carradine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942972" start="3252" end="3263" title="Ruth Kobart" label="Ruth Kobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q262373" start="3269" end="3284" title="Raymond Walburn" label="Raymond Walburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q232333" start="3350" end="3361" title="Karen Black" label="Karen Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="3439" end="3449" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="3740" end="3748" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064499" start="3810" end="3824" title="Novello Theatre" label="Strand Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7190566" start="3833" end="3851" title="Piccadilly Theatre" label="Piccadilly Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q979233" start="3878" end="3892" title="Frankie Howerd" label="Frankie Howerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524659" start="3910" end="3921" title="Leon Greene" label="Leon Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304656" start="3974" end="3988" title="Kenneth Connor" label="Kenneth Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540491" start="4012" end="4043" title="&amp;#x27;Monsewer&amp;#x27; Eddie Gray" label="&amp;#x27;Monsewer&amp;#x27; Eddie Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349934" start="4047" end="4052" title="Senex" label="Senex"/>
<link wikidata="Q467601" start="4057" end="4068" title="Jon Pertwee" label="Jon Pertwee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755311" start="4107" end="4122" title="Patrick Cargill" label="Patrick Cargill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441799" start="4138" end="4152" title="Ronnie Stevens (actor)" label="Ronnie Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066359" start="4170" end="4181" title="Derek Royle" label="Derek Royle"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="4243" end="4265" title="Royal National Theatre" label="Royal National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422650" start="4276" end="4290" title="Desmond Barrit" label="Desmond Barrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901473" start="4305" end="4317" title="Philip Quast" label="Philip Quast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645381" start="4338" end="4351" title="Hamish McColl" label="Hamish McColl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155355" start="4369" end="4379" title="Isla Blair" label="Isla Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q28470" start="4492" end="4505" title="Olivier Award" label="Olivier Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q842256" start="4642" end="4654" title="musical film" label="musical film"/>
<link wikidata="Q346508" start="4667" end="4681" title="Richard Lester" label="Richard Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524659" start="4683" end="4694" title="Leon Greene" label="Leon Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q656035" start="4777" end="4793" title="Michael Crawford" label="Michael Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q956867" start="4814" end="4829" title="Michael Hordern" label="Michael Hordern"/>
<link wikidata="Q103949" start="4844" end="4857" title="Buster Keaton" label="Buster Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568341" start="4941" end="4948" title="Revival (theatre)" label="revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634840" start="4975" end="4996" title="Lunt-Fontanne Theatre" label="Lunt-Fontanne Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136301" start="5092" end="5106" title="Burt Shevelove" label="Burt Shevelove"/>
<link wikidata="Q967969" start="5169" end="5179" title="Tom Poston" label="Tom Poston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536037" start="5182" end="5192" title="Lew Parker" label="Lew Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097213" start="5203" end="5218" title="Carl Ballantine" label="Carl Ballantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q577687" start="5232" end="5245" title="Reginald Owen" label="Reginald Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218026" start="5259" end="5271" title="Larry Blyden" label="Larry Blyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q464973" start="5555" end="5567" title="Nancy Walker" label="Nancy Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909790" start="6029" end="6046" title="St. James Theatre" label="St. James Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q491264" start="6139" end="6150" title="Nathan Lane" label="Nathan Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001" start="6177" end="6192" title="Whoopi Goldberg" label="Whoopi Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q562596" start="6206" end="6222" title="David Alan Grier" label="David Alan Grier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366440" start="6225" end="6240" title="Mark Linn-Baker" label="Mark Linn-Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q451833" start="6255" end="6268" title="Ernie Sabella" label="Ernie Sabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198271" start="6279" end="6289" title="Jim Stanek" label="Jim Stanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433799" start="6299" end="6315" title="Lewis J. Stadlen" label="Lewis J. Stadlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20007844" start="6330" end="6346" title="Cris Groenendaal" label="Cris Groenendaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177517" start="6398" end="6408" title="Jerry Zaks" label="Jerry Zaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q353501" start="6431" end="6443" title="Rob Marshall" label="Rob Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q311754" start="6836" end="6851" title="Jason Alexander" label="Jason Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177424" start="6902" end="6931" title="Jerome Robbins&amp;#x27; Broadway" label="Jerome Robbins&amp;#x27; Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805565" start="7064" end="7076" title="Jack Collins (actor)" label="Jack Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777440" start="7104" end="7117" title="Theatre Royal, Sydney" label="Theatre Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q891082" start="7240" end="7262" title="Boise State University" label="Boise State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574475" start="7296" end="7309" title="Randy Davison" label="Randy Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357464" start="7356" end="7367" title="Jon English" label="Jon English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399867" start="7392" end="7412" title="Essgee Entertainment" label="Essgee Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913937" start="7562" end="7609" title="Stephen Sondheim Center for the Performing Arts" label="Stephen Sondheim Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q449959" start="7820" end="7832" title="Richard Kind" label="Richard Kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609036" start="7867" end="7881" title="Stephen DeRosa" label="Stephen DeRosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q606350" start="8158" end="8176" title="Kwai Tsing Theatre" label="Kwai Tsing Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116314" start="8247" end="8261" title="Chung King Fai" label="Chung King Fai"/>
<link wikidata="Q367149" start="8318" end="8348" title="Stratford Shakespeare Festival" label="Stratford Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q740756" start="8352" end="8361" title="Stratford, Ontario" label="Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705901" start="8433" end="8444" title="Des McAnuff" label="Des McAnuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976095" start="8459" end="8472" title="Wayne Cilento" label="Wayne Cilento"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977400" start="8491" end="8500" title="Bruce Dow" label="Bruce Dow"/>
<link wikidata="Q13470470" start="8653" end="8664" title="Seán Cullen" label="Seán Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610158" start="8690" end="8706" title="Stephen Ouimette" label="Stephen Ouimette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874764" start="8725" end="8744" title="Mirvish Productions" label="Mirvish Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="8810" end="8817" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5732319" start="8954" end="8991" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre, Melbourne" label="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Theatre, Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q166272" start="9009" end="9022" title="Geoffrey Rush" label="Geoffrey Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482522" start="9037" end="9052" title="Magda Szubanski" label="Magda Szubanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487988" start="9067" end="9079" title="Shane Bourne" label="Shane Bourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859180" start="9170" end="9187" title="Two River Theater" label="Two River Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010539" start="9191" end="9211" title="Red Bank, New Jersey" label="Red Bank, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q356331" start="9417" end="9429" title="Michael Urie" label="Michael Urie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815554" start="9431" end="9442" title="Tom Deckman" label="Tom Deckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112325" start="9448" end="9470" title="Christopher Fitzgerald (actor)" label="Christopher Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786372" start="10464" end="10479" title="Miles Gloriosus" label="Miles Gloriosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q153875" start="10632" end="10638" title="Yersinia pestis" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="10644" end="10649" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410369" start="13894" end="13898" title="Drag (clothing)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q179294" start="14526" end="14532" title="Eunuch (court official)" label="eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233667" start="15436" end="15445" title="Pseudolus" label="Pseudolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567255" start="15547" end="15557" title="slave name" label="slave name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349934" start="16250" end="16255" title="Senex" label="Senex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510895" start="16311" end="16324" title="Senate of the Roman Republic" label="Roman senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q47160" start="16623" end="16630" title="Plautus" label="Plautus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786372" start="16662" end="16677" title="Miles Gloriosus" label="Miles Gloriosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160005" start="18792" end="18804" title="The Birdcage" label="The Birdcage"/>
<link wikidata="Q83338" start="18838" end="18852" title="Robin Williams" label="Robin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q229134" start="18857" end="18875" title="Christine Baranski" label="Christine Baranski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735351" start="19075" end="19084" title="The Frogs (musical)" label="The Frogs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3034" wikidata="Q191710" url="?curid=3034" title="Aleuts">
<text>Aleuts ( ; (west) or (east) ) are the Indigenous people of the Aleutian Islands, which are located between the North Pacific Ocean and the Bering Sea. Both the Aleuts and the islands are politically divided between the US state of Alaska and the Russian administrative division of Kamchatka Krai. This group is also known as the Unangax̂ in Unangam Tunuu, the Aleut language. There are 13 federally recognized Aleut tribes in the Aleut Region of Alaska. In 2000, Aleuts in Russia were recognized by government decree as a small-numbered Indigenous people.

== Etymology ==
In the Aleut language, they are known by the endonyms Unangan (eastern dialect) and Unangas (western dialect); both terms mean &quot;people&quot;. The Russian term &quot;Aleut&quot; was a general term used for both the native population of the Aleutian Islands and their neighbors to the east in the Kodiak Archipelago, who were also referred to as &quot;Pacific Eskimos&quot; or Sugpiat/Alutiit.

== Language ==
Aleut people speak Unangam Tunuu, the Aleut language, as well as English and Russian in the United States and Russia respectively. An estimated 150 people in the United States and five people in Russia speak Aleut. The language belongs to the Eskaleut language family and includes three dialects: Eastern Aleut, spoken on the Eastern Aleutian, Shumagin, Fox and Pribilof Islands; Atkan, spoken on Atka and Bering islands; and the now extinct Attuan dialect.

The Pribilof Islands has the highest number of active speakers of Unangam Tunuu. Most native elders speak Aleut, but it is rare for common people to speak the language fluently.

Beginning in 1829, Aleut was written in the Cyrillic script. From 1870, the language has been written in the Latin script. An Aleut dictionary and grammar have been published, and portions of the Bible were translated into Aleut.

==Tribes==

Aleut (Unangan) dialects and tribes:

* Attuan dialect and speaking tribes: 
** &quot;Sasignan&quot; (in Attuan dialect)/&quot;Sasxnan&quot; (in Eastern dialect)/&quot;Sasxinas&quot; (in Western dialect) or &quot;Near Islanders&quot;: in the Near Islands (Attu, Agattu, Semichi).
** &quot;Kasakam Unangangis&quot; (in Aleut, lit. &#x27;Russian Aleut&#x27;) or &quot;Copper Island Aleut&quot;: in the Commander Islands of Russian Federation (Bering, Medny).
*? &quot;Qax̂un&quot; or &quot;Rat Islanders&quot; : in the Buldir Island and Rat Islands (Kiska, Amchitka, Semisopochnoi).
* Atkan dialect or Western Aleut or &quot;Aliguutax̂&quot; (in Aleut) and speaking tribes: 
** &quot;Naahmiĝus&quot; or &quot;Delarof Islanders&quot; : in the Delarof Islands (Amatignak) and Andreanof Islands (Tanaga).
** &quot;Niiĝuĝis&quot; or &quot;Andreanof Islanders&quot; : in the Andreanof Islands (Kanaga, Adak, Atka, Amlia, Seguam). 
* Eastern Aleut dialect and speaking tribes: 
** &quot;Akuuĝun&quot; or &quot;Uniiĝun&quot; or &quot;Islanders of the Four Mountains&quot; : in the Islands of Four Mountains (Amukta, Kagamil). 
** &quot;Qawalangin&quot; or &quot;Fox Islanders&quot; : in the Fox Islands (Umnak, Samalga, western part of Unalaska). 
** &quot;Qigiiĝun&quot; or &quot;Krenitzen Islanders&quot; : in the Krenitzin Islands (eastern part of Unalaska, Akutan, Akun, Tigalda).
** &quot;Qagaan Tayaĝungin&quot; or &quot;Sanak Islanders&quot; : in the Sanak Islands (Unimak, Sanak). 
** &quot;Taxtamam Tunuu&quot; dialect of Belkofski. 
** &quot;Qaĝiiĝun&quot; or &quot;Shumigan Islanders&quot; : in the Shumagin Islands.

==Population and distribution==


Aleuts historically lived throughout the Aleutian Islands, the Shumagin Islands, and the far western part of the Alaska Peninsula, with an estimated population of around 25,000 prior to European contact. In the 1820s, the Russian-American Company administered a large portion of the North Pacific during a Russian-led expansion of the fur trade. They resettled many Aleut families to the Commander Islands (within the Aleutsky District of the Kamchatka Krai in Russia) and to the Pribilof Islands (in Alaska). These continue to have majority-Aleut communities.

According to the 2000 census, 11,941 people identified as being Aleut, while 17,000 identified as having partial Aleut ancestry. Prior to sustained European contact, approximately 25,000 Aleut lived in the archipelago. The Encyclopædia Britannica Online states that more than 15,000 people have Aleut ancestry in the early 21st century. Aleuts suffered high fatalities in the 19th and early 20th centuries from Eurasian infectious diseases to which they had no immunity. In addition, the population suffered as their customary lifestyles were disrupted. Russian traders, and later Europeans, married Aleut women and had families with them.

==History==
===After contact with Russia===

After the arrival of Russian Orthodox missionaries in the late 18th century, many Aleuts became Christian. Of the numerous Russian Orthodox congregations in Alaska, most are majority Alaska Native or Native Alaskan in ethnicity. One of the earliest Christian martyrs in North America was Saint Peter the Aleut.

Russian traders &quot;took Aleut women and children hostage&quot; to force Aleut men to hunt foxes and sea otters so the Russians could have their pelts, and often additionally enslaved Aleut men.
====Recorded uprising against the Russians====

In the 18th century, Russia &quot;promyshlenniki&quot; traders established settlements on the islands. There was high demand for the furs that the Aleuts provided from hunting. In May 1784, local Aleuts revolted on Amchitka against the Russian traders. (The Russians had a small trading post there.) According to the Aleuts, in an account recorded by Japanese castaways and published in 2004, otters were decreasing year by year. The Russians paid the Aleuts less and less in goods in return for the furs they made. The Japanese learned that the Aleuts felt the situation was at crisis. The leading Aleuts negotiated with the Russians, saying they had failed to deliver enough supplies in return for furs. Nezimov, leader of the Russians, ordered two of his men, Stephanov ( ) and Kazhimov ( ) to kill his mistress Oniishin ( ), who was the Aleut chief&#x27;s daughter, because he doubted that Oniishin had tried to dissuade her father and other leaders from pushing for more goods.

After the four leaders had been killed, the Aleuts began to move from Amchitka to neighboring islands. Nezimov, leader of the Russian group, was jailed after the whole incident was reported to Russian officials. (According to , written by Katsuragawa Hoshū after interviewing Daikokuya Kōdayū.)

===Aleut genocide against the Nicoleño Tribe in California===
According to Russian American Company (RAC) records which were translated and published in the &quot;Journal of California and Great Basin Anthropology&quot;, a 200-ton otter hunting ship named &quot;Il’mena&quot; with a mixed-nationality crew, including a majority Aleut contingent, was involved in conflict resulting in a massacre of the indigenous natives of San Nicolas Island.

In 1814, to obtain more of the commercially valuable otter pelts, a Russian company brought a party of conscripted Aleut hunters to the coastal island of San Nicolas, near the Alta California-Baja California border. The locally resident Nicoleño nation sought a payment from the Aleut hunters for the large number of otters being killed in the area. Disagreement arose, turning violent; an Aleut was killed, and in retaliation Aleuts killed a number of Nicoleño (the exact amount is unknown). In 1835, the remaining Nicoleños were removed from the island, except for one woman and possibly her child, who were left behind. In 1853 that woman, later christened Juana Maria, was found and taken to Santa Barbara. She may have been the last living Nicoleñan, as what happened to the others after they were brought to the mainland is unknown (Juana Maria, &quot;the Lone Woman of San Nicolas&quot;).

===Internment during World War II===
In June 1942, during World War II, Japanese forces occupied Kiska and Attu Islands in the western Aleutians. They later transported captive Attu Islanders to Hokkaidō, where they were held as prisoners of war in harsh conditions. Fearing a Japanese attack on other Aleutian Islands and mainland Alaska, the U.S. government evacuated hundreds more Aleuts from the western chain and the Pribilofs, placing them in internment camps in southeast Alaska, where many died of measles, influenza and other infectious diseases which spread quickly in the overcrowded dormitories. In total, about 75 died in American internment and 22died while prisoners of the Japanese. The Aleut Restitution Act of 1988 was an attempt by Congress to compensate the survivors. On June 17, 2017, the U.S. Government formally apologized for the internment of the Unangan people and their treatment in the camps.

The World War II campaign by the United States to retake Attu and Kiska was a significant component of the operations in the American and Pacific theaters.

===Population&#x27;s decline===
Before their way of life was changed by major influences from the outside world, approximately 25,000 Aleuts were located on the archipelago. Foreign diseases, harsh treatment and disruption of aboriginal society soon reduced the population to less than one-tenth this number. The 1910 Census count showed 1,491 Aleuts. In the 2000 Census, 11,941 people identified as being Aleut; nearly 17,000 said Aleuts were among their ancestors.

== Culture ==
===Housing===
Aleuts constructed partially underground houses called &quot;barabara&quot;. According to Lillie McGarvey, a 20th-century Aleut leader, &quot;s&quot; keep &quot;occupants dry from the frequent rains, warm at all times, and snugly sheltered from the high winds common to the area&quot;. Aleuts traditionally built houses by digging an oblong square pit in the ground, usually or smaller. The pit was then covered by a roof framed with driftwood, thatched with grass, and then covered with earth for insulation. Inside trenches were dug along the sides, with mats placed on top to keep them clean. The bedrooms were at the back of the lodge, opposite the entrance. Several families would stay in one house, with their own designated areas. Rather than fireplaces or bonfires in the middle, lanterns were hung in the house.

===Subsistence===
Aleuts survived by hunting and gathering. They fished for salmon, crabs, shellfish, and cod, as well as hunting sea mammals such as seal, walrus, and whales. They processed fish and sea mammals in a variety of ways: dried, smoked, or roasted. Caribou, muskoxen, deer, moose, whale, and other types of game were eaten roasted or preserved for later use. They dried berries. They were also processed as , a mixture of berries, fat, and fish. The boiled skin and blubber of a whale is a delicacy, as is that of walrus.

Today, many Aleut continue to eat customary and locally sourced foods but also buy processed foods from abroad, which is expensive in Alaska.

===Ethnobotany===
A full list of their ethnobotany has been compiled, with 65 documented plant uses.

=== Visual arts ===
Customary arts of the Aleuts include weapon-making, building of &quot;baidarkas&quot; (special hunting boats), weaving, figurines, clothing, carving, and mask making. Men as well as women often carved ivory and wood. Nineteenth century craftsmen were famed for their ornate wooden hunting hats, which feature elaborate and colorful designs and may be trimmed with sea lion whiskers, feathers, and walrus ivory. Andrew Gronholdt of the Shumagin Islands has played a vital role in reviving the ancient art of building the &quot;chagudax&quot; or bentwood hunting visors.

Aleut women sewed finely stitched, waterproof parkas from seal gut and wove fine baskets from sea-lyme grass (&quot;Elymus mollis&quot;). Some Aleut women continue to weave ryegrass baskets. Aleut arts are practiced and taught throughout the state of Alaska. As many Aleut have moved out of the islands to other parts of the state, they have taken with them the knowledge of their arts. They have also adopted new materials and methods for their art, including serigraphy, video art, and installation art.

Aleut carving, distinct in each region, has attracted traders for centuries, including early Europeans and other Alaska Natives. Historically, carving was a male art and leadership attribute whereas today it is done by both genders. Most commonly the carvings of walrus ivory and driftwood originated as part of making hunting weapons. Sculptural carvings depict local animals, such as seals and whales. Aleut sculptors also have carved human figures.

Aleuts also carve walrus ivory for other uses, such as jewelry and sewing needles. Jewelry is made with designs specific to the region of each people. Each clan would have a specific style to signify their origin. Jewelry ornaments were made for piercing lips (labrum), nose, and ears, as well as for necklaces. Each woman had her own sewing needles, which she made, and that often had detailed end of animal heads.

The main Aleut method of basketry was false embroidery (overlay). Strands of grasses or reeds were overlaid upon the basic weaving surface, to obtain a plastic effect. Basketry was an art reserved for women. Early Aleut women created baskets and woven mats of exceptional technical quality, using only their thumbnail, grown long and then sharpened, as a tool. Today, Aleut weavers continue to produce woven grass pieces of a remarkable cloth-like texture, works of modern art with roots in ancient tradition. Birch bark, puffin feathers, and baleen are also commonly used by the Aleuts in basketry. The Aleut term for grass basket is . One Aleut leader recognized by the State of Alaska for her work in teaching and reviving Aleut basketry was Anfesia Shapsnikoff. Her life and accomplishments are portrayed in the book &quot;Moments Rightly Placed&quot; (1998).

Masks were created to portray figures of their myths and oral history. The Atka people believed that another people lived in their land before them. They portrayed such ancients in their masks, which show anthropomorphic creatures named in their language. Knut Bergsland says their word means &quot;like those found in caves.&quot; Masks were generally carved from wood and were decorated with paints made from berries or other natural products. Feathers were inserted into holes carved out for extra decoration. These masks were used in ceremonies ranging from dances to praises, each with its own meaning and purpose.

===Tattoos and piercings===

The tattoos and piercings of the Aleuts demonstrated accomplishments as well as their religious views. They believed their body art would please the spirits of the animals and make any evil go away. The body orifices were believed to be pathways for the entry of evil entities. By piercing their orifices: the nose, the mouth, and ears, they would stop evil entities, , from entering their bodies. Body art also enhanced their beauty, social status, and spiritual authority.

Before the 19th century, piercings and tattoos were very common among Aleuts, especially among women. Piercings, such as the nose pin, were common among both men and women and were usually performed a few days after birth. The ornament was made of various materials, a piece of bark or bone, or an eagle&#x27;s feather shaft. From time to time, adult women decorated the nose pins by hanging pieces of amber and coral from strings on it; the semi-precious objects dangled down to their chins.

Piercing ears was also common. The Aleuts pierced holes around the rim of their ears with dentalium shells (tooth shells or tusk shells), bone, feathers, dried bird wings or skulls and/or amber. Materials associated with birds were important, as birds were considered to defend animals in the spirit world. A male would wear sea lion whiskers in his ears as a trophy of his expertise as a hunter. Worn for decorative reasons, and sometimes to signify social standing, reputation, and the age of the wearer, Aleuts would pierce their lower lips with walrus ivory and wear beads or bones. The individual with the most piercings held the highest respect.

Tattooing for women began when they reached physical maturity, after menstruation, at about age 20. Historically, men received their first tattoo after killing their first animal, an important rite of passage. Sometimes tattoos signaled social class. For example, the daughter of a wealthy, famous ancestor or father would work hard at her tattoos to show the accomplishments of that ancestor or father. They would sew, or prick, different designs on the chin, the side of the face, or under the nose.

===Aleut clothing===

Aleuts developed in one of the harshest climates in the world, and learned to create and protect warmth. Both men and women wore parkas that extended below the knees. The women wore the skin of seal or sea-otter, and the men wore bird skin parkas, the feathers turned in or out depending on the weather. When the men were hunting on the water, they wore waterproof parkas made from seal or sea-lion guts, or the entrails of bear, walrus, or whales. Parkas had a hood that could be cinched, as could the wrist openings, so water could not get in. Men wore breeches made from the esophageal skin of seals. Children wore parkas made of downy eagle skin with tanned bird skin caps. They called these parkas &quot;,&quot; meaning &#x27;rain gear&#x27; in the English language.

Sea-lions, harbor seals, and sea otters are the most abundant marine mammals. The men brought home the skins and prepared them by soaking them in urine and stretching them. The women undertook the sewing. Preparation of the gut for clothing involved several steps. The prepared intestines were turned inside out. A bone knife was used to remove the muscle tissue and fat from the walls of the intestine. The gut was cut and stretched, and fastened to stakes to dry. It was then cut and sewn to make waterproof parkas, bags, and other receptacles. On some hunting trips, the men would take several women with them. They would catch birds and prepare the carcasses and feathers for future use. They caught puffins (&quot;Lunda cirrhata&quot;, &quot;Fratercula corniculata&quot;), guillemots, and murres.

It took 40 skins of tufted puffin and 60 skins of horned puffin to make one parka. A woman would need a year for all the labor to make one parka. Each lasted two years with proper care. All parkas were decorated with bird feathers, beard bristles of seal and sea-lion, beaks of sea parrots, bird claws, sea otter fur, dyed leather, and caribou hair sewn in the seams.

Women made needles from the wing bones of seabirds. They made thread from the sinews of different animals and fish guts. A thin strip of seal intestine could also be used, twisted to form a thread. The women grew their thumbnail extra long and sharpened it. They could split threads to make them as fine as a hair. They used vermilion paint, hematite, the ink bag of the octopus, and the root of a kind of grass or vine to color the threads.

===Gender===
Russian travelers making early contact with the Aleuts mention traditional tales of two-spirits or third and fourth gender people, known as (male-bodied, &#x27;man transformed into a woman&#x27;) and (female-bodied, &#x27;woman transformed into a man&#x27;), but it is unclear whether these tales are about historical individuals or spirits.

===Hunting technologies===
====Boats====
The interior regions of the rough, mountainous Aleutian Islands provided little in terms of natural resources for the Aleutian people. They collected stones for weapons, tools, stoves or lamps. They collected and dried grasses for their woven baskets. For everything else, the Aleuts had learned to use the fish and mammals they caught and processed to satisfy their needs.

To hunt sea mammals and to travel between islands, the Aleuts became experts of sailing and navigation. While hunting, they used small watercraft called &quot;baidarkas.&quot; For regular travel, they used their large &quot;s&quot;.

The was a large, open, walrus-skin-covered boat. Aleut families used it when traveling among the islands. It was also used to transport goods for trade, and warriors took them to battle.

The (small skin boat) was a small boat covered in sea lion skin. It was developed and used for hunting because of its sturdiness and maneuverability. Aleut resembles that of a Yup&#x27;ik kayak, but it is hydrodynamically sleeker and faster. They made the for one or two persons only. The deck was made with a sturdy chamber, the sides of the craft were nearly vertical and the bottom was rounded. Most one-man &quot;s&quot; were about long and wide, whereas a two-man was on average about long and wide. It was from the that Aleut men would stand on the water to hunt from the sea.

====Weapons====
The Aleuts hunted small sea mammals with barbed darts and harpoons slung from throwing boards. These boards gave precision as well as some extra distance to these weapons.

Harpoons were also called throwing-arrows when the pointed head fit loosely into the socket of the foreshaft and the head was able to detach from the harpoon when it penetrated an animal, and remain in the wound. There were three main kinds of harpoon that the Aleuts used: a simple harpoon, with a head that kept its original position in the animal after striking, a compound (toggle-head) harpoon in which the head took a horizontal position in the animal after penetration, and the throwing-lance used to kill large animals.

The simple Aleut harpoon consisted of four main parts: the wooden shaft, the bone foreshaft, and the bonehead (tip) with barbs pointed backward. The barbed head was loosely fitted into the socket of the foreshaft so that when the animal was stabbed, it pulled the head away from the rest of the harpoon. The sharp barbs penetrated with ease, but could not be pulled out. The bone tip is fastened to a length of braided twine meanwhile; the hunter held the other end of the twine in his hand.

The compound harpoon was the most prevalent weapon of the Aleuts. Also known as the toggle-head spear, it was about the same size as the simple harpoon and used to hunt the same animals, however, this harpoon provided a more efficient and lethal weapon. This harpoon separated into four parts. The longest part was the shaft with the thicker stalk closer to the tip of the harpoon. The shaft was fitted into the socket of the fore shaft and a bone ring was then placed over the joint to hold the two pieces together, as well as, protecting the wooden shaft from splitting. Connected to the fore shaft of the harpoon is the toggle head spear tip. This tip was made of two sub shafts that break apart on impact with an animal. The upper sub shaft held the razor stone head and attached to the lower sub shaft with a small braided twine loop. Once the tip penetrates the animal the upper sub head broke off from the rest of the shaft, however, since it was still connected with the braided loop it rotated the head into a horizontal position inside the animal&#x27;s body so that it could not get away from the hunter.

The throwing lance may be distinguished from a harpoon because all its pieces are fixed and immovable. A lance was a weapon of war and it was also used to kill large marine animals after it has already been harpooned. The throwing lance usually consisted of three parts: a wooden shaft, a bone ring or belt, and the compound head that was made with a barbed bonehead and a stone tip. The length of the compound head was equivalent to the distance between the planes of a man&#x27;s chest to his back. The lance would penetrate the chest and pass through the chest cavity and exit from the back. The bone ring was designed to break after impact so that the shaft could be used again for another kill.

===Burial practices===
They buried their dead ancestors near the village. Archeologists have found many different types of burials, dating from a variety of periods, in the Aleutian Islands. Aleuts developed burial styles that were accommodated to local conditions, and honored the dead. They have had four main types of burials: , cave, above-ground sarcophagi, and burials connected to communal houses.

 burials are the most widely known type of mortuary practice found in the Aleutian Islands. The people created burial mounds, that tend to be located on the edge of a bluff. They placed stone and earth over the mound to protect and mark it. Such mounds were first excavated by archeologists in 1972 on Southwestern Unmak Island, and dated to the early contact period. Researchers have found a prevalence of these burials, and concluded it is a regional mortuary practice. It may be considered a pan-Aleutian mortuary practice.

Cave burials have been found throughout the eastern Aleutian Islands. The human remains are buried in shallow graves at the rear of the cave. These caves tend to be next to middens and near villages. Some grave goods have been found in the caves associated with such burials. For example, a deconstructed boat was found in a burial cave on Kanaga Island. There were no other major finds of grave goods in the vicinity.

Throughout the Aleutian Islands, gravesites have been found that are above-ground sarcophagi. These sarcophagi are left exposed, with no attempt to bury the dead in the ground. These burials tend to be isolated and limited to the remains of adult males, which may indicate a specific ritual practice. In the Near Islands, isolated graves have also been found with the remains, and not just the sarcophagus, left exposed on the surface. This way of erecting sarcophagi above ground is not as common as and cave burials, but it is still widespread.

Another type of practice has been to bury remains in areas next to the communal houses of the settlement. Human remains are abundant in such sites. They indicate a pattern of burying the dead within the main activity areas of the settlement. These burials consist of small pits adjacent to the houses and scattered around them. In these instances, mass graves are common for women and children. This type of mortuary practice has been mainly found in the Near Islands.

In addition to these four main types, other kinds of burials have been found in the Aleutian Islands. These more isolated examples in include mummification, private burial houses, abandoned houses, etc. To date, such examples are not considered to be part of a larger, unifying cultural practice. The findings discussed represent only the sites that have been excavated.

The variety of mortuary practices mostly did not include the ritual of including extensive grave goods, as has been found in other cultures. The remains so far have been mainly found with other human and faunal remains. The addition of objects to &quot;accompany&quot; the dead is rare. Archaeologists have been trying to dissect the absence of grave goods, but their findings have been ambiguous and do not really help the academic community to understand these practices more.

Not much information is known about the ritual parts of burying the dead. Archeologists and anthropologists have not found much evidence related to burial rituals. This lack of ritual evidence could hint at either no ritualized ceremony, or one that has not yet been revealed in the archaeological record. As a result, archaeologists cannot decipher the context to understand exactly why a certain type of burial was used in particular cases.

==Notable Aleuts==
*John Hoover (1919–2011), sculptor
* Carl E. Moses (1929–2014) businessman, state representative, who served from 1965 to 1973 as both a Republican and Democrat,
* Jacob Netsvetov (1802–1864), Russian Orthodox saint and priest
* Sergie Sovoroff (1901–1989), educator, (model sea kayak) builder
* Eve Tuck, academic, indigenous studies
*Olga (Arrsamquq) of Alaska (1916–1979) Eastern Orthodox Saint and Matushka
*Peter the Aleut (1800–1815), Eastern Orthodox Saint and martyr

== In popular culture==
In &quot;Snow Crash&quot;, a science fiction novel by American writer Neal Stephenson, a central character named Raven is portrayed as an Aleut with incredible toughness and hunting skill. The story is about revenge due in part to perceived mistreatment of the Aleuts.

==See also==

*Adamagan
*Aleutian Islands
*Aleutian tradition
*Alutiiq
*Indigenous Amerindian genetics
*Maritime Fur Trade
*Sadlermiut
*Shamanism among Alaska Natives
*Unangan Aleut
* List of Native American peoples in the United States
==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
*Black, Lydia T. &quot;Aleut Art: Unangam Aguqaadangin&quot;. Anchorage, Alaska: Aleutian/Pribilof Islands Association, 2005.

* Jochelson, Waldemar. &quot;History, Ethnology, and Anthropology of the Aleut&quot;. Washington: Carnegie institution of Washington, 1933.
* Jochelson, Waldemar, Bergsland, Knut (Editor) &amp; Dirks, Moses (Editor). &quot;Unangam Ungiikangin Kayux Tunusangin = Unangam Uniikangis ama Tunuzangis = Aleut Tales and Narratives&quot;. Fairbanks, Alaska: Alaska Native Language Center, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, 1990..

* Kohlhoff, Dean. &quot;When the Wind Was a River Aleut Evacuation in World War II&quot;. Seattle: University of Washington Press in association with Aleutian/Pribilof Islands Association, Anchorage, 1995. 

*Lee, Molly, Angela J. Linn, and Chase Hensel. Not Just a Pretty Face: Dolls and Human Figurines in Alaska Native Cultures. Fairbanks, AK: University of Alaska, 2006. Print.

* Madden, Ryan Howard. &quot;An enforced odyssey: The relocation and internment of Aleuts during World War II&quot; (PhD thesis U of New Hampshire, Durham, 1993) online 
* Murray, Martha G., and Peter L. Corey. &quot;Aleut Weavers&quot;. Juneau, AK: Alaska State Museums, Division of Libraries, Archives and Museums, 1997.

* National Park Service. &quot;Aleutian World War II .&quot; 

* Reedy-Maschner, Katherine. &quot;Aleut Identities : Tradition and Modernity in an Indigenous Fishery&quot;. Montréal, Quebec: McGill-Queen&#x27;s University Press, 2010. 

* Veltre, Douglas W. &quot;Aleut Unangax̂ Ethnobotany An Annotated Bibliography&quot;. Akureyri, Iceland: CAFF International Secretariat, 2006. 
==External links==
* Aleut Corporation
* Aleut Management Services
* Aleutian Pribilof Island Association
* Qawalangin Tribe of Unalaska
* Museum of the Aleutians
* Unalaska Communities of Memory Project Jukebox; 
* Aleut International Association
* &quot;A Grammar of Fox Island Aleutian&quot; Manuscript at Dartmouth College Library
* Aleutian Pribilof Island Community Development Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191710" start="0" end="6" title="Aleuts" label="Aleuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="38" end="55" title="Alaska Natives" label="Indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="63" end="79" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="111" end="130" title="Pacific Ocean" label="North Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q44725" start="139" end="149" title="Bering Sea" label="Bering Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="231" end="237" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948" start="281" end="295" title="Kamchatka Krai" label="Kamchatka Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q191710" start="329" end="337" title="Aleuts" label="Unangax̂"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855208" start="389" end="409" title="List of Alaska Native tribal entities" label="federally recognized"/>
<link wikidata="Q124357742" start="463" end="479" title="Aleuts in Russia" label="Aleuts in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661399" start="522" end="554" title="Unified list of Indigenous minority peoples of the North, Siberia, and the Far East of Russia" label="small-numbered Indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q27210" start="580" end="594" title="Aleut language" label="Aleut language"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="618" end="625" title="endonym" label="endonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537766" start="873" end="891" title="Kodiak Archipelago" label="Kodiak Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q27210" start="1024" end="1038" title="Aleut language" label="Aleut language"/>
<link wikidata="Q25946" start="1229" end="1253" title="Eskaleut languages" label="Eskaleut language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q81181" start="1330" end="1338" title="Shumagin Islands" label="Shumagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q195182" start="1340" end="1343" title="Fox Islands (Alaska)" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144173" start="1348" end="1364" title="Pribilof Islands" label="Pribilof Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q27210" start="1366" end="1371" title="Atkan" label="Atkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q756016" start="1383" end="1387" title="Atka Island" label="Atka"/>
<link wikidata="Q193962" start="1392" end="1398" title="Bering Island" label="Bering"/>
<link wikidata="Q758260" start="1428" end="1434" title="Attu Island" label="Attuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="1668" end="1683" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="1733" end="1745" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q195405" start="2109" end="2121" title="Near Islands" label="Near Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q758260" start="2123" end="2127" title="Attu Island" label="Attu"/>
<link wikidata="Q391578" start="2129" end="2135" title="Agattu" label="Agattu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004327" start="2137" end="2144" title="Semichi Islands" label="Semichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977419" start="2233" end="2252" title="Copper Island Aleut" label="Copper Island Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q208268" start="2267" end="2284" title="Commander Islands" label="Commander Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q193962" start="2308" end="2314" title="Bering Island" label="Bering"/>
<link wikidata="Q251315" start="2316" end="2321" title="Medny Island" label="Medny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003571" start="2384" end="2397" title="Buldir Island" label="Buldir Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623916" start="2402" end="2413" title="Rat Islands" label="Rat Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096067" start="2415" end="2420" title="Kiska Island" label="Kiska"/>
<link wikidata="Q460282" start="2422" end="2430" title="Amchitka Island" label="Amchitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030657" start="2432" end="2445" title="Semisopochnoi Island" label="Semisopochnoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q195124" start="2607" end="2622" title="Delarof Islands" label="Delarof Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q455737" start="2624" end="2633" title="Amatignak Island" label="Amatignak"/>
<link wikidata="Q195248" start="2639" end="2656" title="Andreanof Islands" label="Andreanof Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772570" start="2658" end="2664" title="Tanaga Island" label="Tanaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q195248" start="2735" end="2752" title="Andreanof Islands" label="Andreanof Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723556" start="2754" end="2760" title="Kanaga Island" label="Kanaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q176381" start="2762" end="2766" title="Adak Island" label="Adak"/>
<link wikidata="Q756016" start="2768" end="2772" title="Atka Island" label="Atka"/>
<link wikidata="Q472618" start="2774" end="2779" title="Amlia Island" label="Amlia"/>
<link wikidata="Q955387" start="2781" end="2787" title="Seguam Island" label="Seguam"/>
<link wikidata="Q166612" start="2939" end="2964" title="Islands of Four Mountains" label="Islands of Four Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q481441" start="2966" end="2972" title="Amukta Island" label="Amukta"/>
<link wikidata="Q583758" start="2974" end="2981" title="Kagamil Island" label="Kagamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q195182" start="3049" end="3060" title="Fox Islands (Alaska)" label="Fox Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q264718" start="3062" end="3067" title="Umnak Island" label="Umnak"/>
<link wikidata="Q181611" start="3069" end="3076" title="Samalga Island" label="Samalga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424060" start="3094" end="3102" title="Unalaska Island" label="Unalaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q195271" start="3174" end="3191" title="Krenitzin Islands" label="Krenitzin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424060" start="3209" end="3217" title="Unalaska Island" label="Unalaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q424195" start="3219" end="3225" title="Akutan Island" label="Akutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q423736" start="3227" end="3231" title="Akun Island" label="Akun"/>
<link wikidata="Q913006" start="3233" end="3240" title="Tigalda Island" label="Tigalda"/>
<link wikidata="Q195068" start="3316" end="3329" title="Sanak Islands" label="Sanak Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q375615" start="3331" end="3337" title="Unimak Island" label="Unimak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814673" start="3339" end="3344" title="Sanak Island" label="Sanak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238403" start="3389" end="3398" title="Belkofski, Alaska" label="Belkofski"/>
<link wikidata="Q81181" start="3468" end="3484" title="Shumagin Islands" label="Shumagin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q81181" start="3584" end="3600" title="Shumagin Islands" label="Shumagin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q60064" start="3634" end="3650" title="Alaska Peninsula" label="Alaska Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q753193" start="3743" end="3767" title="Russian-American Company" label="Russian-American Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="3856" end="3865" title="fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q208268" start="3909" end="3926" title="Commander Islands" label="Commander Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q621449" start="3939" end="3956" title="Aleutsky District" label="Aleutsky District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948" start="3964" end="3978" title="Kamchatka Krai" label="Kamchatka Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144173" start="4001" end="4017" title="Pribilof Islands" label="Pribilof Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="4022" end="4028" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="4306" end="4336" title="Encyclopædia Britannica Online" label="Encyclopædia Britannica Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="4503" end="4522" title="infectious diseases" label="infectious diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q182581" start="4544" end="4552" title="immunity (medical)" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="4790" end="4806" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="4807" end="4819" title="missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562095" start="5063" end="5078" title="Peter the Aleut" label="Peter the Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508239" start="5360" end="5374" title="promyshlenniki" label="promyshlenniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q946932" start="6549" end="6566" title="Katsuragawa Hoshū" label="Katsuragawa Hoshū"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563388" start="6586" end="6602" title="Daikokuya Kōdayū" label="Daikokuya Kōdayū"/>
<link wikidata="Q104835804" start="6868" end="6875" title="Il’mena" label="Il’mena"/>
<link wikidata="Q128362" start="7030" end="7048" title="San Nicolas Island" label="San Nicolas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q200184" start="7104" end="7109" title="otter" label="otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q490977" start="7288" end="7303" title="Nicoleño" label="Nicoleño nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128611" start="7890" end="7901" title="Juana Maria" label="Juana Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8006" end="8018" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096067" start="8045" end="8050" title="Kiska" label="Kiska"/>
<link wikidata="Q758260" start="8055" end="8059" title="Attu Island" label="Attu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="8143" end="8151" title="Hokkaidō" label="Hokkaidō"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="8177" end="8193" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="8454" end="8461" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="8463" end="8472" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716548" start="8651" end="8680" title="Aleut Restitution Act of 1988" label="Aleut Restitution Act of 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="8699" end="8707" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q249708" start="8875" end="8896" title="Aleutian Islands Campaign" label="World War II campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632857" start="8996" end="9004" title="American Theater (World War II)" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920892" start="9009" end="9025" title="Pacific Ocean theater of World War II" label="Pacific theaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658768" start="9585" end="9593" title="barabara" label="barabara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9614" end="9629" title="Lillie McGarvey" label="Lillie McGarvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q40994" start="10502" end="10508" title="walrus" label="walrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="10607" end="10614" title="reindeer" label="Caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q184004" start="10616" end="10622" title="muskox" label="muskox"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="10632" end="10637" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q539632" start="11216" end="11224" title="baidarka" label="baidarka"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="11257" end="11264" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q913572" start="11519" end="11527" title="Vibrissae" label="whiskers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352389" start="11543" end="11555" title="walrus ivory" label="walrus ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757185" start="11557" end="11573" title="Andrew Gronholdt" label="Andrew Gronholdt"/>
<link wikidata="Q60743825" start="11672" end="11680" title="Unangan hunting headgear" label="chagudax"/>
<link wikidata="Q567688" start="11762" end="11768" title="Anorak" label="parkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="11774" end="11778" title="Seal (mammal)" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13928242" start="11810" end="11824" title="sea-lyme grass" label="sea-lyme grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q13928242" start="11832" end="11845" title="Elymus mollis" label="Elymus mollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187791" start="12177" end="12187" title="serigraphy" label="serigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q682010" start="12189" end="12198" title="video art" label="video art"/>
<link wikidata="Q212431" start="12204" end="12220" title="installation art" label="installation art"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="12832" end="12836" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q373017" start="13118" end="13126" title="basketry" label="basketry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761785" start="13838" end="13857" title="Anfesia Shapsnikoff" label="Anfesia Shapsnikoff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14033" end="14044" title="Atka people" label="Atka people"/>
<link wikidata="Q311761" start="18233" end="18240" title="puffins" label="puffins"/>
<link wikidata="Q838607" start="18248" end="18262" title="Lunda cirrhata" label="Lunda cirrhata"/>
<link wikidata="Q855367" start="18276" end="18298" title="Fratercula corniculata" label="Fratercula corniculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120530" start="18307" end="18316" title="guillemot" label="guillemot"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062" start="18323" end="18329" title="Common murre" label="murres"/>
<link wikidata="Q989963" start="19220" end="19237" title="storytelling" label="traditional tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q301702" start="19241" end="19251" title="two-spirit" label="two-spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q48279" start="19256" end="19261" title="third gender" label="third"/>
<link wikidata="Q48279" start="19266" end="19279" title="fourth gender" label="fourth gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q539632" start="20075" end="20084" title="Aleutian kayak" label="baidarkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37014" start="20514" end="20525" title="Yupik peoples" label="Yup&amp;#x27;ik"/>
<link wikidata="Q179246" start="20526" end="20531" title="kayak" label="kayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152199" start="25058" end="25065" title="middens" label="middens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399692" start="25090" end="25101" title="grave goods" label="grave goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="25387" end="25397" title="sarcophagi" label="sarcophagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43616" start="26465" end="26478" title="mummification" label="mummification"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019093" start="27639" end="27650" title="John Hoover (artist)" label="John Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040066" start="27675" end="27688" title="Carl E. Moses" label="Carl E. Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q657025" start="27802" end="27817" title="Jacob Netsvetov" label="Jacob Netsvetov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454157" start="27867" end="27882" title="Sergie Sovoroff" label="Sergie Sovoroff"/>
<link wikidata="Q28924966" start="27934" end="27942" title="Eve Tuck" label="Eve Tuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086632" start="27974" end="28000" title="Olga Michael" label="Olga (Arrsamquq) of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562095" start="28050" end="28065" title="Peter the Aleut" label="Peter the Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q768389" start="28147" end="28157" title="Snow Crash" label="Snow Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q312853" start="28208" end="28223" title="Neal Stephenson" label="Neal Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q482270" start="28423" end="28431" title="Adamagan" label="Adamagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="28433" end="28449" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716558" start="28451" end="28469" title="Aleutian tradition" label="Aleutian tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745405" start="28471" end="28478" title="Alutiiq" label="Alutiiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532907" start="28480" end="28510" title="Indigenous Amerindian genetics" label="Indigenous Amerindian genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q323002" start="28512" end="28530" title="Maritime Fur Trade" label="Maritime Fur Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q488406" start="28532" end="28542" title="Sadlermiut" label="Sadlermiut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487415" start="28544" end="28574" title="Shamanism among Alaska Natives" label="Shamanism among Alaska Natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q27210" start="28576" end="28589" title="Unangan Aleut" label="Unangan Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358663" start="28592" end="28644" title="List of Native American peoples in the United States" label="List of Native American peoples in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="29949" end="29970" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3035" wikidata="Q836951" url="?curid=3035" title="Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act">
<text>The Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) was signed into law by President Richard Nixon on December 18, 1971, constituting what is still the largest land claims settlement in United States history. ANCSA was intended to resolve long-standing issues surrounding aboriginal land claims in Alaska, as well as to stimulate economic development throughout Alaska.

The settlement established Alaska Native claims to the land by transferring titles to twelve Alaska Native regional corporations and over 200 local village corporations. A thirteenth regional corporation was later created for Alaska Natives who no longer resided in Alaska. The act is codified in chapter 33 of title 43 of the US Code.

==Background==
===Alaskan statehood===

When Alaska became a state in 1959, section 4 of the Alaska Statehood Act provided that any existing Alaska Native land claims would be unaffected by statehood and held in status quo. Yet while section 4 of the act preserved Native land claims until later settlement, section 6 allowed for the state government to claim lands deemed vacant. Section 6 granted the state of Alaska the right to select lands then in the hands of the federal government, with the exception of Native territory. As a result, nearly from the public domain would eventually be transferred to the state. The state government also attempted to acquire lands under section 6 of the Statehood Act that were subject to Native claims under section 4, and that were currently occupied and used by Alaska Natives. The federal Bureau of Land Management began to process the Alaska government&#x27;s selections without taking into account the Native claims and without informing the affected Native groups.

It was against this backdrop that the original language for a land claims settlement was developed.

A 9.2-magnitude earthquake struck the state in 1964. Recovery efforts drew the attention of the federal government. The Federal Field Committee for Development Planning in Alaska decided that Natives should receive $100 million and 10% of revenue as a royalty. Nothing was done with this proposal, however, and a freeze on land transfers remained in effect.

===Founding of the Alaska Federation of Natives (AFN)===
In 1966, Emil Notti called for a statewide meeting inviting numerous leaders around Alaska to gather and create the first meeting of a committee. The historic meeting was held October 18, 1966 - on the 99th anniversary of the transfer of Alaska from Russia. Notti presided over the three-day conference as it discussed matters of land recommendations, claims committees, and political challenges the act would have in getting through congress. Many respected politicians and businessmen attended the meeting and delegates were astonished at the attention which they received from well-known political figures of the state. The growing presence and political importance of Natives was evidenced when members were able to gain election to seven of the sixty seats in the legislature.

When the group met a second time early in 1967, it emerged with a new name, The Alaska Federation of Natives (AFN), and a new full-time President, Emil Notti. AFN went on to profoundly change the human rights and economic stability of the Alaska Native population.

===Native Land Claims Task Force===
In 1967, Governor Walter Hickel summoned a group of Indigenous leaders and politicians to work out a settlement that would be satisfactory to Natives. The group met for ten days and asked for $20 million in exchange for requested lands. Among the other task force proposals were an outright grant of 1,000 acres per native village resident; a revenue-sharing program for state land claims and national mineral development projects; secured hunting and fishing rights on public lands; and a Native Commission to administrate state and federal compliance with the provisions of the claims settlement. They proposed receiving 10% of federal mineral lease revenue for ten years, once the freeze which had been placed on land patents to allow oil exploration was lifted.

===Oil===

In 1968, the Atlantic-Richfield Company discovered oil at Prudhoe Bay on the Arctic coast, catapulting the issue of land ownership into headlines. In order to lessen the difficulty of drilling at such a remote location and transporting the oil to the lower 48 states, the oil companies proposed building a pipeline to carry the oil across Alaska to the port of Valdez. At Valdez, the oil would be loaded onto tankers and shipped to the contiguous states.

The plan had been approved, but a permit to construct the pipeline, which would cross lands involved in the land claims dispute, could not be granted until the Native claims were settled. Hearings were held for the first time before the United States House&#x27;s Subcommittee on Indian Affairs in July 1968. Among those who attended the hearings were officials and legislators, as well as Laura Bergt, Roger Connor, Thoda Forslund, Cliff Groh, Barry Jackson, Flore Lekanof, Notti, and Morris Thompson.

===Government negotiations and policy===

In 1969, President Nixon appointed Hickel as Secretary of the Interior. The Alaska Federation of Natives (AFN) protested against Hickel&#x27;s nomination, but he was eventually confirmed. He worked with the AFN, negotiating with Native leaders and state government over the disputed lands. Offers went back and forth, with each rejecting the other&#x27;s proposals. The AFN wanted rights to land, while then-Governor Keith Miller believed Natives did not have legitimate claims to state land in light of the provisions of the Alaska Statehood Act. On July 8, 1970, Nixon delivered a speech reversing the Indian termination policy in favor of allowing tribal self-determination. The following month, he established the National Council on Indian Opportunity, headed by Vice President Spiro Agnew, which included eight Native leaders: Frank Belvin (Choctaw), Bergt (Iñupiat), Betty Mae Jumper (Seminole), Earl Old Person (Blackfeet), John C. Rainer (Taos Pueblo), Martin Seneca Jr. (Seneca), Harold Shunk (Yankton-Sioux), and Joseph C. &quot;Lone Eagle&quot; Vasquez (Apache-Sioux).

During the state administration of Governor William A. Egan positions were staked out upon which the AFN and other stakeholders could largely agree. Native leaders, in addition to Alaska&#x27;s congressional delegation and the state&#x27;s newly elected Governor Egan, eventually reached the basis for presenting an agreement to Congress. Bergt attended a March 1971 conference of the National Congress of American Indians in Kansas City, Missouri and was able to persuade Agnew there to meet with national officials, herself, Christiansen, an Alaska State Senator; Al Ketzler, chair of the Tanana Chiefs Conference; and Don Wright, president of the Alaska Federation of Natives a week later. That meeting held on March 12, marked a turning-point in negotiations with the various parties. The proposed settlement terms faced challenges in both houses but found a strong ally in Senator Henry M. Jackson from Washington state. The most controversial issues that continued to hold up approval were methods for determining land selection by Alaska Natives and financial distribution.

With major petroleum dollars on the line, pressure mounted to achieve a definitive legislative resolution at the federal level. In 1971, the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act was signed into law by President Nixon. It abrogated Native claims to aboriginal lands except those that are the subject of the law. In return, Natives retained up to of land and were paid $963 million. The land and money were to be divided among regional, urban, and village tribal corporations established under the law, often recognizing existing leadership.

Alaskan officials were originally divided on the bill, though by 1970, with Interior Secretary Walter Hickel, Governor William Egan, Representative Nick Begich &amp; Senators Ted Stevens &amp; Mike Gravel all backing the bill, the opposition died down. Stevens was particularly strongminded, and was key in the bill&#x27;s passage. Stevens, a freshman Senator for most of the fight, would later remark:
==Effect of land conveyances==
In 1971, barely one million acres of land in Alaska were in private hands. ANCSA, together with section 6 of Alaska Statehood Act, which the new act allowed to come to fruition, affected ownership to about of land in Alaska once wholly controlled by the federal government. That is larger by than the combined areas of Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland and Virginia.

When the bill passed in 1971, it included provisions that had never before been attempted in previous United States settlements with Native Americans. The newly passed Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act created twelve Native regional economic development corporations. Each corporation was associated with a specific region of Alaska and the Natives who had traditionally lived there. This innovative approach to native settlements engaged the tribes in corporate capitalism.

The idea originated with the AFN, who believed that the Natives would have to become a part of the capitalist system in order to survive. As stockholders in these corporations, the Natives could earn some income and stay in their traditional villages. If the corporations were managed properly, they could make profits that would enable individuals to stay, rather than having to leave Native villages to find better work. This was intended to help preserve Native culture.

==Native and state land selection==
Alaska Natives had three years from passage of ANCSA to make land selections of the granted under the act. In some cases Native corporations received outside aid in surveying the land. For instance, Doyon, Limited (one of the 13 regional corporations) was helped by the Geophysical Institute of the University of Alaska. The Institute determined which land contained resources such as minerals and coal. NASA similarly provided satellite imagery to aid in Native corporations finding areas most suited for vegetation and their traditional subsistence culture. The imagery showed locations of caribou and moose, as well as forests with marketable timber. In total about were analyzed for Doyon. Natives were able to choose tens of thousands of acres of land rich with timber while Doyon used mineral analysis to attract businesses.

The state of Alaska to date has been granted approximately 85% or of the land claims it has made under ANCSA. The state is entitled to a total of under the terms of the Statehood Act. Originally the state had 25 years after passage of the Alaska Statehood Act to file claims under section 6 of the act with the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). Amendments to ANCSA extended that deadline until 1994, with the expectation that BLM would complete processing of land transfers subject to overlapping Native claims by 2009. Nonetheless, some Native and state selections under ANCSA remained unresolved as late as December 2014.

==Criticism of ANCSA==
There was largely positive reaction to ANCSA, although not entirely. The act was supported by Natives as well as non-Natives, and likewise enjoyed bipartisan support. Natives were heavily involved in the legislative process, and the final draft of the act used many AFN ideas.

Some Natives have argued that ANCSA has hastened cultural genocide of Alaska Natives. Some Natives critiqued ANCSA as an illegitimate treaty since only tribal leaders were involved and the provisions of the act were not voted on by indigenous populations. One native described it as a social and political experiment. Critics have also argued that Natives so feared massacre or incarceration that they offered no resistance to the act.

Others have argued that the settlement was arguably the most generous afforded by the United States to a Native group. They note that some of the largest and most profitable corporations in the state are the twelve created by ANCSA. Other critics attacked the act as &quot;Native welfare&quot; and such complaints continue to be expressed.

The corporation system has been critiqued, as in some cases stockholders have sold land to outside corporations that have leveled forests and extracted minerals. But supporters of the system argue that it has provided economic benefits for indigenous peoples that outweigh these problems.

==Selected provisions of ANCSA==
* Native claims in Alaska were extinguished by means of section 4 of ANCSA.
* In exchange for abrogating Native claims, approximately one-ninth of the state&#x27;s land plus $962.5 million were distributed to more than 200 local Alaska Native &quot;village corporations&quot; established under section 8, in addition to 12 land-owning for-profit Alaska Native &quot;regional corporations&quot; and a non-land-owning thirteenth corporation for Alaska Natives who had left the state established under section 6.
* Of the compensation monies, $462.5 million was to come from the federal treasury and the rest from oil revenue-sharing.
* Settlement benefits would accrue to those with at least one-fourth Native ancestry under sections 3(b) and 5(a).
* Of the approximately 80,000 Natives enrolled under ANCSA, those living in villages (approximately two-thirds of the total) would receive 100 shares in both a village and a regional corporation.
* The remaining one-third would be &quot;at large&quot; shareholders with 100 shares in a regional corporation with additional rights to revenue from regional mineral and timber resources.
* The Alaska Native Allotment Act was revoked but with the proviso that pending claims under that act would continue to be processed under section 18. Successful applicants would be excluded under ANCSA by section 14(h)(5) from land to be used for a primary residence.
* The twelve regional corporations within the state would administer the settlement.
* A thirteenth corporation composed of Natives who had left the state would receive compensation but not land.
* Surface rights to were patented to the Native village and regional corporations under sections 12(c), as well as 14(h)(1) and (8).
* The surface rights to the patented land were granted to the village corporations and the subsurface right to the land were granted to the regional corporation, creating a split estate pursuant to section 14(f).

===Alaska Native regional corporations===
The following thirteen regional corporations were created under ANCSA:
* Ahtna, Incorporated
* The Aleut Corporation 
* Arctic Slope Regional Corporation 
* Bering Straits Native Corporation 
* Bristol Bay Native Corporation 
* Calista Corporation
* Chugach Alaska Corporation
* Cook Inlet Region, Inc. 
* Doyon, Limited
* Koniag, Incorporated
* NANA Regional Corporation 
* Sealaska Corporation
* The 13th Regional Corporation

Additionally, most regions and some villages have created their own nonprofits providing social services and health care through grant funding and federal compacts. The objectives of these nonprofits are varied, but focus generally on cultural and educational activities. These include scholarships for Native students, sponsorship of cultural and artistic events, preservation efforts for Native languages, and protection of sites with historic or religious importance.

===Alaska Native village and urban corporations===
ANCSA created about 224 village and urban corporations. Below is a representative list of village and urban corporations created under ANCSA:
* Ukpeaġvik Iñupiat Corporation, village corporation for Utqiaġvik
* Bethel Native Corporation, village corporation for Bethel
* Cape Fox Corporation, village corporation for Saxman
* Deloycheet, Inc., village corporation for Holy Cross
* Huna Totem Corporation, village corporation for Hoonah
* Haida Corporation, village corporation for Hydaburg
* Goldbelt, Inc., urban corporation for Juneau
* Paug-Vik, Inc. Ltd., village corporation for Naknek
* Chenega Corporation, village corporation for Chenega
* Afognak Native Corporation, village corporation for Afognak and Port Lions
* Kavilco Incorporated, village corporation for Kasaan
* Klukwan, Inc., village corporation for Klukwan
* The Kuskokwim Corporation , village corporation for Aniak, Crooked Creek, Georgetown, Kalskag, Lower Kalskag, Napaimute, Red Devil, Russian Mission, Sleetmute and Stony River
* Natives of Kodiak, Inc., urban corporation for Kodiak
* Ounalashka Corporation, village corporation for Unalaska
* Ouzinkie Native Corporation, village corporation for Ouzinkie
* Shee Atika, Incorporated, urban corporation for Sitka

==See also==
*Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act
*Alaska Statehood Act
*Alaska Native Allotment Act
*Alaska Land Transfer Acceleration Act
*Emil Notti

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
*Borneman, Walter R. &quot;Alaska: Saga of a Bold Land&quot;. Harper Perennial. (2004)
*Dombrowski, Kirk. &quot;Against Culture: Development, Politics, and Religion in Indian Alaska&quot; U of Nebraska Press. (2001)
*Haycox, Stephen. &quot;Alaska: An American Colony&quot;. University of Washington Press. (2006)
*Haycox, Stephen. &quot;Frigid Embrace: Politics, Economics, and Environment in Alaska&quot; Oregon University Press. (2002) 
*Haynes, James B. &quot;Land Selection and Development under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act,&quot; &quot;Arctic Institute of North America&quot;, Vol. 28–3, pp. 201–208 (September 1975)
*Linxwiler, James D. &quot;The Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act: The First Twenty Years,&quot; &quot;Proceedings from the 38th Annual Rocky Mountain Mineral Law Institute&quot;. (1992)
*Roderick, Libby. &quot;Alaska Native Cultures and Issues: Responses to Frequently Asked Questions&quot;. University of Alaska Press. (2010)
*Williams, Maria Sháa Tláa. &quot;The Alaska Native Reader: History, Culture, Politics&quot;. Duke University Press. (2009). 
*Worl, Rosita. &quot;Reconstructing Sovereignty in Alaska,&quot; &quot;Cultural Survival Quarterly&quot;. (Fall 2001)

==Further reading==
*Arnold, Robert D. Alaska Native Land Claims, (Alaska Native Foundation 1978).
*Berry, Mary Clay. The Alaska Pipeline: The Politics of Oil and Native Land Claims, (Indiana University Press 1975).
*Berger, Thomas R. Village Journey: The Report of the Alaska Native Review Commission, (Farrar, Straus and Giroux 1985).
*Case, David S. Alaska Natives and American Laws, (University of Alaska Press 3d ed. 2012)
*&quot;GAO Report: Increased Use of Alaska Native Corporations’ Special 8(a) Provisions Calls for Tailored Oversight&quot; (April 2006)
*Kentch, Gavin. &quot;A Corporate Culture? The Environmental Justice Challenges of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act&quot;. 81 Miss. L.J. 813 (2012)
*Lazarus, Arthur Jr. &quot;The Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act: A Flawed Victory,&quot; &quot;Law and Contemporary Problems&quot;. (Winter 1976)
*London, J. Tate. &quot;The &quot;1991 Amendments&quot; to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act: Protection for Native Lands?&quot;, 8 Stan. Envtl. L.J. 200. (1989)
*Mitchell, Donald Craig. Sold American: The Story of Alaska Natives and Their Land, 1867-1959, (University of Alaska Press 2003).
*Mitchell, Donald Craig. Take My Land Take My Life: The Story of Congress&#x27;s Historic Settlement of Alaska Native Land Claims, 1960-1971, (University of Alaska Press 2001).
*Morgan, Lael. Art and Eskimo Power: The Life and Times of Alaskan Howard Rock, (Epicenter Press 1988).
*Senungetuk, Joseph E. Give or Take a Century: An Eskimo Chronicle, (The Indian Historian Press 1971). 
*&quot;Settling the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act&quot;, 38 Stan. L. Rev. 227 (1985).

==External links==
* The Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act Resource Center
* Alaska Native Land Claims Settlement Act of 1971
* Revisiting the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA)
* Alaska Native Corporation Links</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q836951" start="4" end="39" title="Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act" label="Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q836951" start="41" end="46" title="Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act" label="ANCSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="71" end="80" title="U.S. President" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="81" end="94" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131110" start="182" end="203" title="United States history" label="United States history"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="358" end="364" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="394" end="407" title="Alaska Native" label="Alaska Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708579" start="460" end="495" title="Alaska Native Regional Corporations" label="Alaska Native regional corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="633" end="639" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196092" start="694" end="701" title="United States Code" label="US Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q913644" start="797" end="817" title="Alaska Statehood Act" label="Alaska Statehood Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="1538" end="1563" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q749610" start="1821" end="1845" title="1964 Alaska earthquake" label="9.2-magnitude earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q58215766" start="2244" end="2254" title="Emil Notti" label="Emil Notti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708545" start="3098" end="3126" title="Alaska Federation of Natives" label="Alaska Federation of Natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q516594" start="3338" end="3351" title="Walter Hickel" label="Walter Hickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q304769" start="4111" end="4137" title="ARCO" label="Atlantic-Richfield Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604978" start="4156" end="4167" title="Prudhoe Bay Oil Field" label="Prudhoe Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="4175" end="4181" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q66493932" start="4214" end="4228" title="land ownership" label="land ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="4349" end="4364" title="lower 48 states" label="lower 48 states"/>
<link wikidata="Q80037" start="4459" end="4465" title="Valdez, Alaska" label="Valdez"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="4791" end="4810" title="United States House" label="United States House"/>
<link wikidata="Q114515668" start="4944" end="4955" title="Laura Bergt" label="Laura Bergt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287650" start="5145" end="5170" title="United States Secretary of the Interior" label="Secretary of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q881854" start="5517" end="5529" title="Keith Harvey Miller" label="Keith Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q913644" start="5626" end="5646" title="Alaska Statehood Act" label="Alaska Statehood Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404841" start="5704" end="5729" title="Indian termination policy" label="Indian termination policy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5758" end="5776" title="Self-determination#United States" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893570" start="5818" end="5856" title="National Council on Indian Opportunity" label="National Council on Indian Opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q203433" start="5883" end="5894" title="Spiro Agnew" label="Spiro Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898915" start="5974" end="5990" title="Betty Mae Jumper" label="Betty Mae Jumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q878916" start="6226" end="6241" title="William A. Egan" label="William A. Egan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967040" start="6567" end="6604" title="National Congress of American Indians" label="National Congress of American Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="6608" end="6629" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6748" end="6758" title="Al Ketzler" label="Al Ketzler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682279" start="6773" end="6797" title="Tanana Chiefs Conference" label="Tanana Chiefs Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293756" start="6803" end="6813" title="Don Wright (politician)" label="Don Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345201" start="7068" end="7084" title="Henry M. Jackson" label="Henry M. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="7090" end="7106" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington state"/>
<link wikidata="Q516594" start="7899" end="7912" title="Walter Hickel" label="Walter Hickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q878916" start="7923" end="7935" title="William A. Egan" label="William Egan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619015" start="7952" end="7963" title="Nick Begich Sr." label="Nick Begich"/>
<link wikidata="Q50599" start="7979" end="7990" title="Ted Stevens" label="Ted Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q352422" start="7997" end="8008" title="Mike Gravel" label="Mike Gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q913644" start="8347" end="8367" title="Alaska Statehood Act" label="Alaska Statehood Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="8557" end="8562" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="8564" end="8571" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="8573" end="8586" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="8588" end="8601" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="8603" end="8615" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="8617" end="8628" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="8630" end="8638" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="8640" end="8650" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="8652" end="8664" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="8666" end="8674" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="8676" end="8684" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="8689" end="8697" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303808" start="9888" end="9902" title="Doyon, Limited" label="Doyon, Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708579" start="9918" end="9939" title="Alaska native corporation" label="regional corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002043" start="9988" end="10008" title="University of Alaska" label="University of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="10093" end="10097" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q913644" start="10760" end="10780" title="Alaska Statehood Act" label="Alaska Statehood Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="10832" end="10857" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="12549" end="12555" title="Alaska Native" label="Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708579" start="12790" end="12822" title="Alaska Native Regional Corporations" label="&amp;quot;village corporations&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708579" start="12907" end="12940" title="Alaska Native Regional Corporations" label="&amp;quot;regional corporations&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711764" start="13580" end="13600" title="The 13th Regional Corporation" label="regional corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708568" start="13685" end="13712" title="Alaska Native Allotment Act" label="Alaska Native Allotment Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711764" start="14037" end="14059" title="The 13th Regional Corporation" label="thirteenth corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578689" start="14450" end="14462" title="split estate" label="split estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696390" start="14606" end="14625" title="Ahtna, Incorporated" label="Ahtna, Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713070" start="14628" end="14649" title="The Aleut Corporation" label="The Aleut Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787552" start="14653" end="14686" title="Arctic Slope Regional Corporation" label="Arctic Slope Regional Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891841" start="14690" end="14723" title="Bering Straits Native Corporation" label="Bering Straits Native Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581663" start="14727" end="14757" title="Bristol Bay Native Corporation" label="Bristol Bay Native Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021401" start="14761" end="14780" title="Calista Corporation" label="Calista Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115951" start="14783" end="14809" title="Chugach Alaska Corporation" label="Chugach Alaska Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166929" start="14812" end="14835" title="Cook Inlet Region, Inc." label="Cook Inlet Region, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5303808" start="14839" end="14853" title="Doyon, Limited" label="Doyon, Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q6429315" start="14856" end="14876" title="Koniag, Incorporated" label="Koniag, Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952322" start="14879" end="14904" title="NANA Regional Corporation" label="NANA Regional Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666068" start="14908" end="14928" title="Sealaska Corporation" label="Sealaska Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711764" start="14931" end="14960" title="The 13th Regional Corporation" label="The 13th Regional Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878351" start="15629" end="15658" title="Ukpeaġvik Iñupiat Corporation" label="Ukpeaġvik Iñupiat Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79809" start="15684" end="15693" title="Utqiaġvik" label="Utqiaġvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q80022" start="15747" end="15753" title="Bethel, Alaska" label="Bethel"/>
<link wikidata="Q79347" start="15802" end="15808" title="Saxman, Alaska" label="Saxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q79507" start="15853" end="15863" title="Holy Cross, Alaska" label="Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996131" start="15866" end="15888" title="Huna Totem Corporation" label="Huna Totem Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79525" start="15914" end="15920" title="Hoonah, Alaska" label="Hoonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q79680" start="15966" end="15974" title="Hydaburg, Alaska" label="Hydaburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q29445" start="16015" end="16021" title="Juneau, Alaska" label="Juneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q751433" start="16069" end="16075" title="Naknek" label="Naknek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685056" start="16123" end="16130" title="Chenega, Alaska" label="Chenega"/>
<link wikidata="Q279794" start="16185" end="16192" title="Afognak" label="Afognak"/>
<link wikidata="Q79429" start="16197" end="16207" title="Port Lions" label="Port Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q79528" start="16256" end="16262" title="Kasaan" label="Kasaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634780" start="16304" end="16311" title="Klukwan" label="Klukwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79540" start="16366" end="16371" title="Aniak, Alaska" label="Aniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025467" start="16373" end="16386" title="Crooked Creek, Alaska" label="Crooked Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836641" start="16388" end="16398" title="Georgetown, Alaska" label="Georgetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q79452" start="16400" end="16407" title="Upper Kalskag, Alaska" label="Kalskag"/>
<link wikidata="Q79269" start="16409" end="16422" title="Lower Kalskag" label="Lower Kalskag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335871" start="16424" end="16433" title="Napaimute" label="Napaimute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866801" start="16435" end="16444" title="Red Devil, Alaska" label="Red Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q79337" start="16446" end="16461" title="Russian Mission, Alaska" label="Russian Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744067" start="16463" end="16472" title="Sleetmute" label="Sleetmute"/>
<link wikidata="Q932485" start="16477" end="16488" title="Stony River, Alaska" label="Stony River"/>
<link wikidata="Q79985" start="16538" end="16544" title="Kodiak, Alaska" label="Kodiak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110507" start="16547" end="16569" title="Ounalashka Corporation" label="Ounalashka Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79982" start="16595" end="16603" title="Unalaska" label="Unalaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q79939" start="16659" end="16667" title="Ouzinkie" label="Ouzinkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q79804" start="16718" end="16723" title="Sitka, Alaska" label="Sitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623146" start="16739" end="16786" title="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act" label="Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q913644" start="16788" end="16808" title="Alaska Statehood Act" label="Alaska Statehood Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708568" start="16810" end="16837" title="Alaska Native Allotment Act" label="Alaska Native Allotment Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708557" start="16839" end="16876" title="Alaska Land Transfer Acceleration Act" label="Alaska Land Transfer Acceleration Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q58215766" start="16878" end="16888" title="Emil Notti" label="Emil Notti"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18179" end="18204" title="Alaska Native Land Claims" label="Alaska Native Land Claims"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18258" end="18321" title="The Alaska Pipeline: The Politics of Oil and Native Land Claims" label="The Alaska Pipeline: The Politics of Oil and Native Land Claims"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18375" end="18441" title="Village Journey: The Report of the Alaska Native Review Commission" label="Village Journey: The Report of the Alaska Native Review Commission"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18493" end="18525" title="Alaska Natives and American Laws" label="Alaska Natives and American Laws"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19201" end="19269" title="Sold American: The Story of Alaska Natives and Their Land, 1867-1959" label="Sold American: The Story of Alaska Natives and Their Land, 1867-1959"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19331" end="19446" title="Take My Land Take My Life: The Story of Congress&amp;#x27;s Historic Settlement of Alaska Native Land Claims, 1960-1971" label="Take My Land Take My Life: The Story of Congress&amp;#x27;s Historic Settlement of Alaska Native Land Claims, 1960-1971"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19498" end="19561" title="Art and Eskimo Power: The Life and Times of Alaskan Howard Rock" label="Art and Eskimo Power: The Life and Times of Alaskan Howard Rock"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19610" end="19653" title="Give or Take a Century: An Eskimo Chronicle" label="Give or Take a Century: An Eskimo Chronicle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3036" wikidata="Q366287" url="?curid=3036" title="Adoptionism">
<text>Adoptionism, also called dynamic monarchianism, is an early Christian nontrinitarian theological doctrine, subsequently revived in various forms, which holds that Jesus was adopted as the Son of God at his baptism, his resurrection, or his ascension. How common adoptionist views were among early Christians is debated, but it appears to have been most popular in the first, second, and third centuries. Some scholars see adoptionism as the belief of the earliest followers of Jesus, based on the epistles of Paul and other early literature. However, adoptionist views sharply declined in prominence in the fourth and fifth centuries, as Church leaders condemned it as a heresy.

==Definition==
Adoptionism is one of two main forms of monarchianism (the other being modalism, which considers God to be one while working through the different &quot;modes&quot; or &quot;manifestations&quot; of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit, without limiting his modes or manifestations). Adoptionism denies the eternal pre-existence of Christ, and although it explicitly affirms his deity subsequent to events in his life, many classical trinitarians claim that the doctrine implicitly denies it by denying the constant hypostatic union of the eternal Logos to the human nature of Jesus.

Under adoptionism, Jesus is divine and has been since his adoption although he is not equal to the Father per &quot;my Father is greater than I&quot; and as such is a kind of subordinationism. (However, the quoted scripture can be orthodoxically interpreted as the fact that in the Trinity the Father is the source without origin, while the Son eternally receives the divinity from the Father.) Adoptionism is sometimes but not always related to a denial of the virgin birth of Jesus.

== History ==
===Early Christianity===

====Adoptionism and high Christology====

Bart Ehrman claims that the New Testament writings contain two different Christologies, namely a &quot;low&quot; or adoptionist Christology, and a &quot;high&quot; or &quot;incarnation Christology&quot;. The &quot;low Christology&quot; or &quot;adoptionist Christology&quot; is the belief &quot;that God exalted Jesus to be his Son by raising him from the dead&quot;, thereby raising him to &quot;divine status&quot;. The other early Christology is &quot;high Christology,&quot; which is &quot;the view that Jesus was a pre-existent divine being who became a human, did the Father&#x27;s will on earth, and then was taken back up into heaven whence he had originally come,&quot; and from where he appeared on earth. The chronology of the development of these early Christologies is a matter of debate within contemporary scholarship.

According to the &quot;evolutionary model&quot; or evolutionary theories proposed by Bousset, followed by Brown, the Christological understanding of Christ developed over time, from a low Christology to a high Christology, as witnessed in the Gospels. According to the evolutionary model, the earliest Christians believed that Jesus was a human who was exalted, and thus adopted as God&#x27;s Son, when he was resurrected, signaling the nearness of the Kingdom of God, when all dead would be resurrected and the righteous exalted. Adoptionist concepts can be found in the Gospel of Mark. As Daniel Johansson notes, the majority of scholars hold Mark&#x27;s Jesus as &quot;an exalted, but merely human figure&quot;, especially when read in the apparent context of Jewish beliefs. Later beliefs shifted the exaltation to his baptism, birth, and subsequently to the idea of his eternal existence, as witnessed in the Gospel of John. Mark shifted the moment of when Jesus became the son to the baptism of Jesus, and later still Matthew and Luke shifted it to the moment of the divine conception, and finally John declared that Jesus had been with God from the beginning: &quot;In the beginning was the Word&quot;.

One notable passage that may have been cited by early adoptionists was what exactly God said at Jesus&#x27;s baptism; three different versions are recorded. One of them, found in the Codex Bezae version of Luke 3:22, is &quot;You are my son; today I have begotten you.&quot; This seems to be quoted in Acts 13:32–33 as well (in all manuscripts, not just Bezae) and in Hebrews 5:5. Quotes from second and third century Christian writers almost always use this variant as well, with many fourth and fifth century writers continuing to use it, if occasionally with embarrassment; Augustine cites the line, for example, but clarifies God meant an eternal &quot;today&quot;. Ehrman speculates that Orthodox scribes of the fourth and fifth century changed the passage in Luke to align with the version in Mark as a defense against adoptionists citing the passage in their favor.

Since the 1970s, these late datings for the development of a &quot;high Christology&quot; have been contested, and a majority of scholars argue that this &quot;high Christology&quot; existed already before the writings of Paul. According to the &quot;New &quot;, or the Early High Christology Club, which includes Martin Hengel, Larry Hurtado, N. T. Wright, and Richard Bauckham, this &quot;incarnation Christology&quot; or &quot;high Christology&quot; did not evolve over a longer time, but was a &quot;big bang&quot; of ideas which were already present at the start of Christianity, and took further shape in the first few decades of the church, as witnessed in the writings of Paul. Some &#x27;Early High Christology&#x27; proponents scholars argue that this &quot;high Christology&quot; may go back to Jesus himself.

According to Ehrman, these two Christologies existed alongside each other, calling the &quot;low Christology&quot; an &quot;adoptionist Christology, and &quot;the &quot;high Christology&quot; an &quot;incarnation Christology&quot;. Conversely, Michael Bird has argued that adoptionism did not first emerge until the 2nd century as a result of later theological debates and other socio-religious influences on the reading of certain biblical texts.

====New Testamental epistles====
Adoptionist theology may also be reflected in canonical epistles, the earliest of which pre-date the writing of the gospels. The letters of Paul the Apostle, for example, do not mention a virgin birth of Christ. Paul describes Jesus as &quot;born of a woman, born under the law&quot; and &quot;as to his human nature was a descendant of David&quot; in the Epistle to the Galatians and the Epistle to the Romans. Christian interpreters, however, take his statements in Philippians 2 to imply that Paul believed Jesus to have existed as equal to God before his incarnation.

====Shepherd of Hermas====
The 2nd-century work Shepherd of Hermas may also have taught that Jesus was a virtuous man filled with the Holy Spirit and adopted as the Son. While the Shepherd of Hermas was popular and sometimes bound with the canonical scriptures, it did not retain canonical status, if it ever had it.

====Theodotus of Byzantium====
Theodotus of Byzantium ( late 2nd century), a Valentinian Gnostic, was the most prominent exponent of adoptionism. According to Hippolytus of Rome (&quot;Philosophumena&quot;, VII, xxiii) Theodotus taught that Jesus was a man born of a virgin, according to the Council of Jerusalem, that he lived like other men, and was most pious. At his baptism in the Jordan the &quot;Christ&quot; came down upon the man Jesus, in the likeness of a dove (&quot;Philosophumena&quot;, VII, xxiii), but Jesus was not himself God until after his resurrection.

Adoptionism was declared heresy at the end of the 3rd century and was rejected by the Synods of Antioch and the First Council of Nicaea, which defined the orthodox doctrine of the Trinity and identified the man Jesus with the eternally begotten Son or Word of God in the Nicene Creed. The belief was also declared heretical by Pope Victor I.

====Ebionites====
Adoptionism was also adhered to by the Jewish Christians known as Ebionites, who, according to Epiphanius in the 4th century, believed that Jesus was chosen on account of his sinless devotion to the will of God.

The Ebionites were a Jewish Christian movement that existed during the early centuries of the Christian Era. They show strong similarities with the earliest form of Jewish Christianity, and their specific theology may have been a &quot;reaction to the law-free Gentile mission&quot;. They regarded Jesus as the Messiah while rejecting his divinity and his virgin birth, and insisted on the necessity of following Jewish law and rites. They used the Gospel of the Ebionites, one of the Jewish–Christian gospels; the Hebrew Book of Matthew starting at chapter 3; revered James the brother of Jesus (James the Just); and rejected Paul the Apostle as an apostate from the Law. Their name (, derived from , meaning or ) suggests that they placed a special value on voluntary poverty.

Distinctive features of the Gospel of the Ebionites include the absence of the virgin birth and of the genealogy of Jesus; an Adoptionist Christology, in which Jesus is chosen to be God&#x27;s Son at the time of his Baptism; the abolition of the Jewish sacrifices by Jesus; and an advocacy of vegetarianism.

=== Spanish Adoptionism ===

Iberian Adoptionism was a theological position which was articulated in Umayyad and Christian-held regions of the Iberian Peninsula in the 8th and 9th centuries. The issue seems to have begun with the claim of archbishop Elipandus of Toledo that – in respect to his human nature – Christ was &quot;adoptive&quot; Son of God. Another leading advocate of this Christology was Felix of Urgel. In the Iberian peninsula, adoptionism was opposed by Beatus of Liebana, and in the Carolingian territories, the Adoptionist position was condemned by Pope Hadrian I, Alcuin of York, Agobard, and officially in Carolingian territory by the Council of Frankfurt (794).

Despite the shared name of &quot;adoptionism&quot; the Spanish Adoptionist Christology appears to have differed sharply from the adoptionism of early Christianity. Spanish advocates predicated the term of Christ only in respect to his humanity; once the divine Son &quot;emptied himself&quot; of divinity and &quot;took the form of a servant&quot; (Philippians 2:7), Christ&#x27;s human nature was &quot;adopted&quot; as divine.

Historically, many scholars have followed the Adoptionists&#x27; Carolingian opponents in labeling Spanish Adoptionism as a minor revival of &quot;Nestorian&quot; Christology. John C. Cavadini has challenged this notion by attempting to take the Spanish Christology in its own Spanish/North African context in his study, &quot;The Last Christology of the West: Adoptionism in Spain and Gaul, 785–820&quot;.

=== Scholastic Neo-adoptionism ===
A third wave was the revived form (&quot;Neo-adoptionism&quot;) of Peter Abelard in the 12th century. Later, various modified and qualified Adoptionist tenets emerged from some theologians in the 14th century. Duns Scotus (1300) and Durandus of Saint-Pourçain (1320) admit the term in a qualified sense. In more recent times the Jesuit Gabriel Vásquez, and the Lutheran divines Georgius Calixtus and Johann Ernst Immanuel Walch, have defended adoptionism as essentially orthodox.

=== Modern adoptionist groups ===
A form of adoptionism surfaced in Unitarianism during the 16th and 17th in Polish Brethren and the 18th century as denial of the virgin birth became increasingly common, led by the views of Joseph Priestley and others.

A similar form of adoptionism was expressed in the writings of James Strang, a Latter Day Saint leader who founded the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Strangite) after the death of Joseph Smith in 1844. In his Book of the Law of the Lord, a purported work of ancient scripture found and translated by Strang, he offers an essay entitled &quot;Note on the Sacrifice of Christ&quot; in which he explains his unique (for Mormonism as a whole) doctrines on the subject. Jesus Christ, said Strang, was the natural-born son of Mary and Joseph, who was chosen from before all time to be the Savior of mankind, but who had to be born as an ordinary mortal of two human parents (rather than being begotten by the Father or the Holy Spirit) to be able to truly fulfill his Messianic role. Strang claimed that the earthly Christ was in essence &quot;adopted&quot; as God&#x27;s son at birth, and fully revealed as such during the Transfiguration. After proving himself to God by living a perfectly sinless life, he was enabled to provide an acceptable sacrifice for the sins of men, prior to his resurrection and ascension.

The Christian Community, an esoteric Christian denomination informed by the teachings of Rudolf Steiner, assumes an adoptionist Christology that treats Jesus and the Christ as separate beings until they are joined at baptism. &quot;Steiner&#x27;s Christology is discussed as a central element of his thought in Johannes Hemleben, &quot;Rudolf Steiner: A Documentary Biography,&quot; trans. Leo Twyman (East Grinstead, Sussex: Henry Goulden, 1975), pp. 96-100. From the perspective of orthodox Christianity, it may be said that Steiner combined a docetic understanding of Christ&#x27;s nature with the Adoptionist heresy.&quot;

== See also ==
* Adoptivi
* Arianism
* Binitarianism

== Notes ==
==References==
== Sources ==
;Printed sources
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Philip Schaff &quot;History of the Christian Church&quot;, Volume IV, 1882.
* (6th German edition, translated by George Ogg)


;Web sources
== External links ==

* Adoptionism in &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;
* Adoptionism in &quot;Christian Cyclopedia&quot;
* Chapter XI. Doctrinal Controversies, from Philip Schaff&#x27;s History of the Christian Church</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q366287" start="0" end="11" title="Adoptionism" label="Adoptionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q366287" start="25" end="46" title="Adoptionism" label="dynamic monarchianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="54" end="69" title="Early Christianity" label="early Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q584205" start="70" end="84" title="Nontrinitarianism" label="nontrinitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714556" start="85" end="105" title="Diversity in early Christian theology" label="theological doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q51663" start="163" end="168" title="Jesus in Christianity" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352429" start="188" end="198" title="Son of God (Christianity)" label="Son of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q217048" start="206" end="213" title="Baptism of Jesus" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="219" end="231" title="resurrection of Jesus" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686605" start="240" end="249" title="Ascension of Jesus" label="ascension"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="497" end="513" title="epistles of Paul" label="epistles of Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="671" end="677" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180430" start="735" end="748" title="monarchianism" label="monarchianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q856561" start="766" end="774" title="modalism" label="modalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q186350" start="893" end="907" title="God the Father" label="God the Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141210" start="909" end="920" title="God the Son" label="God the Son"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="926" end="945" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity#God the Holy Spirit" label="God the Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203161" start="1025" end="1048" title="pre-existence of Christ" label="pre-existence of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="1144" end="1156" title="Trinity" label="trinitarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452745" start="1226" end="1242" title="hypostatic union" label="hypostatic union"/>
<link wikidata="Q766575" start="1258" end="1263" title="Logos (Christianity)" label="Logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q946399" start="1470" end="1486" title="subordinationism" label="subordinationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028784" start="1743" end="1778" title="denial of the virgin birth of Jesus" label="denial of the virgin birth of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127876" start="1863" end="1874" title="Bart Ehrman" label="Bart Ehrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="1891" end="1904" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111740" start="2560" end="2577" title="Christophany" label="appeared on earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q126363589" start="3151" end="3165" title="Kingdom of God" label="Kingdom of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388" start="3270" end="3284" title="Gospel of Mark" label="Gospel of Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q217048" start="3688" end="3704" title="baptism of Jesus" label="baptism of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q859115" start="3771" end="3788" title="Virgin birth of Jesus" label="divine conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q818305" start="4092" end="4103" title="Codex Bezae" label="Codex Bezae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="4486" end="4495" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q64875" start="5097" end="5110" title="Martin Hengel" label="Martin Hengel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491248" start="5112" end="5125" title="Larry Hurtado" label="Larry Hurtado"/>
<link wikidata="Q335125" start="5127" end="5139" title="N. T. Wright" label="N. T. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065290" start="5145" end="5161" title="Richard Bauckham" label="Richard Bauckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18684819" start="5849" end="5861" title="Michael Bird (theologian)" label="Michael Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q215495" start="6143" end="6150" title="epistle" label="epistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="6227" end="6243" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q859115" start="6275" end="6297" title="virgin birth of Christ" label="virgin birth of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q837443" start="6361" end="6364" title="Law of Moses" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q742609" start="6391" end="6403" title="human nature" label="human nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q128620" start="6443" end="6467" title="Epistle to the Galatians" label="Epistle to the Galatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q48203" start="6476" end="6497" title="Epistle to the Romans" label="Epistle to the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q51613" start="6555" end="6568" title="Philippians 2" label="Philippians 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q616175" start="6646" end="6657" title="Incarnation (Christianity)" label="incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q898808" start="6708" end="6726" title="Shepherd of Hermas" label="Shepherd of Hermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q720984" start="7009" end="7031" title="Theodotus of Byzantium" label="Theodotus of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q204603" start="7055" end="7066" title="Valentinianism" label="Valentinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="7067" end="7074" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207113" start="7137" end="7155" title="Hippolytus of Rome" label="Hippolytus of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q966546" start="7163" end="7177" title="Philosophumena" label="Philosophumena"/>
<link wikidata="Q966546" start="7457" end="7471" title="Philosophumena" label="Philosophumena"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="7518" end="7521" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q188681" start="7538" end="7550" title="resurrection" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="7578" end="7584" title="Heresy in Christianity" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127686492" start="7639" end="7656" title="Synods of Antioch" label="Synods of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="7665" end="7688" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="First Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q383258" start="7708" end="7725" title="Orthodoxy" label="orthodox doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="7733" end="7740" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q766575" start="7805" end="7816" title="Logos (Christianity)" label="Word of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="7824" end="7836" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q127989" start="7880" end="7893" title="Pope Victor I" label="Pope Victor I"/>
<link wikidata="Q262109" start="7953" end="7970" title="Jewish Christians" label="Jewish Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q208171" start="7980" end="7989" title="Ebionites" label="Ebionites"/>
<link wikidata="Q313922" start="8009" end="8019" title="Epiphanius of Salamis" label="Epiphanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006204" start="8089" end="8096" title="sinless" label="sinless"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003236" start="8113" end="8124" title="will of God" label="will of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q262109" start="8148" end="8164" title="Jewish Christian" label="Jewish Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q760793" start="8379" end="8403" title="Paul and Judaism" label="law-free Gentile mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421977" start="8438" end="8445" title="Messiah in Judaism" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="8466" end="8474" title="divinity" label="divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q859115" start="8483" end="8495" title="Virgin birth of Jesus" label="virgin birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="8540" end="8560" title="Halakha" label="Jewish law and rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235316" start="8576" end="8599" title="Gospel of the Ebionites" label="Gospel of the Ebionites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189715" start="8612" end="8636" title="Jewish–Christian gospels" label="Jewish–Christian gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q26925" start="8696" end="8722" title="James, brother of Jesus" label="James the brother of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="8754" end="8770" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8777" end="8798" title="Antinomianism#Supporting Pauline passages" label="apostate from the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012445" start="8887" end="8904" title="Vow of poverty" label="voluntary poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q859115" start="8986" end="8998" title="virgin birth of Jesus" label="virgin birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q51630" start="9010" end="9028" title="genealogy of Jesus" label="genealogy of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q366287" start="9033" end="9044" title="Adoptionist" label="Adoptionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="9045" end="9056" title="Christology" label="Christology"/>
<link wikidata="Q472768" start="9089" end="9103" title="Son of God" label="God&amp;#x27;s Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q217048" start="9123" end="9130" title="Baptism of Jesus" label="Baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q928023" start="9153" end="9170" title="Korban" label="Jewish sacrifices"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="9200" end="9213" title="vegetarianism" label="vegetarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="9317" end="9324" title="Caliphate of Córdoba" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q231392" start="9329" end="9338" title="Kingdom of Asturias" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="9359" end="9376" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q948104" start="9466" end="9485" title="Elipandus of Toledo" label="Elipandus of Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355228" start="9619" end="9633" title="Felix of Urgel" label="Felix of Urgel"/>
<link wikidata="Q553113" start="9688" end="9705" title="Beatus of Liebana" label="Beatus of Liebana"/>
<link wikidata="Q133602" start="9718" end="9729" title="Carolingian" label="Carolingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q103292" start="9785" end="9799" title="Pope Hadrian I" label="Pope Hadrian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q154332" start="9801" end="9815" title="Alcuin of York" label="Alcuin of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q395171" start="9817" end="9824" title="Agobard" label="Agobard"/>
<link wikidata="Q168414" start="10479" end="10488" title="Nestorianism" label="Nestorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295" start="10842" end="10855" title="Peter Abelard" label="Peter Abelard"/>
<link wikidata="Q190089" start="10985" end="10996" title="Duns Scotus" label="Duns Scotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266754" start="11008" end="11034" title="Durandus of Saint-Pourçain" label="Durandus of Saint-Pourçain"/>
<link wikidata="Q352513" start="11111" end="11126" title="Gabriel Vásquez" label="Gabriel Vásquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q62752" start="11153" end="11170" title="Georgius Calixtus" label="Georgius Calixtus"/>
<link wikidata="Q670082" start="11175" end="11202" title="Johann Ernst Immanuel Walch" label="Johann Ernst Immanuel Walch"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="11324" end="11336" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q749576" start="11365" end="11380" title="Polish Brethren" label="Polish Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028784" start="11405" end="11431" title="denial of the virgin birth of Jesus" label="denial of the virgin birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="11480" end="11496" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142551" start="11573" end="11585" title="James Strang" label="James Strang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="11589" end="11605" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q520362" start="11629" end="11684" title="Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Strangite)" label="Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (Strangite)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247467" start="11695" end="11716" title="death of Joseph Smith" label="death of Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104627" start="11733" end="11760" title="Book of the Law of the Lord" label="Book of the Law of the Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="12044" end="12048" title="Mary (mother of Jesus)" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128267" start="12053" end="12059" title="Saint Joseph" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="12241" end="12252" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q201201" start="12442" end="12457" title="Transfiguration of Jesus" label="Transfiguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="12608" end="12620" title="Resurrection appearances of Jesus" label="resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686605" start="12625" end="12634" title="Ascension of Jesus Christ" label="ascension"/>
<link wikidata="Q666614" start="12637" end="12660" title="The Christian Community" label="The Christian Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082453" start="12665" end="12683" title="esoteric Christianity" label="esoteric Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q78484" start="12726" end="12740" title="Rudolf Steiner" label="Rudolf Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="12765" end="12776" title="Christology" label="Christology"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="12789" end="12794" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="12803" end="12809" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q217048" start="12854" end="12861" title="Baptism of Jesus" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207674" start="13183" end="13190" title="Docetism" label="docetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573135" start="13282" end="13290" title="Adoptivi" label="Adoptivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="13293" end="13301" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914396" start="13304" end="13317" title="Binitarianism" label="Binitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q115922" start="13400" end="13413" title="Philip Schaff" label="Philip Schaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q115922" start="13707" end="13720" title="Philip Schaff" label="Philip Schaff"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3037" wikidata="Q1194234" url="?curid=3037" title="Apollinarism">
<text>Apollinarism or Apollinarianism is a Christological position proposed by Apollinaris of Laodicea that argues that Jesus had a human body and sensitive human soul, but a divine mind and not a human rational mind, the Divine Logos taking the place of the latter. It was deemed heretical by the First Council of Constantinople in 381 and virtually died out within the following decades. 

==History==
The Trinity had been recognized at the First Council of Nicaea in 325, but debate about exactly what it meant continued. A rival to the more common belief that Jesus Christ had two natures was monophysitism (&quot;one nature&quot;), the doctrine that Christ had only one nature. Apollinarism and Eutychianism were two forms of monophysitism. Apollinaris&#x27;s rejection of Christ having a human mind was considered an over-reaction to Arianism and its teaching that Christ was a lesser god.

Theodoret charged Apollinaris with confounding the persons of the Godhead and giving in to the heretical ways of Sabellius. Basil of Caesarea accused him of abandoning the literal sense of the scripture, and taking it up wholly with the allegorical sense. His views were condemned in a Synod at Alexandria, under Athanasius of Alexandria, in 362, and later subdivided into several different heresies, the main ones of which were the Polemians and the Antidicomarianites.

Apollinaris, considering the rational soul and spirit as essentially liable to sin and capable, at its best, of only precarious efforts, saw no way of saving Christ&#x27;s impeccability and the infinite value of Redemption, except by the elimination of the human spirit from Jesus&#x27; humanity, and the substitution of the Divine Logos in its stead. Apollinarism was declared to be a heresy in 381 by the First Council of Constantinople.

== Neo-Apollinarianism ==
Christian philosopher William Lane Craig has proposed a neo-Apollinarian Christology in which the divine Logos completes the human nature of Christ. Craig says his proposal is tentative and he welcomes critique and interaction from other scholars.

Craig also clarifies &quot;what I called a Neo-Apollinarian Christological model&quot; by stating that 

==See also==
*
==References==
==Sources==
*Artemi, E., «Mia physis of God Logos sesarkomeni» a)The analysis of this phrase according to Cyril of Alexandria b)The analysis of this phrase according to Apollinaris of Laodicea», Ecclesiastic Faros t. ΟΔ (2003), 293 – 304.
*Chan, Joyce (2021). &quot;Apollinarianism&quot;, Carey Theological College, University of British Columbia. 
*McGrath, Alister. 1998. &quot;Historical Theology, An Introduction to the History of Christian Thought.&quot; Oxford: Blackwell Publishers. Chapter 1.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1194234" start="0" end="12" title="Apollinarism" label="Apollinarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194234" start="16" end="31" title="Apollinarism" label="Apollinarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="37" end="51" title="Christological" label="Christological"/>
<link wikidata="Q367946" start="73" end="96" title="Apollinaris of Laodicea" label="Apollinaris of Laodicea"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="114" end="119" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="169" end="175" title="divine" label="divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q766575" start="223" end="228" title="Logos (Christianity)" label="Logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="275" end="284" title="Christian heresy" label="heretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q179826" start="292" end="323" title="First Council of Constantinople" label="First Council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="402" end="409" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="437" end="460" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="First Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991529" start="558" end="586" title="Dyophysitism" label="Jesus Christ had two natures"/>
<link wikidata="Q183091" start="591" end="604" title="monophysitism" label="monophysitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590543" start="694" end="706" title="Eutychianism" label="Eutychianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="834" end="842" title="Arianism" label="Arianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q317029" start="891" end="900" title="Theodoret" label="Theodoret"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576620" start="957" end="964" title="Godhead (Christianity)" label="Godhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q447451" start="1004" end="1013" title="Sabellius" label="Sabellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44258" start="1015" end="1032" title="Basil of Caesarea" label="Basil of Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="1177" end="1182" title="Synod" label="Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="1186" end="1196" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="1204" end="1228" title="Athanasius of Alexandria" label="Athanasius of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774684" start="1342" end="1359" title="Antidicomarianite" label="Antidicomarianite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="1749" end="1755" title="Christian heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179826" start="1770" end="1801" title="First Council of Constantinople" label="First Council of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233528" start="1852" end="1870" title="William Lane Craig" label="William Lane Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q451103" start="2564" end="2580" title="Alister McGrath" label="McGrath, Alister"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3038" wikidata="Q378751" url="?curid=3038" title="Acid–base reaction">
<text>In chemistry, an acid–base reaction is a chemical reaction that occurs between an acid and a base. It can be used to determine pH via titration. Several theoretical frameworks provide alternative conceptions of the reaction mechanisms and their application in solving related problems; these are called the acid–base theories, for example, Brønsted–Lowry acid–base theory.

Their importance becomes apparent in analyzing acid–base reactions for gaseous or liquid species, or when acid or base character may be somewhat less apparent. The first of these concepts was provided by the French chemist Antoine Lavoisier, around 1776.

It is important to think of the acid–base reaction models as theories that complement each other. For example, the current Lewis model has the broadest definition of what an acid and base are, with the Brønsted–Lowry theory being a subset of what acids and bases are, and the Arrhenius theory being the most restrictive.

==Acid–base definitions==

===Historic development===
The concept of an acid–base reaction was first proposed in 1754 by Guillaume-François Rouelle, who introduced the word &quot;base&quot; into chemistry to mean a substance which reacts with an acid to give it solid form (as a salt). Bases are mostly bitter in nature.

====Lavoisier&#x27;s oxygen theory of acids====
The first scientific concept of acids and bases was provided by Lavoisier in around 1776. Since Lavoisier&#x27;s knowledge of strong acids was mainly restricted to oxoacids, such as (nitric acid) and (sulfuric acid), which tend to contain central atoms in high oxidation states surrounded by oxygen, and since he was not aware of the true composition of the hydrohalic acids (HF, HCl, HBr, and HI), he defined acids in terms of their containing &quot;oxygen&quot;, which in fact he named from Greek words meaning &quot;acid-former&quot; (). The Lavoisier definition held for over 30 years, until the 1810 article and subsequent lectures by Sir Humphry Davy in which he proved the lack of oxygen in hydrogen sulfide (), hydrogen telluride (), and the hydrohalic acids. However, Davy failed to develop a new theory, concluding that &quot;acidity does not depend upon any particular elementary substance, but upon peculiar arrangement of various substances&quot;. One notable modification of oxygen theory was provided by Jöns Jacob Berzelius, who stated that acids are oxides of nonmetals while bases are oxides of metals.

====Liebig&#x27;s hydrogen theory of acids====
In 1838, Justus von Liebig proposed that an acid is a hydrogen-containing compound whose hydrogen can be replaced by a metal. This redefinition was based on his extensive work on the chemical composition of organic acids, finishing the doctrinal shift from oxygen-based acids to hydrogen-based acids started by Davy. Liebig&#x27;s definition, while completely empirical, remained in use for almost 50 years until the adoption of the Arrhenius definition.

===Arrhenius definition===
The first modern definition of acids and bases in molecular terms was devised by Svante Arrhenius. A hydrogen theory of acids, it followed from his 1884 work with Friedrich Wilhelm Ostwald in establishing the presence of ions in aqueous solution and led to Arrhenius receiving the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1903.

As defined by Arrhenius:
* An &quot;Arrhenius acid&quot; is a substance that ionises in water to form hydrogen ions (); that is, an acid increases the concentration of H+ ions in an aqueous solution.

This causes the protonation of water, or the creation of the hydronium () ion. Thus, in modern times, the symbol is interpreted as a shorthand for , because it is now known that a bare proton does not exist as a free species in aqueous solution. This is the species which is measured by pH indicators to measure the acidity or basicity of a solution. 
* An &quot;Arrhenius base&quot; is a substance that dissociates in water to form hydroxide () ions; that is, a base increases the concentration of ions in an aqueous solution. 
The Arrhenius definitions of acidity and alkalinity are restricted to aqueous solutions and are not valid for most non-aqueous solutions, and refer to the concentration of the solvent ions. Under this definition, pure and HCl dissolved in toluene are not acidic, and molten NaOH and solutions of calcium amide in liquid ammonia are not alkaline. This led to the development of the Brønsted–Lowry theory and subsequent Lewis theory to account for these non-aqueous exceptions.

The reaction of an acid with a base is called a neutralization reaction. The products of this reaction are a salt and water.
formula_1

In this traditional representation an acid–base neutralization reaction is formulated as a double-replacement reaction. For example, the reaction of hydrochloric acid (HCl) with sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solutions produces a solution of sodium chloride (NaCl) and some additional water molecules.
formula_2

The modifier (aq) in this equation was implied by Arrhenius, rather than included explicitly. It indicates that the substances are dissolved in water. Though all three substances, HCl, NaOH and NaCl are capable of existing as pure compounds, in aqueous solutions they are fully dissociated into the aquated ions and .

====Example: Baking powder====
Baking powder is used to cause the dough for breads and cakes to &quot;rise&quot; by creating millions of tiny carbon dioxide bubbles. Baking powder is not to be confused with baking soda, which is sodium bicarbonate (). Baking powder is a mixture of baking soda (sodium bicarbonate) and acidic salts. The bubbles are created because, when the baking powder is combined with water, the sodium bicarbonate and acid salts react to produce gaseous carbon dioxide. 

Whether commercially or domestically prepared, the principles behind baking powder formulations remain the same. The acid–base reaction can be generically represented as shown:

formula_3 

The real reactions are more complicated because the acids are complicated. For example, starting with sodium bicarbonate and monocalcium phosphate (), the reaction produces carbon dioxide by the following stoichiometry:

formula_4
A typical formulation (by weight) could call for 30% sodium bicarbonate, 5–12% monocalcium phosphate, and 21–26% sodium aluminium sulfate. Alternately, a commercial baking powder might use sodium acid pyrophosphate as one of the two acidic components instead of sodium aluminium sulfate. Another typical acid in such formulations is cream of tartar (), a derivative of tartaric acid.

===Brønsted–Lowry definition===

The Brønsted–Lowry definition, formulated in 1923, independently by Johannes Nicolaus Brønsted in Denmark and Martin Lowry in England, is based upon the idea of protonation of bases through the deprotonation of acids – that is, the ability of acids to &quot;donate&quot; hydrogen ions () otherwise known as protons to bases, which &quot;accept&quot; them.

An acid–base reaction is, thus, the removal of a hydrogen ion from the acid and its addition to the base. The removal of a hydrogen ion from an acid produces its &quot;conjugate base&quot;, which is the acid with a hydrogen ion removed. The reception of a proton by a base produces its &quot;conjugate acid&quot;, which is the base with a hydrogen ion added.

Unlike the previous definitions, the Brønsted–Lowry definition does not refer to the formation of salt and solvent, but instead to the formation of &quot;conjugate acids&quot; and &quot;conjugate bases&quot;, produced by the transfer of a proton from the acid to the base. In this approach, acids and bases are fundamentally different in behavior from salts, which are seen as electrolytes, subject to the theories of Debye, Onsager, and others. An acid and a base react not to produce a salt and a solvent, but to form a new acid and a new base. The concept of neutralization is thus absent. Brønsted–Lowry acid–base behavior is formally independent of any solvent, making it more all-encompassing than the Arrhenius model. The calculation of pH under the Arrhenius model depended on alkalis (bases) dissolving in water (aqueous solution). The Brønsted–Lowry model expanded what could be pH tested using insoluble and soluble solutions (gas, liquid, solid).

The general formula for acid–base reactions according to the Brønsted–Lowry definition is:
formula_5
where HA represents the acid, B represents the base, represents the conjugate acid of B, and represents the conjugate base of HA.

For example, a Brønsted–Lowry model for the dissociation of hydrochloric acid (HCl) in aqueous solution would be the following:
formula_6

The removal of from the produces the chloride ion, , the conjugate base of the acid. The addition of to the (acting as a base) forms the hydronium ion, , the conjugate acid of the base.

Water is amphoteric that is, it can act as both an acid and a base. The Brønsted–Lowry model explains this, showing the dissociation of water into low concentrations of hydronium and hydroxide ions:
formula_7

This equation is demonstrated in the image below:
Here, one molecule of water acts as an acid, donating an and forming the conjugate base, , and a second molecule of water acts as a base, accepting the ion and forming the conjugate acid, .

As an example of water acting as an acid, consider an aqueous solution of pyridine, .
formula_8

In this example, a water molecule is split into a hydrogen ion, which is donated to a pyridine molecule, and a hydroxide ion.

In the Brønsted–Lowry model, the solvent does not necessarily have to be water, as is required by the Arrhenius Acid–Base model. For example, consider what happens when acetic acid, , dissolves in liquid ammonia.
formula_9

An ion is removed from acetic acid, forming its conjugate base, the acetate ion, . The addition of an ion to an ammonia molecule of the solvent creates its conjugate acid, the ammonium ion, .

The Brønsted–Lowry model calls hydrogen-containing substances (like ) acids. Thus, some substances, which many chemists considered to be acids, such as or , are excluded from this classification due to lack of hydrogen. Gilbert N. Lewis wrote in 1938, &quot;To restrict the group of acids to those substances that contain hydrogen interferes as seriously with the systematic understanding of chemistry as would the restriction of the term oxidizing agent to substances containing oxygen.&quot; Furthermore, and are not considered Brønsted bases, but rather salts containing the bases and .

===Lewis definition===

The hydrogen requirement of Arrhenius and Brønsted–Lowry was removed by the Lewis definition of acid–base reactions, devised by Gilbert N. Lewis in 1923, in the same year as Brønsted–Lowry, but it was not elaborated by him until 1938. Instead of defining acid–base reactions in terms of protons or other bonded substances, the Lewis definition defines a base (referred to as a &quot;Lewis base&quot;) to be a compound that can donate an &quot;electron pair&quot;, and an acid (a &quot;Lewis acid&quot;) to be a compound that can receive this electron pair.

For example, boron trifluoride, is a typical Lewis acid. It can accept a pair of electrons as it has a vacancy in its octet. The fluoride ion has a full octet and can donate a pair of electrons. Thus
formula_10
is a typical Lewis acid, Lewis base reaction. All compounds of group 13 elements with a formula can behave as Lewis acids. Similarly, compounds of group 15 elements with a formula , such as amines, , and phosphines, , can behave as Lewis bases. Adducts between them have the formula with a dative covalent bond, shown symbolically as ←, between the atoms A (acceptor) and D (donor). Compounds of group 16 with a formula may also act as Lewis bases; in this way, a compound like an ether, , or a thioether, , can act as a Lewis base. The Lewis definition is not limited to these examples. For instance, carbon monoxide acts as a Lewis base when it forms an adduct with boron trifluoride, of formula .

Adducts involving metal ions are referred to as co-ordination compounds; each ligand donates a pair of electrons to the metal ion. The reaction
formula_11
can be seen as an acid–base reaction in which a stronger base (ammonia) replaces a weaker one (water).

The Lewis and Brønsted–Lowry definitions are consistent with each other since the reaction
formula_12
is an acid–base reaction in both theories.

===Solvent system definition===
One of the limitations of the Arrhenius definition is its reliance on water solutions. Edward Curtis Franklin studied the acid–base reactions in liquid ammonia in 1905 and pointed out the similarities to the water-based Arrhenius theory. Albert F.O. Germann, working with liquid phosgene, , formulated the solvent-based theory in 1925, thereby generalizing the Arrhenius definition to cover aprotic solvents.

Germann pointed out that in many solutions, there are ions in equilibrium with the neutral solvent molecules:
* solvonium ions: a generic name for positive ions. These are also sometimes called solvo-acids; when protonated solvent, they are lyonium ions.
* solvate ions: a generic name for negative ions. These are also sometimes called solve-bases; when deprotonated solvent, they are lyate ions.

For example, water and ammonia undergo such dissociation into hydronium and hydroxide, and ammonium and amide, respectively:
formula_13

Some aprotic systems also undergo such dissociation, such as dinitrogen tetroxide into nitrosonium and nitrate, antimony trichloride into dichloroantimonium and tetrachloroantimonate, and phosgene into chlorocarboxonium and chloride:
formula_14

A solute that causes an increase in the concentration of the solvonium ions and a decrease in the concentration of solvate ions is defined as an &quot;acid&quot;. A solute that causes an increase in the concentration of the solvate ions and a decrease in the concentration of the solvonium ions is defined as a &quot;base&quot;.

Thus, in liquid ammonia, (supplying ) is a strong base, and (supplying ) is a strong acid. In liquid sulfur dioxide (), thionyl compounds (supplying ) behave as acids, and sulfites (supplying ) behave as bases.

The non-aqueous acid–base reactions in liquid ammonia are similar to the reactions in water:
formula_15

Nitric acid can be a base in liquid sulfuric acid:
formula_16
The unique strength of this definition shows in describing the reactions in aprotic solvents; for example, in liquid :

formula_17

Because the solvent system definition depends on the solute as well as on the solvent itself, a particular solute can be either an acid or a base depending on the choice of the solvent: is a strong acid in water, a weak acid in acetic acid, and a weak base in fluorosulfonic acid; this characteristic of the theory has been seen as both a strength and a weakness, because some substances (such as and ) have been seen to be acidic or basic on their own right. On the other hand, solvent system theory has been criticized as being too general to be useful. Also, it has been thought that there is something intrinsically acidic about hydrogen compounds, a property not shared by non-hydrogenic solvonium salts.

===Lux–Flood definition===
This acid–base theory was a revival of the oxygen theory of acids and bases proposed by German chemist Hermann Lux in 1939, further improved by Håkon Flood and is still used in modern geochemistry and electrochemistry of molten salts. This definition describes an acid as an oxide ion () acceptor and a base as an oxide ion donor. For example:
formula_18

This theory is also useful in the systematisation of the reactions of noble gas compounds, especially the xenon oxides, fluorides, and oxofluorides.

===Usanovich definition===
Mikhail Usanovich developed a general theory that does not restrict acidity to hydrogen-containing compounds, but his approach, published in 1938, was even more general than Lewis theory. Usanovich&#x27;s theory can be summarized as defining an acid as anything that accepts negative species or donates positive ones, and a base as the reverse. This defined the concept of redox (oxidation-reduction) as a special case of acid–base reactions.

Some examples of Usanovich acid–base reactions include:
formula_19

==Rationalizing the strength of Lewis acid–base interactions==

===HSAB theory===
In 1963, Ralph Pearson proposed a qualitative concept known as the Hard and Soft Acids and Bases principle. later made quantitative with help of Robert Parr in 1984. &#x27;Hard&#x27; applies to species that are small, have high charge states, and are weakly polarizable. &#x27;Soft&#x27; applies to species that are large, have low charge states and are strongly polarizable. Acids and bases interact, and the most stable interactions are hard–hard and soft–soft. This theory has found use in organic and inorganic chemistry.

===ECW model===
The ECW model created by Russell S. Drago is a quantitative model that describes and predicts the strength of Lewis acid base interactions, . The model assigned and parameters to many Lewis acids and bases. Each acid is characterized by an and a . Each base is likewise characterized by its own and . The and parameters refer, respectively, to the electrostatic and covalent contributions to the strength of the bonds that the acid and base will form. The equation is
formula_20

The term represents a constant energy contribution for acid–base reaction such as the cleavage of a dimeric acid or base. The equation predicts reversal of acids and base strengths. The graphical presentations of the equation show that there is no single order of Lewis base strengths or Lewis acid strengths.

==Acid–base equilibrium==

The reaction of a strong acid with a strong base is essentially a quantitative reaction. For example,
formula_21
In this reaction both the sodium and chloride ions are spectators as the neutralization reaction,
formula_22
does not involve them. With weak bases addition of acid is not quantitative because a solution of a weak base is a buffer solution. A solution of a weak acid is also a buffer solution. When a weak acid reacts with a weak base an equilibrium mixture is produced. For example, adenine, written as AH, can react with a hydrogen phosphate ion, .
formula_23

The equilibrium constant for this reaction can be derived from the acid dissociation constants of adenine and of the dihydrogen phosphate ion.
formula_24

The notation [X] signifies &quot;concentration of X&quot;. When these two equations are combined by eliminating the hydrogen ion concentration, an expression for the equilibrium constant, is obtained.
formula_25

==Acid–alkali reaction==

An acid–alkali reaction is a special case of an acid–base reaction, where the base used is also an alkali. When an acid reacts with an alkali salt (a metal hydroxide), the product is a metal salt and water. Acid–alkali reactions are also neutralization reactions.

In general, acid–alkali reactions can be simplified to
:formula_26
by omitting spectator ions.

Acids are in general pure substances that contain hydrogen cations () or cause them to be produced in solutions. Hydrochloric acid () and sulfuric acid () are common examples. In water, these break apart into ions:
:formula_27

The alkali breaks apart in water, yielding dissolved hydroxide ions:
:formula_28.

==See also==
* Acid–base titration
* Deprotonation
* Donor number
* Electron configuration
* Gutmann–Beckett method
* Lewis structure
* Nucleophilic substitution 
* Neutralization (chemistry)
* Protonation
* Redox reactions 
* Resonance (chemistry)

==Notes==
==References==
===Sources===
*
*

==External links==
*Acid–base Physiology – an on-line text
*John W. Kimball&#x27;s online biology book section of acid and bases.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="3" end="12" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q378751" start="17" end="35" title="Acid–base reaction" label="acid–base reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="41" end="58" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="82" end="86" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="93" end="97" title="base (chemistry)" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="127" end="129" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q133716" start="134" end="143" title="Acid–base titration" label="titration"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="153" end="164" title="theory" label="theoretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q556036" start="340" end="371" title="Brønsted–Lowry acid–base theory" label="Brønsted–Lowry acid–base theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="589" end="596" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39607" start="597" end="614" title="Antoine Lavoisier" label="Antoine Lavoisier"/>
<link wikidata="Q902573" start="1073" end="1099" title="Guillaume-François Rouelle" label="Guillaume-François Rouelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="1131" end="1135" title="base (chemistry)" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q39607" start="1386" end="1395" title="Lavoisier" label="Lavoisier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634792" start="1448" end="1459" title="strong acid" label="strong acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q497173" start="1486" end="1493" title="oxoacid" label="oxoacid"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="1505" end="1516" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="1523" end="1536" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="1583" end="1598" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572088" start="1680" end="1695" title="hydrohalic acid" label="hydrohalic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468" start="1698" end="1700" title="hydrogen fluoride" label="HF"/>
<link wikidata="Q211086" start="1702" end="1705" title="hydrogen chloride" label="HCl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447" start="1707" end="1710" title="hydrogen bromide" label="HBr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462" start="1716" end="1718" title="hydrogen iodide" label="HI"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="1773" end="1779" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="1962" end="1978" title="Humphry Davy" label="Sir Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="2020" end="2036" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q411266" start="2041" end="2059" title="hydrogen telluride" label="hydrogen telluride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572088" start="2072" end="2087" title="hydrohalic acid" label="hydrohalic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q151911" start="2341" end="2361" title="Jöns Jacob Berzelius" label="Jöns Jacob Berzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q16571" start="2500" end="2517" title="Justus von Liebig" label="Justus von Liebig"/>
<link wikidata="Q421948" start="2698" end="2710" title="organic acid" label="organic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q80956" start="3055" end="3071" title="Svante Arrhenius" label="Svante Arrhenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12658" start="3137" end="3162" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Ostwald" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Ostwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="3203" end="3219" title="aqueous solution" label="aqueous solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="3255" end="3279" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="3367" end="3374" title="ionization" label="ionises"/>
<link wikidata="Q899488" start="3507" end="3518" title="protonation" label="protonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q849881" start="3552" end="3561" title="hydronium" label="hydronium"/>
<link wikidata="Q300951" start="3778" end="3790" title="pH indicator" label="pH indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="4049" end="4056" title="acidity" label="acidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432016" start="4061" end="4071" title="alkalinity" label="alkalinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="4472" end="4483" title="aqueous solution" label="non-aqueous"/>
<link wikidata="Q337120" start="4545" end="4559" title="neutralization (chemistry)" label="neutralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="4606" end="4610" title="salt (chemistry)" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672062" start="4724" end="4751" title="salt metathesis reaction" label="double-replacement reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="4782" end="4799" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="4811" end="4827" title="sodium hydroxide" label="sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="4868" end="4883" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="4953" end="4955" title="aqueous solution" label="aq"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="5184" end="5200" title="aqueous solution" label="aqueous solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q29476" start="5289" end="5302" title="Baking powder" label="Baking powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="5400" end="5414" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="5465" end="5476" title="baking soda" label="baking soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="5487" end="5505" title="sodium bicarbonate" label="sodium bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="5734" end="5748" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q414673" start="6067" end="6088" title="monocalcium phosphate" label="monocalcium phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q213185" start="6147" end="6160" title="stoichiometry" label="stoichiometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q414673" start="6252" end="6273" title="monocalcium phosphate" label="monocalcium phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q413559" start="6286" end="6310" title="sodium aluminium sulfate" label="sodium aluminium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q418498" start="6362" end="6387" title="sodium acid pyrophosphate" label="sodium acid pyrophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18745" start="6506" end="6521" title="cream of tartar" label="cream of tartar"/>
<link wikidata="Q194322" start="6542" end="6555" title="tartaric acid" label="tartaric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q180142" start="6659" end="6685" title="Johannes Nicolaus Brønsted" label="Johannes Nicolaus Brønsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q908567" start="6701" end="6713" title="Martin Lowry" label="Martin Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q899488" start="6752" end="6763" title="protonation" label="protonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686738" start="6785" end="6798" title="deprotonation" label="deprotonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q506710" start="6898" end="6904" title="hydron (chemistry)" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014867" start="7116" end="7130" title="conjugate acid" label="conjugate base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014867" start="7240" end="7254" title="conjugate acid" label="conjugate acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q103835" start="7726" end="7731" title="Peter Debye" label="Debye"/>
<link wikidata="Q107405" start="7733" end="7740" title="Lars Onsager" label="Onsager"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="8052" end="8054" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="8130" end="8146" title="aqueous solution" label="aqueous solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="8197" end="8199" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="8560" end="8577" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="8587" end="8603" title="aqueous solution" label="aqueous solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44791900" start="8676" end="8684" title="chloride" label="chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q849881" start="8776" end="8785" title="hydronium" label="hydronium"/>
<link wikidata="Q182677" start="8835" end="8845" title="amphoterism" label="amphoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q425597" start="9009" end="9018" title="hydroxide" label="hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q210385" start="9351" end="9359" title="pyridine" label="pyridine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9603" end="9628" title="#Arrhenius definition" label="Arrhenius Acid–Base model"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="9670" end="9681" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="9698" end="9712" title="liquid ammonia" label="liquid ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212527" start="9793" end="9800" title="acetate" label="acetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q208858" start="10138" end="10154" title="Gilbert N. Lewis" label="Gilbert N. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="10357" end="10372" title="oxidizing agent" label="oxidizing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="10398" end="10404" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208858" start="10661" end="10677" title="Gilbert N. Lewis" label="Gilbert N. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q900190" start="10976" end="10989" title="electron pair" label="electron pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q409602" start="11104" end="11121" title="boron trifluoride" label="boron trifluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q208348" start="11209" end="11214" title="octet rule" label="octet"/>
<link wikidata="Q44793182" start="11220" end="11228" title="fluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q189294" start="11365" end="11373" title="boron group" label="group 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q106675" start="11449" end="11457" title="group 15" label="group 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="11492" end="11497" title="amine" label="amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q108702082" start="11506" end="11515" title="organophosphine" label="phosphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q353392" start="11547" end="11553" title="Adduct" label="Adduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q499548" start="11592" end="11612" title="dative covalent bond" label="dative covalent bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q104567" start="11698" end="11706" title="group 16" label="group 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q103230" start="11783" end="11788" title="ether" label="ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q727732" start="11797" end="11806" title="thioether" label="thioether"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="11904" end="11919" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q15102958" start="12527" end="12549" title="Edward Curtis Franklin" label="Edward Curtis Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29113489" start="12678" end="12697" title="Albert Fredrick Ottomar Germann" label="Albert F.O. Germann"/>
<link wikidata="Q189090" start="12719" end="12727" title="phosgene" label="phosgene"/>
<link wikidata="Q341409" start="12962" end="12976" title="onium ion" label="solvonium ions"/>
<link wikidata="Q899488" start="13062" end="13072" title="protonated" label="protonated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709746" start="13091" end="13102" title="lyonium ion" label="lyonium ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812977" start="13107" end="13119" title="ate complex" label="solvate ions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707113" start="13236" end="13245" title="lyate ion" label="lyate ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="13272" end="13279" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q849881" start="13311" end="13320" title="hydronium" label="hydronium"/>
<link wikidata="Q425597" start="13325" end="13334" title="hydroxide" label="hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190901" start="13340" end="13348" title="ammonium" label="ammonium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13353" end="13358" title="metal amides#Alkali metal amides" label="amide"/>
<link wikidata="Q382984" start="13447" end="13467" title="dinitrogen tetroxide" label="dinitrogen tetroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500533" start="13473" end="13484" title="nitrosonium" label="nitrosonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="13489" end="13496" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q411279" start="13498" end="13518" title="antimony trichloride" label="antimony trichloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q44791900" start="13610" end="13618" title="chloride" label="chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="14063" end="14077" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747806" start="14082" end="14089" title="thionyl" label="thionyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q76014098" start="14134" end="14142" title="sulfites" label="sulfites"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210783" start="15314" end="15325" title="Hermann Lux" label="Hermann Lux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963435" start="15355" end="15366" title="Håkon Flood" label="Håkon Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="15395" end="15407" title="geochemistry" label="geochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877" start="15412" end="15428" title="electrochemistry" label="electrochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931010" start="15432" end="15443" title="molten salt" label="molten salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q898452" start="15637" end="15655" title="noble gas compound" label="noble gas compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046533" start="15744" end="15761" title="Mikhail Usanovich" label="Mikhail Usanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="16117" end="16122" title="redox" label="redox"/>
<link wikidata="Q904428" start="16347" end="16360" title="Ralph Pearson" label="Ralph Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q131857" start="16405" end="16444" title="HSAB theory" label="Hard and Soft Acids and Bases principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q908642" start="16483" end="16494" title="Robert Parr" label="Robert Parr"/>
<link wikidata="Q30693684" start="16885" end="16894" title="ECW model" label="ECW model"/>
<link wikidata="Q29519785" start="16906" end="16922" title="Russell S. Drago" label="Russell S. Drago"/>
<link wikidata="Q208465" start="18036" end="18051" title="buffer solution" label="buffer solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277" start="18196" end="18203" title="adenine" label="adenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="18246" end="18255" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="18768" end="18774" title="alkali" label="alkali"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="18860" end="18864" title="salt (chemistry)" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q337120" start="18907" end="18921" title="neutralization (chemistry)" label="neutralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324480" start="19013" end="19026" title="spectator ion" label="spectator ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q506710" start="19080" end="19096" title="hydron (chemistry)" label="hydrogen cations"/>
<link wikidata="Q133716" start="19356" end="19375" title="Acid–base titration" label="Acid–base titration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686738" start="19378" end="19391" title="Deprotonation" label="Deprotonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296801" start="19394" end="19406" title="Donor number" label="Donor number"/>
<link wikidata="Q53859" start="19409" end="19431" title="Electron configuration" label="Electron configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621824" start="19434" end="19456" title="Gutmann–Beckett method" label="Gutmann–Beckett method"/>
<link wikidata="Q911437" start="19459" end="19474" title="Lewis structure" label="Lewis structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q658656" start="19477" end="19502" title="Nucleophilic substitution" label="Nucleophilic substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q337120" start="19506" end="19532" title="Neutralization (chemistry)" label="Neutralization (chemistry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q899488" start="19535" end="19546" title="Protonation" label="Protonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="19549" end="19554" title="Redox" label="Redox"/>
<link wikidata="Q911365" start="19568" end="19589" title="Resonance (chemistry)" label="Resonance (chemistry)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3040" wikidata="Q335599" url="?curid=3040" title="Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani">
<text>Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Iṣfahānī (), also known as Abul-Faraj, (full form: Abū al-Faraj ʿAlī ibn al-Ḥusayn ibn Muḥammad ibn Aḥmad ibn al-Ḥaytham al-Umawī al-Iṣfahānī) (897–967CE / 284–356AH) was a writer, historian, genealogist, poet, musicologist and scribe. He was of Arab-Quraysh origin and mainly based in Baghdad. He is best known as the author of &quot;Kitab al-Aghani&quot; (&quot;The Book of Songs&quot;), which includes information about the earliest attested periods of Arabic music (from the seventh to the ninth centuries) and the lives of poets and musicians from the pre-Islamic period to al-Isfahani&#x27;s time. Given his contribution to the documentation of the history of Arabic music, al-Isfahani is characterised by George Sawa as &quot;a true prophet of modern ethnomusicology&quot;.

== Dates ==
The commonly accepted dates of al-Isfahani&#x27;s birth and death are 897–898 and 967, based on the dates given by al-Khatib al-Baghdadi which itself based its information on the testimony of al-Isfahani&#x27;s student, Muhammad ibn Abi al-Fawaris. However, the credibility of these dates is to be treated with caution. No source places his death earlier than 967, but several place it later. These dates are at odds with a reference in the &quot;Kitab Adab al-ghuraba&quot; (&quot;The Book of the Etiquettes of Strangers&quot;), attributed to al-Isfahani, to his being in the prime of youth (&quot;fi ayyam al-shabiba wa-l-siba&quot;) in 967. Calculation of the approximate dates of his birth and death through the life spans of his students and his direct informants suggests that he was born before 902 and died after 960.

==Biography==
Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani was born in Isfahan, Persia (present-day Iran) but spent his youth and undertook his early studies in Baghdad (present-day Iraq). He was a direct descendant of the last of the Umayyad caliphs, Marwan II, and was thus connected with the Umayyad rulers in al-Andalus, and seems to have kept up a correspondence with them and to have sent them some of his works. He became famous for his knowledge of early Arabian antiquities.

His later life was spent in various parts of the Islamic world, including in Aleppo with its Hamdanid governor Sayf ad-Dawlah (to whom he dedicated the &quot;Book of Songs&quot;), and in Ray with the Buwayhid vizier Ibn &#x27;Abbad.

=== Family ===
The epithet, al-Isfahani, refers to the city, Isfahan, on the Iranian plateau. Instead of indicating al-Isfahani&#x27;s birthplace, this epithet seems to be common to al-Isfahani&#x27;s family. Every reference al-Isfahani makes to his paternal relatives includes the attributive, al-Isfahani. According to Ibn Hazm (994–1064), some descendants of the last Umayyad caliph, Marwan b. Muhammad (691–750), al-Isfahani&#x27;s ancestor, settled in Isfahan. However, it has to be borne in mind that the earliest information available regarding al-Isfahani&#x27;s family history only dates to the generation of his great-grandfather, Ahmad b. al-Ḥaytham, who settled in Samarra sometime between 835–6 and 847.

Based on al-Isfahani&#x27;s references in the &quot;Kitab al-Aghani&quot; (hereafter, the &quot;Aghani&quot;), Ahmad b. al-Haytham seems to have led a privileged life in Sāmarrāʾ, while his sons were well-connected with the elite of the Abbasid capital at that time. His son, Abd al-Aziz b. Ahmad, was &quot;one of the high ranking scribes in the days of al-Mutawakkil (r. 847–861) (&quot;min kibār al-kuttāb fī ayyām al-Mutawakkil&quot;)&quot;. Another son, Muhammad b. Ahmad (&quot;viz&quot;. al-Isfahani&#x27;s grandfather), was associated with Abbasid officials, the vizier Ibn al-Zayyāt (d. 847), the scribe Ibrahim b. al-Abbas al-Ṣūlī (792–857), and the vizier Ubaydallah b. Sulayman (d. 901), along with the Ṭālibid notables, including al-Husayn b. al-Husayn b. Zayd, who was the leader of the Banu Hashim. The close ties with the Abbasid court continued with Muhammad&#x27;s sons, al-Hasan and al-Husayn (al-Isfahani&#x27;s father).

In various places in the &quot;Aghani&quot;, al-Isfahani refers to Yahya b. Muhammad b. Thawaba (from the Al Thawaba) as his grandfather on his mother&#x27;s side. It is often suggested that the family of Thawaba, being Shi&#x27;i, bequeathed their sectarian inclination to al-Isfahani. However, the identification of the Thawaba family as Shi&#x27;is is only found in a late source, Yaqut&#x27;s (1178–1225) work. While many elite families working under the Abbasid caliphate were Shi&#x27;i-inclined, indeed allied with Alids or their partisans, there is no evidence that members of the Thawaba family embraced an extreme form of Shi&#x27;ism.

In summary, al-Isfahani came from a family well-entrenched in the networks of the Abbasid elite, which included the officials and the Alids. Despite the epithet, al-Isfahani, it does not seem that the Isfahani family had a strong connection with the city of Isfahan. Rather, the family was mainly based in Sāmarrāʾ, from the generation of Ahmad b. al-Ḥaytham, and then Baghdad.

In the seats of the caliphate, a few members of the al-Isfahani family worked as scribes, while maintaining friendship or alliance with other scribes, viziers and notables. Like many of the court elite, al-Isfahani&#x27;s family maintained an amicable relationship with the offspring of Ali and allied with families, such as the Thawaba family, sharing their veneration of Ali and Alids. However, it is hard to pinpoint such a reverential attitude towards Alids in terms of sectarian alignment, given the scanty information about al-Isfahani&#x27;s family and the fluidity of sectarian identities at the time.

=== Education and career ===
The Isfahani family&#x27;s extensive network of contacts is reflected in al-Isfahani&#x27;s sources. Among the direct informants whom al-Isfahani cites in his works, are members of his own family, who were further connected to other notable families, the Al Thawaba, the Banū Munajjim, the Yazīdīs, the Ṣūlīs, the Banū Ḥamdūn, the Ṭāhirids, the Banū al-Marzubān and the Ṭālibids.

Given that al-Isfahani and his family very likely settled in Baghdad around the beginning of the tenth century, he interacted with a considerable number of the inhabitants of or visitors to that city, including: Jaḥẓa (d. 936), al-Khaffāf, Ali b. Sulaymān al-Akhfash (d. 927/8), and Muhammad b. Jarir al-Ṭabari (d. 922). Like other scholars of his time, al-Isfahani travelled in pursuit of knowledge. Although the details are insufficient to establish the dates of his journeys, based on the chains of transmission (&quot;asānīd&quot;, sing. &quot;isnād&quot;) al-Isfahani cites consistently and meticulously in every report, it is certain that he transmitted from ʿAbd al-Malik b. Maslama and ʿĀṣim b. Muhammad in Antakya; ʿAbdallāh b. Muhammad b. Ishaq in Ahwaz; and Yahya b. Aḥmad b. al-Jawn in Raqqa. If we accept the attribution of the &quot;Kitab Adab al-ghuraba&quot; to al-Isfahani, he once visited Baṣra as well as Ḥiṣn Mahdī, Mattūth, and Bājistrā. Yet, none of these cities seems to have left as much of an impact on al-Isfahani as Kūfa and Baghdad did. While al-Isfahani&#x27;s Baghdadi informants were wide-ranging in their expertise as well as sectarian and theological tendencies, his Kūfan sources can be characterised as either Shi&#x27;i or keen on preserving and disseminating memories that favoured Ali and his family. For example, Ibn ʿUqda (d. 944), mentioned in both the &quot;Aghānī&quot; and the &quot;Maqātil,&quot; was invariably cited for the reports about the Alids and their merits.

The journey in search for knowledge taken by al-Isfahani may not be particularly outstanding by the standard of his time, but the diversity of his sources&#x27; occupations and expertise is impressive. His informants can be assigned into one or more of the following categories: philologists and grammarians; singers and musicians; booksellers and copyists (&quot;sahhafun&quot; or &quot;warraqun&quot;, sing. &quot;sahhaf&quot; or &quot;Warraq&quot;); friends; tutors (&quot;muʾaddibūn&quot;, sing. &quot;muʾaddib&quot;); scribes (&quot;kuttāb&quot;, sing. &quot;kātib&quot;); imams or preachers (&quot;khuṭabāʾ&quot;, sing. &quot;khaṭīb&quot;); religious scholars (of the &quot;ḥadīth&quot;, the Qurʾānic recitations and exegeses, or jurisprudence) and judges; poets; and &quot;akhbārīs&quot; (transmitters of reports of all sorts, including genealogical, historical, and anecdotal reports). The variety of the narrators and their narrations enriched al-Iṣfahānī&#x27;s literary output, which covers a wide range of topics from amusing tales to the accounts of the Alids&#x27; martyrdom. His erudition is best illustrated by Abu Ali al-Muhassin al-Tanukhi&#x27;s (941–994) comment: &quot;With his encyclopaedic knowledge of music, musicians, poetry, poets, genealogy, history, and other subjects, al-Iṣfahānī established himself as a learned scholar and teacher.&quot;

He was also a scribe and this is not surprising, given his families’ scribal connections, but the details of his &quot;kātib&quot; activities are rather opaque. Although both al-Tanūkhī and al-Baghdādī refer to al-Isfahani with the attribute, &quot;kātib&quot;, they mention nothing of where he worked or for whom. The details of his occupation as a scribe only came later, with Yaqut, many of whose reports about al-Isfahani prove problematic. For instance, a report from Yaqut claims that al-Isfahani was the scribe of Rukn al-Dawla (d. 976) and mentions his resentment towards Abū al-Faḍl b. al-ʿAmīd (d. 970). However, the very same report was mentioned by Abū Ḥayyān al-Tawḥīdī (active tenth century) in his &quot;Akhlāq al-wazīrayn&quot;, where the scribe of Rukn al-Dawla is identified as Abū al-Faraj Ḥamd b. Muhammad, not Abū al-Faraj al-Isfahani. Thus, it is hard to know with certainty how and where al-Isfahani was engaged in his capacity as a &quot;kātib&quot;. Nevertheless, al-Isfahani&#x27;s association with the vizier, Abū Muḥammad al-Muhallabī (903–963), is well-documented. The friendship between the two began before al-Muhallabī&#x27;s became vizier in 950. The firm relationship between them is supported by al-Isfahani&#x27;s poetry collected by al-Thaʿālibī (961–1038): half of the fourteen poems are panegyrics dedicated to al-Muhallabī. In addition, al-Isfahani&#x27;s own work, &quot;al-Imāʾ al-shawāʿir&quot; (“Enslaved Women Who Composed Poetry”), is dedicated to the vizier, presumably, al-Muhallabī. His no longer surviving &quot;Manājīb al-khiṣyān&quot; (“The Noble Eunuchs”), which addresses two castrated male singers owned by al-Muhallabī, was composed for him. His &quot;magnum opus&quot;, the &quot;Aghānī&quot;, was very likely intended for al-Muhallabī, as well. In return for his literary efforts, according to al-Tanūkhī, al-Isfahani frequently received rewards from the vizier. Furthermore, for the sake of their long-term friendship and out of his respect for al-Isfahani&#x27;s genius, al-Muhallabī exceptionally tolerated al-Isfahani&#x27;s uncouth manners and poor personal hygiene. The sources say nothing about al-Isfahani&#x27;s fate after al-Muhallabī&#x27;s death. In his last years, according to his student, Muhammad b. Abī al-Fawāris, he suffered from senility (&quot;khallaṭa&quot;).

=== Personality, preferences, and beliefs ===
As a friend, al-Isfahani was unconventional in the sense that he did not seem to have been bothered to observe the social decorum of his time, as noted by a late biographical source: with his uncleanliness and gluttony, he presented a counterexample to elegance (&quot;ẓarf&quot;), as defined by one of his teachers, Abu al-Ṭayyib al-Washshāʾ (d. 937). His unconformity to the social norms did not hinder him from being part of al-Muhallabī&#x27;s entourage or participation in the literary assemblies, but, inevitably, it resulted in frictions with other scholars and detraction by his enemies. Although al-Isfahani appeared eccentric to his human associates, he was a caring owner of his cat, named Yaqaq (white): he treated Yaqaq&#x27;s colic (&quot;qulanj&quot;) with an enema (&quot;al-ḥuqna&quot;).

In contrast to his personal habits, al-Isfahani&#x27;s prose style is lucid, “in clear and simple language, with unusual sincerity and frankness”. Al-Isfahani&#x27;s capacity as a writer is well illustrated by Abu Deeb, who depicts al-Isfahani as &quot;one of the finest writers of Arabic prose in his time, with a remarkable ability to relate widely different types of &quot;aḵbār&quot; in a rich, lucid, rhythmic, and precise style, only occasionally exploiting such formal effects as &quot;saǰʿ&quot; (rhyming prose). He was also a fine poet with an opulent imagination. His poetry displays preoccupations similar to those of other urban poets of his time&quot;. His pinpoint documentation of &quot;asānīd&quot; and meticulous verification of information, provided in all his works, embody a truly scholarly character. Usually, in his treatment of a subject or an event, al-Isfahani lets his sources speak, but, occasionally, he voices his evaluation of poems and songs, as well as their creators. When dealing with conflicting reports, al-Isfahani either leaves his readers to decide or issues his judgement as to the most credible account. Yet, he frankly condemns sources whom he holds to be unreliable, for instance, Ibn Khurdādhbih on musicological information and Ibn al-Kalbī on genealogy. Indeed, al-Isfahani assesses his source material with a critical eye, while striving to present a more balanced view on his biographies, by focusing on their merits instead of elaborating on their flaws.

That said, al-Isfahani&#x27;s personal preferences and sectarian partisanship are not absent from his works. In terms of music and songs, al-Isfahani favours Ishaq b. Ibrahim al-Mawsili (772–850). In al-Isfahani&#x27;s view, Ishaq b. Ibrahim was a multi-talented man, who excelled in a number of subjects, but, most importantly, music. Ishaq b. Ibrahim, as a collector of the reports about poets and singers, is an important source in his &quot;Aghānī&quot;. Besides being a mine of information, Ishaq b. Ibrahim&#x27;s terminology for the description of the melodic modes is preferred over that of his opponent, Ibrahim ibn al-Mahdi (779–839), and adopted by al-Isfahani in his &quot;Aghani&quot;. Furthermore, al-Isfahani embarked on the compilation of the &quot;Aghānī&quot; because he was commissioned by his patron to reconstruct the list of the exquisite songs selected by Ishaq. In other words, the &quot;raison d’etre&quot; of the &quot;Aghānī&quot; is partly related to al-Isfahani&#x27;s idol, Ishaq b. Ibrahim, and its information about singers, songs and performance owes a tremendous amount to him. Al-Isfahani&#x27;s admiration for scholars or men of letters can be detected from time to time, usually in the passing comments in the chains of transmission. Yet al-Isfahani outspokenly expresses his admiration, in some cases, such as that of Ibn al-Muʿtazz (862–909).

As an Umayyad by ancestry, al-Isfahani&#x27;s later biographers mention his Shi&#x27;i affiliation with surprise. Yet, in the light of the history of the family&#x27;s connections with the Abbasid elite of Shi&#x27;i inclination and the Ṭālibids, and of his learning experience in Kūfa, his Shi&#x27;i conviction is understandable. Al-Tusi (995–1067) is the only early source specifying the exact sect to which al-Isfahani belonged in the fluid Shi&#x27;i world: he was a Zaydī. Although al-Ṭūsī&#x27;s view is widely accepted, its veracity is not beyond doubt. Al-Isfahani does not seem to have been informed of the latest Zaydī movements in Yemen and Ṭabaristān during his life, while his association with the Kūfan Zaydī community, which to some degree became less distinguishable from the Sunnīs, is yet to be studied in depth. It is clear, based on examination of how al-Isfahani amended the reports at his disposal, that he honoured Ali, who played a far more prominent role in his works than the first three caliphs, and some of his descendants, including Zaydi Shi&#x27;ism&#x27;s eponym, Zayd ibn Ali (694–740), by presenting them positively, while, in some cases, leaving their enemies’ rectitude in question. In spite of that, al-Isfahani is neither keen to identify the imams in the past, nor discuss the qualities of an imam. As a matter of fact, he hardly uses the word, not even applying it to Zayd b. Ali. Furthermore, he does not unconditionally approve any Alid revolt and seems lukewarm towards the group he refers to as Zaydis. Taken together, al-Isfahani&#x27;s Shi&#x27;i conviction is better characterised as moderate love for Ali without impugning the dignity of the caliphs before him.

== Legacy ==
Al-Isfahani authored a number of works, but only a few survive. Three of them are preserved through quotations: &quot;al-Qiyan&quot; (&quot;The Singing Girls Enslaved by Men&quot;), &quot;al-Diyarat&quot; (&quot;The Monasteries&quot;), and &quot;Mujarrad al-aghani&quot; (“The Abridgement of the Book of Songs”). A fragment of the &quot;Mujarrad al-aghani&quot; is found in Ibn Abi Uṣaybi&#x27;a&#x27;s ʿ&quot;Uyun al-anba&#x27; fi tabaqat al-atibba&quot;ʾ, which quotes a poem by the caliph, al-Maʾmūn (r. 813–833), which was arranged as a song by Mutayyam. The first two have been reconstructed and published by al-ʿAtiyya, who collected and collateed the passages from later works that quote from al-Isfahani. The former, &quot;al-Qiyān&quot;, is a collection of the biographies of the enslaved singing girls. In it, al-Isfahani provided the basic information about the biographical subjects, the men who enslaved them, and their interaction with poets, notables such as caliphs, and their admirers, with illustration of their poetic and/or musical talents. The latter, &quot;al-Diyārāt&quot;, provides information related to monasteries, with the indication of their geographical locations and, sometimes, history and topographical characteristics. However, it is questionable to what extent the reconstructed editions can represent the original texts, since the passages, which quote al-Isfahani as a source for the given subject and are thus included by the editor, seldom identify the titles of the works.

Four works survive in manuscripts and have been edited and published: &quot;Maqātil al-Ṭālibīyīn&quot; (&quot;The Ṭālibid Martyrs&quot;), &quot;Kitab al-Aghani&quot; (&quot;The Book of the Songs&quot;), &quot;Adab al-ghuraba&quot; (&quot;The Etiquettes of the Strangers&quot;), and &quot;al-Ima al-shawair&quot; (&quot;The Enslaved Women Who Composed Poetry&quot;). As noted above, al-Isfahani&#x27;s authorship of the &quot;Adab al-ghurabaʾ&quot; is disputed. The author, whoever he may have been, mentions in the preface his sufferings from the hardship of time and vicissitude of fate, and the solace which he seeks through the stories of bygone people. Hence, he collects in the &quot;Adab al-ghuraba&quot; the reports about the experiences of strangers; those away from their homes or their beloved ones. Some of the stories centre on the hardship which strangers, anonymous or not, encountered in their journey or exile, usually shown in the epigrams written on monuments, rocks, or walls. Others relate excursions to the monasteries for drinking.

The &quot;al-Imāʾ al-shawāʿir&quot; was composed at the order of the vizier al-Muhallabī, al-Isfahani&#x27;s patron, who demanded the collection of the reports about the enslaved women who composed poetry from the Umayyad to the Abbasid periods. Al-Isfahani confesses that he could not find any noteworthy poetess in the Umayyad period, because the people at that time were not impressed with verses featuring tenderness and softness. Thus, he only records the Abbasid poetesses, with mention of the relevant fine verses or the pleasant tales, and arranges them in chronological order. There are 31 sections, addressing 32 poetesses, most of which are short and usually begin with al-Isfahani&#x27;s summary of the subject.

The &quot;Maqātil al-Ṭālibīyīn&quot; is a historical-biographical compilation concerning the descendants of Abu Talib, who died by being killed, poisoned to death in a treacherous way, on the run from the rulers’ persecution, or confined until death. The &quot;Maqātil&quot; literature was rather common, particularly amongst Shi&#x27;is, before al-Isfahani and he used many works of this genre as sources for the &quot;Maqātil al-Ṭālibīyīn&quot;. Al-Isfahani does not explain the motivation behind this compilation nor mention to whom they were dedicated, but according to the preface of this work, he sets out as a condition to recount the reports about the Ṭālibids who were “praiseworthy in their conduct and rightly guided in their belief (&quot;maḥmūd al-ṭarīqa wa-sadīd al-madhhab&quot;)”.

Like the &quot;al-Imāʾ&quot;, the work is structured in chronological order, beginning with the first Ṭālibī martyr, Jaʿfar b. Abī Ṭālib, and ends in the year of its compilation, August 925 (Jumādā I 313). For each biographical entry, al-Isfahani gives the full name, the lineage (sometimes adding the maternal side). Less often, he additionally gives the virtues and personal traits of the subject and other material he thinks noteworthy, for example the prophetic &quot;ḥadīth&quot; about, or transmitted by, the subject of the biography in question. Then, al-Isfahani gives the account of the death which, more often than not, constitutes the end of the entry. Sometimes poetry for or by the subject is attached. The &quot;Maqātil&quot; was used as a reliable source of information by many Shi&#x27;i and non-Shi&#x27;i compilers of the following centuries.

The &quot;Kitab al-Aghani&quot;, al-Isfahanis best known work, is an immense compilation, including songs provided with musical indications (melodic modes and meters of songs), the biographies of poets and musicians of different periods in addition to historical material. As noted above, al-Isfahani embarks on compiling the &quot;Aghani&quot; first under the command of a patron, whom he calls &quot;ra&#x27;is&quot; (chief), to reconstruct the list of one hundred fine songs, selected by Ishaq b. Ibrahim. Due to an obscure report in Yaqut&#x27;s &quot;Mu&#x27;jam&quot;, this &quot;raʾīs&quot; is often assumed to be Sayf al-Dawla al-Ḥamdānī (r. 945–967), but recent studies suggest that a more plausible candidate for the dedication of the &quot;Aghani&quot; is the vizier al-Muhallabī.

The &quot;Aghani&quot; is divided into three parts: first, The Hundred Songs (&quot;al-mi&#x27;a al-ṣawt  al-mukhtara&quot;) and other song collections; second, the songs of the caliphs and of their children and grandchildren (&quot;aghani al-khulafa wa-awladihim wa-awlad awladihim&quot;); and third, al-Isfahanis selection of songs. The articles in each part are arranged based on different patterns, but it is mostly the song which introduces the articles on biographies or events. The &quot;Kitab al-Aghani&quot; is not the first book or collection of songs in Arabic, but it can be asserted that it is the most important one, for it &quot;is a unique mine of information not only on hundreds of song texts with their modes and meters, but also on the lives of their poets and composers, and on the social context of music making in early Islam and at the courts of the caliphs in Damascus and Baghdad&quot;. Because of al-Isfahani&#x27;s pedantic documentation of his sources, the &quot;Kitab al-Aghani&quot; can also be used to reconstruct earlier books of songs or biographical dictionaries on musicians that are otherwise lost.

As for the works that did not survive, based on their contents, as implied by their titles, they can be divided into the following categories:

The genealogical works: &quot;Nasab Bani Abd Shams&quot; (&quot;The Genealogy of the Banu Abd Shams&quot;), &quot;Jamharat al-nasab&quot; (&quot;The Compendium of Genealogies&quot;), &quot;Nasab Bani Shayban&quot; (&quot;The Genealogy of the Banu Shayban&quot;), and &quot;Nasab al-Mahaliba&quot; (&quot;The Genealogy of the Muhallabids&quot;), this last probably dedicated to his patron, the vizier al-Muhallabi.

The reports about specified or unspecified topics, such as &quot;Kitab al-Khammarin wa-l-khammarat&quot; (&quot;The Book of Tavern-Keepers, Male and Female&quot;), &quot;Akhbar al-tufayliyin&quot; (&quot;Reports about Party Crashers&quot;), &quot;al-Akhbar wa-l-nawadir&quot; (&quot;The Reports and Rare Tales&quot;), and &quot;Ayyam al-arab&quot; (&quot;The Battle-Days of the Arabs&quot;), which mentions 1700 days of the pre-Islamic tribal battles and was in circulation only in Andalusia.

The reports about music, musicians and singers: the aforementioned &quot;Manajib al-khisyan&quot; (&quot;The Noble Eunuchs&quot;), &quot;Akhbzr Jahza al-Barmaki&quot; (&quot;The Reports concerning Jahza al-Barmaki&quot;), &quot;al-Mamalik al-shu&#x27;ara&quot; (&quot;The Slave Poets&quot;), &quot;Adab al-samz&quot; (&quot;The Etiquettes of Listening to Music&quot;), and &quot;Risala fi &#x27;ilal al-nagham&quot; (&quot;The Treatise on the Rules of Tones&quot;).

There are two works, only mentioned by al-Tusi: &quot;Kitab ma nazala min al-Qur&#x27;an fi amir al-mu&#x27;minīn wa-ahl baytih &#x27;alayhim al-salam&quot; (&quot;The Book about the Qur&#x27;anic Verses Revealed regarding the Commander of the Faithful and the People of His Family, Peace upon Them&quot;) and &quot;Kitab fihi kalam Fatima alayha al-salam fi Fadak&quot; (&quot;The Book concerning the Statements of Fāṭima, Peace upon Her, regarding Fadak&quot;). Should the attribution of these two works to al-Isfahani be correct, together with the &quot;Maqatil al-Talibiyin&quot;, they reveal al-Isfahani&#x27;s Shi&#x27;i partisanship.

===Works===
Al-Isfahani is best known as the author of &quot;Kitab al-Aghani&quot; (&quot;The Book of Songs&quot;), an encyclopaedia of over 20 volumes and editions. However, he additionally wrote poetry, an anthology of verses on the monasteries of Mesopotamia and Egypt, and a genealogical work.
*&quot;Kitāb al-Aġānī&quot; () &#x27;Book of Songs&#x27;, a collection of Arabic chants rich in information on Arab and Persian poets, singers and other musicians from the 7th to the 10th centuries of major cities such as Mecca, Damascus, Isfahan, Rey, Baghdād and Baṣrah. The Book of Songs contains details of the ancient Arab tribes and courtly life of the Umayyads and provides a complete overview of the Arab civilization from the pre-Islamic Jahiliyya era, up to his own time. Abu ‘l-Faraj employs the classical Arabic genealogical device, or &quot;isnad&quot;, (chain of transmission), to relate the biographical accounts of the authors and composers. Although originally the poems were put to music, the musical signs are no longer legible. Abu ‘l-Faraj spent in total 50 years creating this work, which remains an important historical source.
The first printed edition, published in 1868, contained 20 volumes. In 1888 Rudolf Ernst Brünnow published a 21st volume being a collection of biographies not contained in the Bulāq edition, edited from manuscripts in the Royal Library of Munich.

*&quot;Maqātil aṭ-Ṭālibīyīn&quot; (), Tālibid Fights, a collection of more than 200 biographies of the descendants of Abu Talib ibn Abd al-Muttalib, from the time of Muhammad to the writing of the book in 925/6, who died in an unnatural way. As Abul-Faraj said in the foreword to his work, he included only those Tālibids who rebelled against the government and were killed, slaughtered, executed or poisoned, lived underground, fled or died in captivity. The work is a major source for the Umayyad and Abbāsid Alid uprisings and the main source for the Hashimite meeting that took place after the assassination of the Umayyad Caliph al-Walīd II in the village of al-Abwā&#x27; between Mecca and Medina. At this meeting, al-&#x27;Abdallah made the Hashimites pledge an oath of allegiance to his son Muhammad al-Nafs al-Zakiyya as the new Mahdi. 
*&quot;Kitāb al-Imā&#x27;āš-šawā&#x27;ir&quot; () &#x27;The Book of the Poet-slaves&#x27;, a collection of accounts of poetic slaves of the Abbasid period.

==See also==
*List of Arab scientists and scholars
*List of Iranian scientists and scholars

==Notes==

==References==

==Works cited==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q335599" start="0" end="29" title="Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani" label="Ali ibn al-Husayn al-Iṣfahānī"/>
<link wikidata="Q335599" start="48" end="58" title="Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani" label="Abul-Faraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="172" end="174" title="Common Era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="184" end="186" title="Islamic calendar" label="AH"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="267" end="271" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q485732" start="272" end="279" title="Quraysh (tribe)" label="Quraysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="307" end="314" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476995" start="356" end="371" title="Kitab al-Aghani" label="Kitab al-Aghani"/>
<link wikidata="Q624044" start="477" end="489" title="Arabic music" label="Arabic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q557961" start="930" end="951" title="al-Khatib al-Baghdadi" label="al-Khatib al-Baghdadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42053" start="1693" end="1700" title="Isfahan (city)" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1722" end="1726" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="1783" end="1790" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="1804" end="1808" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="1857" end="1864" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="1865" end="1871" title="caliph" label="caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q128371" start="1874" end="1883" title="Marwan II" label="Marwan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="1935" end="1945" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="2184" end="2190" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q837187" start="2200" end="2208" title="Hamdanid" label="Hamdanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544585" start="2218" end="2232" title="Sayf ad-Dawlah" label="Sayf ad-Dawlah"/>
<link wikidata="Q636188" start="2294" end="2297" title="Ray, Iran" label="Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q273874" start="2307" end="2315" title="Buwayhid" label="Buwayhid"/>
<link wikidata="Q175240" start="2316" end="2322" title="vizier" label="vizier"/>
<link wikidata="Q42053" start="2402" end="2409" title="Isfahan (city)" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q237660" start="2418" end="2433" title="Iranian plateau" label="Iranian plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q317787" start="2662" end="2670" title="Ibn Hazm" label="Ibn Hazm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="2712" end="2726" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q128371" start="2728" end="2746" title="Marwan II" label="Marwan b. Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q170047" start="3018" end="3025" title="Samarra" label="Samarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="3296" end="3303" title="Abbasid" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q220789" start="3414" end="3427" title="al-Mutawakkil" label="al-Mutawakkil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533685" start="3637" end="3650" title="Muhammad ibn al-Zayyat" label="Ibn al-Zayyāt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3774" end="3781" title="Ṭālibid" label="Ṭālibid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4987" start="3860" end="3871" title="Banu Hashim" label="Banu Hashim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="4221" end="4231" title="Shi&amp;#x27;i" label="Shi&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q316364" start="4385" end="4397" title="Yaqut al-Hamawi" label="Yaqut&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263379" start="4782" end="4787" title="Alids" label="Alids"/>
<link wikidata="Q170366" start="6806" end="6811" title="Ahvaz" label="Ahwaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q283368" start="6846" end="6851" title="Raqqa" label="Raqqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="6955" end="6960" title="Baṣra" label="Baṣra"/>
<link wikidata="Q186234" start="7091" end="7095" title="Kūfa" label="Kūfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263379" start="7537" end="7542" title="Alids" label="Alids"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969963" start="8000" end="8006" title="Warraq" label="Warraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813950" start="8120" end="8137" title="Katib" label="&amp;quot;kātib&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q932945" start="8188" end="8206" title="Khatib" label="&amp;quot;khaṭīb&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11903979" start="9971" end="9996" title="Abū Muḥammad al-Muhallabī" label="Abū Muḥammad al-Muhallabī"/>
<link wikidata="Q13121526" start="12061" end="12066" title="colic" label="colic"/>
<link wikidata="Q194517" start="12096" end="12101" title="enema" label="enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481412" start="13790" end="13817" title="Ishaq al-Mawsili" label="Ishaq b. Ibrahim al-Mawsili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959106" start="14245" end="14265" title="Ibrahim ibn al-Mahdi" label="Ibrahim ibn al-Mahdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q144333" start="15487" end="15492" title="Zaidiyyah" label="Zaydī"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="15808" end="15813" title="Sunnī" label="Sunnī"/>
<link wikidata="Q144287" start="16112" end="16124" title="Zayd ibn Ali" label="Zayd ibn Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="16665" end="16668" title="Ali" label="Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q61056" start="17233" end="17242" title="Al-Ma&amp;#x27;mun" label="al-Maʾmūn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="21023" end="21031" title="Islamic calendar" label="Jumādā I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606921" start="22090" end="22112" title="Rais" label="&amp;quot;ra&amp;#x27;is&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544585" start="22315" end="22339" title="Sayf ad-Dawlah" label="Sayf al-Dawla al-Ḥamdānī"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476995" start="25847" end="25862" title="Kitab al-Aghani" label="Kitab al-Aghani"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="25983" end="25989" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="26021" end="26032" title="monastery" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="26036" end="26047" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="26052" end="26057" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476995" start="26091" end="26105" title="Kitab al-Aghani" label="Kitāb al-Aġānī"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="26306" end="26311" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="26313" end="26321" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42053" start="26323" end="26330" title="Isfahan" label="Isfahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q636188" start="26332" end="26335" title="Rey, Iran" label="Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="26337" end="26344" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdād"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="26349" end="26355" title="Basra" label="Baṣrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="26443" end="26451" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyads"/>
<link wikidata="Q726805" start="26531" end="26540" title="Jahiliyya" label="Jahiliyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674390" start="26638" end="26643" title="isnad" label="isnad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588868" start="27011" end="27031" title="Rudolf Ernst Brünnow" label="Rudolf Ernst Brünnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="27174" end="27180" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q297913" start="27301" end="27330" title="Abu Talib ibn Abd al-Muttalib" label="Abu Talib ibn Abd al-Muttalib"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="27349" end="27357" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="27496" end="27504" title="Alī" label="Tālibids"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="27674" end="27681" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="27686" end="27693" title="Abbasid" label="Abbāsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263379" start="27694" end="27698" title="Alid" label="Alid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636337" start="27699" end="27708" title="Alid revolt of 762–763" label="uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774915" start="27737" end="27746" title="Hashimites" label="Hashimite"/>
<link wikidata="Q128307" start="27817" end="27828" title="Al-Walid II" label="al-Walīd II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051781" start="27847" end="27854" title="al-Abwa" label="al-Abwā"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="27869" end="27874" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="27879" end="27885" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q533216" start="27982" end="28009" title="Muhammad al-Nafs al-Zakiyya" label="Muhammad al-Nafs al-Zakiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q784387" start="28021" end="28026" title="Mahdi" label="Mahdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="28169" end="28176" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736514" start="28200" end="28236" title="List of Arab scientists and scholars" label="List of Arab scientists and scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116396" start="28238" end="28277" title="List of Iranian scientists and scholars" label="List of Iranian scientists and scholars"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3043" wikidata="Q651997" url="?curid=3043" title="Alcobaça, Portugal">
<text>Alcobaça () is a Portuguese city and municipality in the intermunicipal community Oeste and the region Oeste e Vale do Tejo, in the historical province of Estremadura, and in the Leiria District. The city grew along the valleys of the rivers Alcoa and Baça, from which it derives its name. The municipality population in 2011 was 56,693, in an area of . The city proper has a population of 15,800 inhabitants.

The city of Alcobaça became notable after the first king of Portugal, Afonso Henriques, decided to build a church to commemorate the Conquest of Santarém from the Moors in 1147. The church later evolved into the Monastery of Alcobaça, one of the most magnificent Gothic monuments in the country. In the church are the tombs of Pedro I of Portugal and his murdered mistress Inês de Castro. Over the centuries this monastery played an important role in shaping Portuguese culture.

A few kilometers to the north of Alcobaça is the Monastery of Batalha, another Gothic building constructed in memory of a different important battle, that of Aljubarrota. To the west of Alcobaça is the fishing village of Nazaré, now a popular resort town. To the south is the city of Caldas da Rainha and the medieval town of Óbidos. To the northeast is the town of Porto de Mós with its rebuilt castle.

== History ==
Alcobaça became notable in the 12th century, when it was chosen as the future site of Portugal&#x27;s largest church. In March 1147, the young King Dom Afonso Henriques defeated the Moors by capturing the city of Santarém. As a tribute to his victory, he vowed to build a magnificent home for the Order of Cistercians. It took another 76 years before this task was completed. The monarchy continued to carry out further construction and 60 years later King Dinis built the main cloister. The monastery was consecrated in 1262.

The church contains the tombs of Pedro I of Portugal and his murdered mistress Inês de Castro. Pedro had married Constanza, the &quot;Infanta&quot; (princess) of Castile, but escaped with his mistress Inês and later lived in the city of Coimbra. His father, King Afonso IV, believing that the family of Inês was a threat to his kingdom, had her murdered. Shortly after the death of his father, Pedro declared that he had married Inês in a prior secret ceremony in Bragança, and took a gruesome revenge on the killers and exhumed her body. He presented the embalmed corpse at the court with a crown on her head and demanded that all his courtiers kneel and individually pay homage to her decomposed hand. Today, their ornate tombs face each other so that on Judgment Day his first sight would be of Inês.

During the following centuries, the monks from this monastery had a major influence on the development of Portuguese culture. Notably, in 1269 they were the first to give public lessons to their congregation, and later they produced the first authoritative history on Portugal in a series of books. In 1810, the invading French pillaged the abbey, taking with them most of its most important treasures, including the noteworthy library. The items that remained were later stolen in 1834 during an anti-clerical riot and the banning of religious orders in Portugal.

==Climate==
Alcobaça has a Mediterranean climate (Köppen:&quot;Csb&quot;) with warm, dry summers and mild, wet winters.


==Parishes==
Administratively, the municipality is divided into 13 civil parishes (&quot;freguesias&quot;):

* Alcobaça e Vestiaria
* Alfeizerão
* Aljubarrota
* Bárrio
* Benedita
* Cela
* Coz, Alpedriz e Montes
* Évora de Alcobaça
* Maiorga
* Pataias e Martingança
* São Martinho do Porto
* Turquel
* Vimeiro
== City information==
The main feature of the city is essentially the monastery that proudly presents a long and sombre façade with 18th-century embellishments. This austerity is further emphasized in the cloisters with its apt name of &quot;Cloister of Silence&quot;. In contrast within the Abbey is the massive kitchen with a running stream specially diverted to pass through as a supply of fresh water. The open area of the kitchen chimney is large enough to take a whole ox for roasting. The surround to the sacristy doorway is an outstanding example of Manueline decoration. In 1794, Lord Beckford visited the Abbey and commented that he found some 300 monks &quot;living in a very splendid manner&quot;!

== Nearby locations ==

A few kilometers to the north of Alcobaça is another wondrous building constructed in memory of a different important battle, that of Aljubarrota in 1385, when King John I of Portugal defeated the Castilians and ensuring two hundred years of independence from the Castilian invaders. The construction of the Abbey at Batalha commenced in 1388 and was added to by various Portuguese Kings over these next two centuries. To the east of Batalha is the world-famous location of Fátima and a point of pilgrimage for the Roman Catholic religion due to the vision of the Virgin Mary in 1917 by three young children whilst tending their flock. To the west of Alcobaça is the well-known fishing village of Nazaré. Today, the village is now a small town and a popular holiday resort with most of its past and traditions having rapidly evaporated in the course of time. A very successful Portuguese feature film was made in the early 20th century that dramatically captured the primitive and dangerous life of these fishermen. Stoutly Catholic, the inhabitants have retained some of their past as can be still seen in their own particular style of costume. To the south is Caldas da Rainha and the quaint medieval town of Óbidos that is an attraction for any tourists that enjoys a true glimpse of the past. Also to the south is the town of Porto de Mós with its fanciful rebuilt castle. This town borders the Nature Reserve Parque Natural das Serras de Aire e Candeeiros. These 390 square kilometres of limestone-covered landscape is also known for its caverns. The best known being the Grutas de Mira de Aire can be visited and consists of tunnels, caverns with stalactites, stalagmites, lakes, and a music and light finale.

== Major events ==
* Market days – Every Monday
* Carnaval de Alcobaça – February/March
* Cistermúsica – classical music festival – June / July
* Saint Bernard&#x27;s fair – August 20
* Municipal holiday – August 20
* &quot;Marionetas na Cidade&quot; – puppetry festival – mid-October
* Saint Simon&#x27;s fair – 4th week of October
* International display of Sweets and Conventual Liqueurs – November

== Notable people from Alcobaça==

* Joaquim Ferreira Bogalho (1889–1977) the 20th president of S.L. Benfica
* Virgínia Vitorino (1895–1967) a teacher, poet and playwright. 
* Joaquim Vieira de Natividade, (Wiki PT) (1899–1968) an agricultural engineer
* Valdemar José Correia Barbosa Rodrigues, (Wiki PT) (b. 1965) an environmental engineer, ensaist and poet
* José Aurélio, (Wiki PT) (born 1938) a sculptor, works in stone, wood and bronze
* João Lourenço (born 1942) a former footballer with 207 club caps 
* Alberto Costa (born 1947) politician, Minister of Justice, 2005–2009.
* Nuno Gonçalves, a Portuguese musician, founder of The Gift.
* João Traquina (born 1988) a Portuguese footballer with over 350 club caps
* João Pedro Silva (born 1989) a Portuguese professional triathlete, competed at the 2012 Summer Olympics 
* The Gift (formed 1994) a Portuguese alternative rock band
* Loto (formed 2002) an electro-pop-rock-dance music band
* Spartak! (2006–2008) a musical collective from Alcobaça
* JÜRA Popular pop artist based in Lisbon

==International relations==
Alcobaça is twinned with:
* Aubergenville, France
* Bełchatów, Poland
* Cacuaco, Angola
* Chicopee, United States

==See also==

*Alcobaça IPR
*Monastery of Alcobaça
*Monastery of Batalha
*Nazaré

==References==
==External links==
*Municipality official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q651997" start="0" end="8" title="Alcobaça, Portugal" label="Alcobaça"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="17" end="27" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q27995043" start="57" end="81" title="Intermunicipal communities of Portugal" label="intermunicipal community"/>
<link wikidata="Q10340327" start="82" end="87" title="Oeste (intermunicipal community)" label="Oeste"/>
<link wikidata="Q124246184" start="103" end="123" title="Oeste e Vale do Tejo" label="Oeste e Vale do Tejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q742117" start="155" end="166" title="Estremadura Province (1936–1976)" label="Estremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q244512" start="179" end="194" title="Leiria District" label="Leiria District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536437" start="242" end="247" title="Alcoa River" label="Alcoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q587697" start="481" end="497" title="Afonso I of Portugal" label="Afonso Henriques"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162445" start="544" end="564" title="Conquest of Santarém" label="Conquest of Santarém"/>
<link wikidata="Q593147" start="623" end="644" title="Alcobaça Monastery" label="Monastery of Alcobaça"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="674" end="680" title="gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q295824" start="738" end="757" title="Peter I of Portugal" label="Pedro I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q234022" start="784" end="798" title="Inês de Castro" label="Inês de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746216" start="870" end="888" title="Culture of Portugal" label="Portuguese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q174779" start="940" end="960" title="Batalha Monastery" label="Monastery of Batalha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341972" start="1049" end="1060" title="Battle of Aljubarrota" label="Aljubarrota"/>
<link wikidata="Q497179" start="1112" end="1118" title="Nazaré, Portugal" label="Nazaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q275689" start="1175" end="1191" title="Caldas da Rainha" label="Caldas da Rainha"/>
<link wikidata="Q275862" start="1217" end="1223" title="Óbidos, Portugal" label="Óbidos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012710" start="1257" end="1269" title="Porto de Mós" label="Porto de Mós"/>
<link wikidata="Q587697" start="1462" end="1478" title="Afonso I of Portugal" label="Afonso Henriques"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="1492" end="1497" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q273877" start="1523" end="1531" title="Santarém, Portugal" label="Santarém"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="1607" end="1627" title="Cistercians" label="Order of Cistercians"/>
<link wikidata="Q212890" start="1762" end="1772" title="Denis of Portugal" label="King Dinis"/>
<link wikidata="Q295824" start="1871" end="1890" title="Peter I of Portugal" label="Pedro I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q234022" start="1917" end="1931" title="Inês de Castro" label="Inês de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q213594" start="1972" end="1979" title="Infante" label="Infanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="2000" end="2007" title="Crown of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q45412" start="2075" end="2082" title="Coimbra" label="Coimbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q272903" start="2096" end="2110" title="Afonso IV of Portugal" label="King Afonso IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q768261" start="2302" end="2310" title="Bragança, Portugal" label="Bragança"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="2595" end="2607" title="Last Judgment" label="Judgment Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2964" end="2970" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="3236" end="3257" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3259" end="3265" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131296" start="3420" end="3430" title="freguesia (Portugal)" label="freguesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683086" start="3442" end="3462" title="Vestiaria, Portugal" label="Alcobaça e Vestiaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035332" start="3465" end="3475" title="Alfeizerão" label="Alfeizerão"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623372" start="3478" end="3489" title="Aljubarrota" label="Aljubarrota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3492" end="3498" title="Bárrio (Alcobaça)" label="Bárrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q817079" start="3501" end="3509" title="Benedita (Alcobaça)" label="Benedita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052741" start="3512" end="3516" title="Cela, Alcobaça" label="Cela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3519" end="3541" title="Coz, Alpedriz e Montes" label="Coz, Alpedriz e Montes"/>
<link wikidata="Q291451" start="3544" end="3561" title="Évora de Alcobaça" label="Évora de Alcobaça"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3564" end="3571" title="Maiorga" label="Maiorga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3574" end="3595" title="Pataias e Martingança" label="Pataias e Martingança"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035277" start="3598" end="3619" title="São Martinho do Porto" label="São Martinho do Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q507373" start="3622" end="3629" title="Turquel" label="Turquel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3632" end="3639" title="Vimeiro (Alcobaça)" label="Vimeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q751878" start="4198" end="4207" title="Manueline" label="Manueline"/>
<link wikidata="Q361026" start="4229" end="4242" title="William Thomas Beckford" label="Lord Beckford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341972" start="4509" end="4520" title="Battle of Aljubarrota" label="Aljubarrota"/>
<link wikidata="Q201575" start="4540" end="4558" title="John I of Portugal" label="John I of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q810715" start="4692" end="4699" title="Batalha, Portugal" label="Batalha"/>
<link wikidata="Q191133" start="4849" end="4855" title="Fátima, Portugal" label="Fátima"/>
<link wikidata="Q719524" start="4925" end="4950" title="Our Lady of Fátima" label="vision of the Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q497179" start="5072" end="5078" title="Nazaré, Portugal" label="Nazaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q275689" start="5537" end="5553" title="Caldas da Rainha" label="Caldas da Rainha"/>
<link wikidata="Q275862" start="5586" end="5592" title="Óbidos, Portugal" label="Óbidos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012710" start="5705" end="5717" title="Porto de Mós" label="Porto de Mós"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364596" start="5789" end="5835" title="Parque Natural das Serras de Aire e Candeeiros" label="Parque Natural das Serras de Aire e Candeeiros"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612355" start="5952" end="5974" title="Gruta de Moinhos Velhos" label="Grutas de Mira de Aire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618" start="6142" end="6150" title="Carnival" label="Carnaval"/>
<link wikidata="Q188411" start="6238" end="6251" title="Bernard of Clairvaux" label="Saint Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="6345" end="6353" title="puppetry" label="puppetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12871" start="6379" end="6390" title="Simon the Zealot" label="Saint Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51347089" start="6532" end="6556" title="Joaquim Ferreira Bogalho" label="Joaquim Ferreira Bogalho"/>
<link wikidata="Q131499" start="6591" end="6603" title="S.L. Benfica" label="S.L. Benfica"/>
<link wikidata="Q10391751" start="6606" end="6623" title="Virgínia Vitorino" label="Virgínia Vitorino"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6671" end="6710" title=":pt:Joaquim Vieira de Natividade" label="Joaquim Vieira de Natividade, (Wiki PT)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6750" end="6800" title=":pt:Valdemar José Correia Barbosa Rodrigues" label="Valdemar José Correia Barbosa Rodrigues, (Wiki PT)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6857" end="6880" title=":pt:José Aurélio" label="José Aurélio, (Wiki PT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810721" start="6939" end="6952" title="João Lourenço (footballer, born 1942)" label="João Lourenço"/>
<link wikidata="Q364934" start="7007" end="7020" title="Alberto Costa (Portuguese politician)" label="Alberto Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294868" start="7045" end="7064" title="Ministry of Justice (Portugal)" label="Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q10338192" start="7079" end="7093" title="Nuno Miguel Gonçalves" label="Nuno Gonçalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q10311904" start="7141" end="7154" title="João Traquina" label="João Traquina"/>
<link wikidata="Q685116" start="7217" end="7233" title="João Pedro Silva (triathlete)" label="João Pedro Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="7300" end="7320" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382689" start="7324" end="7332" title="The Gift (band)" label="The Gift"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260033" start="7384" end="7388" title="Loto (band)" label="Loto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573866" start="7442" end="7450" title="Spartak!" label="Spartak!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7500" end="7504" title="JÜRA" label="JÜRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="7581" end="7588" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q687036" start="7597" end="7610" title="Aubergenville" label="Aubergenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="7612" end="7618" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q157992" start="7621" end="7630" title="Bełchatów" label="Bełchatów"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="7632" end="7638" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005770" start="7641" end="7648" title="Cacuaco" label="Cacuaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="7650" end="7656" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650454" start="7659" end="7667" title="Chicopee, Massachusetts" label="Chicopee"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="7669" end="7682" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832196" start="7699" end="7711" title="Alcobaça IPR" label="Alcobaça IPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q593147" start="7713" end="7734" title="Alcobaça Monastery" label="Monastery of Alcobaça"/>
<link wikidata="Q174779" start="7736" end="7756" title="Monastery of Batalha" label="Monastery of Batalha"/>
<link wikidata="Q497179" start="7758" end="7764" title="Nazaré, Portugal" label="Nazaré"/>
</links>
</doc>
