<doc id="5222" wikidata="Q739" url="?curid=5222" title="Colombia">
<text>Colombia, officially the Republic of Colombia, is a country primarily located in South America with insular regions in North America. The Colombian mainland is bordered by the Caribbean Sea to the north, Venezuela to the east and northeast, Brazil to the southeast, Peru and Ecuador to the south and southwest, the Pacific Ocean to the west, and Panama to the northwest. Colombia is divided into 32 departments. The Capital District of Bogotá is also the country&#x27;s largest city hosting the main financial and cultural hub. Other major urban areas include Medellín, Cali, Barranquilla, Cartagena, Santa Marta, Cúcuta, Ibagué, Villavicencio and Bucaramanga. It covers an area of 1,141,748 square kilometers (440,831 sq mi) and has a population of around 52 million. Its rich cultural heritage—including language, religion, cuisine, and art—reflects its history as a colony, fusing cultural elements brought by immigration from Europe and the Middle East, with those brought by the African diaspora, as well as with those of the various Indigenous civilizations that predate colonization. Spanish is the official language, although Creole, English and 64 other languages are recognized regionally.

Colombia has been home to many indigenous peoples and cultures since at least 12,000 BCE. The Spanish first landed in La Guajira in 1499, and by the mid-16th century, they had colonized much of present-day Colombia, and established the New Kingdom of Granada, with Santa Fe de Bogotá as its capital. Independence from the Spanish Empire is considered to have been declared in 1810, with what is now Colombia emerging as the United Provinces of New Granada. After a brief Spanish reconquest, Colombian independence was secured and the period of Gran Colombia began in 1819. The new polity experimented with federalism as the Granadine Confederation (1858) and then the United States of Colombia (1863), before becoming a centralised republic—the current Republic of Colombia—in 1886. With the backing of the United States and France, Panama seceded from Colombia in 1903, resulting in Colombia&#x27;s present borders. Beginning in the 1960s, the country has suffered from an asymmetric low-intensity armed conflict and political violence, both of which escalated in the 1990s. Since 2005, there has been significant improvement in security, stability, and rule of law, as well as unprecedented economic growth and development. Colombia is recognized for its healthcare system, being the best healthcare in Latin America according to the World Health Organization and 22nd in the world. Its diversified economy is the third-largest in South America, with macroeconomic stability and favorable long-term growth prospects.

Colombia is one of the world&#x27;s seventeen megadiverse countries; it has the highest level of biodiversity per square mile in the world and the second-highest level overall. Its territory encompasses Amazon rainforest, highlands, grasslands and deserts. It is the only country in South America with coastlines (and islands) along both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. Colombia is a key member of major global and regional organizations including the UN, the WTO, the OECD, the OAS, the Pacific Alliance and the Andean Community; it is also a NATO Global Partner and a major non-NATO ally of the United States.

== Etymology ==

The name &quot;Colombia&quot; is derived from the last name of the Italian navigator Christopher Columbus (, , ). It was conceived as a reference to all of the New World. The name was later adopted by the Republic of Colombia of 1819, formed from the territories of the old Viceroyalty of New Granada (modern-day Colombia, Panama, Venezuela, Ecuador, and northwest Brazil).

When Venezuela, Ecuador, and Cundinamarca came to exist as independent states, the former Department of Cundinamarca adopted the name &quot;Republic of New Granada&quot;. New Granada officially changed its name in 1858 to the Granadine Confederation. In 1863 the name was again changed, this time to United States of Colombia, before finally adopting its present name – the Republic of Colombia – in 1886.

To refer to this country, the Colombian government uses the terms and .

== History ==
=== Pre-Columbian era ===
Owing to its location, the present territory of Colombia was a corridor of early human civilization from Mesoamerica and the Caribbean to the Andes and Amazon basin. The oldest archaeological finds are from the Pubenza and El Totumo sites in the Magdalena Valley southwest of Bogotá. These sites date from the Paleoindian period (18,000–8000 BCE). At Puerto Hormiga and other sites, traces from the Archaic Period (~8000–2000 BCE) have been found. Vestiges indicate that there was also early occupation in the regions of El Abra and Tequendama in Cundinamarca. The oldest pottery discovered in the Americas, found in San Jacinto, dates to 5000–4000 BCE.

Indigenous people inhabited the territory that is now Colombia by 12,500 BCE. Nomadic hunter-gatherer tribes at the El Abra, Tibitó and Tequendama sites near present-day Bogotá traded with one another and with other cultures from the Magdalena River Valley. A site including of pictographs that is under study at Serranía de la Lindosa was revealed in November 2020. Their age is suggested as being 12,500 years old (c. 10,480 B.C.) by the anthropologists working on the site, because of extinct fauna depicted. It was during the earliest known human occupation of the area.

Between 5000 and 1000 BCE, hunter-gatherer tribes transitioned to agrarian societies; fixed settlements were established, and pottery appeared. Beginning in the 1st millennium BCE, groups of Amerindians including the Muisca, Zenú, Quimbaya, and Tairona developed the political system of &quot;cacicazgos&quot; with a pyramidal structure of power headed by &quot;caciques&quot;. The Muisca inhabited mainly the area of what is now the Departments of Boyacá and Cundinamarca high plateau (&quot;Altiplano Cundiboyacense&quot;) where they formed the Muisca Confederation. They farmed maize, potato, quinoa, and cotton, and traded gold, emeralds, blankets, ceramic handicrafts, coca and especially rock salt with neighboring nations. The Tairona inhabited northern Colombia in the isolated mountain range of Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta. The Quimbaya inhabited regions of the Cauca River Valley between the Western and Central Ranges of the Colombian Andes. Most of the Amerindians practiced agriculture and the social structure of each indigenous community was different. Some groups of indigenous people such as the Caribs lived in a state of permanent war, but others had less bellicose attitudes. During the 1200s, Malayo-Polynesians and Native Americans in Colombia made contact, thereby spreading Native American genetics from Precolonial Colombia to some Pacific Ocean islands.

=== Colonial period ===


Alonso de Ojeda (who had sailed with Columbus) reached the Guajira Peninsula in 1499. Spanish explorers, led by Rodrigo de Bastidas, made the first exploration of the Caribbean coast in 1500. Christopher Columbus navigated near the Caribbean in 1502. In 1508, Vasco Núñez de Balboa accompanied an expedition to the territory through the region of Gulf of Urabá and they founded the town of Santa María la Antigua del Darién in 1510, the first stable settlement on the continent. Santa Marta was founded in 1525, and Cartagena in 1533. Spanish conquistador Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada led an expedition to the interior in April 1536, and christened the districts through which he passed &quot;New Kingdom of Granada&quot;. In August 1538, he provisionally founded its capital near the Muisca cacicazgo of Muyquytá, and named it &quot;Santa Fe&quot;. The name soon acquired a suffix and was called Santa Fe de Bogotá. Two other notable journeys by early conquistadors to the interior took place in the same period. Sebastián de Belalcázar, conqueror of Quito, traveled north and founded Cali, in 1536, and Popayán, in 1537; from 1536 to 1539, German conquistador Nikolaus Federmann crossed the Llanos Orientales and went over the Cordillera Oriental in a search for El Dorado, the &quot;city of gold&quot;. The legend and the gold would play a pivotal role in luring the Spanish and other Europeans to New Granada during the 16th and 17th centuries.

The conquistadors made frequent alliances with the enemies of different indigenous communities. Indigenous allies were crucial to conquest, as well as to creating and maintaining empire. Indigenous peoples in Colombia experienced a decline in population due to conquest as well as Eurasian diseases, such as smallpox, to which they had no immunity. Regarding the land as deserted, the Spanish Crown sold properties to all persons interested in colonized territories, creating large farms and possession of mines. In the 16th century, the nautical science in Spain reached a great development thanks to numerous scientific figures of the Casa de Contratación and nautical science was an essential pillar of the Iberian expansion. In 1542, the region of New Granada, along with all other Spanish possessions in South America, became part of the Viceroyalty of Peru, with its capital in Lima. In 1547, New Granada became a separate captaincy-general within the viceroyalty, with its capital at Santa Fe de Bogota. In 1549, the Royal Audiencia was created by a royal decree, and New Granada was ruled by the Royal Audience of Santa Fe de Bogotá, which at that time comprised the provinces of Santa Marta, Rio de San Juan, Popayán, Guayana and Cartagena. But important decisions were taken from the colony to Spain by the Council of the Indies.
In the 16th century, European slave traders had begun to bring enslaved Africans to the Americas. Spain was the only European power that did not establish factories in Africa to purchase slaves; the Spanish Empire instead relied on the asiento system, awarding merchants from other European nations the license to trade enslaved peoples to their overseas territories. This system brought Africans to Colombia, although many spoke out against the institution. The indigenous peoples could not be enslaved because they were legally subjects of the Spanish Crown. To protect the indigenous peoples, several forms of land ownership and regulation were established by the Spanish colonial authorities: &quot;resguardos&quot;, &quot;encomiendas&quot; and &quot;haciendas&quot;.

However, secret anti-Spanish discontentment was already brewing for Colombians since Spain prohibited direct trade between the Viceroyalty of Peru, which included Colombia, and the Viceroyalty of New Spain, which included the Philippines, the source of Asian products like silk and porcelain which was in demand in the Americas. Illegal trade between Peruvians, Filipinos, and Mexicans continued in secret, as smuggled Asian goods ended up in Córdoba, Colombia, the distribution center for illegal Asian imports, due to the collusion between these peoples against the authorities in Spain. They settled and traded with each other while disobeying the forced Spanish monopoly.
The Viceroyalty of New Granada was established in 1717, then temporarily removed, and then re-established in 1739. Its capital was Santa Fé de Bogotá. This Viceroyalty included some other provinces of northwestern South America that had previously been under the jurisdiction of the Viceroyalties of New Spain or Peru and correspond mainly to today&#x27;s Venezuela, Ecuador, and Panama. Bogotá became one of the principal administrative centers of the Spanish possessions in the New World, along with Lima and Mexico City, though it remained less developed compared to those two cities in several economic and logistical ways.

Great Britain declared war on Spain in 1739, and the city of Cartagena quickly became a top target for the British. A massive British expeditionary force was dispatched to capture the city, but, after achieving initial inroads, devastating outbreaks of disease crippled their numbers, and the British were forced to withdraw. The battle became one of Spain&#x27;s most decisive victories in the conflict, and secured Spanish dominance in the Caribbean until the Seven Years&#x27; War. The 18th-century priest, botanist, and mathematician José Celestino Mutis was delegated by Viceroy Antonio Caballero y Góngora to conduct an inventory of the nature of New Granada. Started in 1783, this became known as the Royal Botanical Expedition to New Granada. It classified plants and wildlife, and founded the first astronomical observatory in the city of Santa Fe de Bogotá. In July 1801 the Prussian scientist Alexander von Humboldt reached Santa Fe de Bogotá where he met with Mutis. In addition, historical figures in the process of independence in New Granada emerged from the expedition as the astronomer Francisco José de Caldas, the scientist Francisco Antonio Zea, the zoologist Jorge Tadeo Lozano and the painter Salvador Rizo.

=== Independence ===

Rebellions against Spanish rule had occurred in the empire since the advent of conquest and colonization, but most were either crushed or remained too weak to change the overall situation. The last one that sought outright independence from Spain sprang up around 1810 and culminated in the Colombian Declaration of Independence, issued on 20 July 1810, the day that is now celebrated as the nation&#x27;s Independence Day. This movement followed the independence of Saint-Domingue (present-day Haiti) in 1804, which provided some support to an eventual leader of this rebellion: Simón Bolívar. Francisco de Paula Santander also would play a decisive role.

A movement was initiated by Antonio Nariño, who opposed Spanish centralism and led the opposition against the Viceroyalty. Cartagena became independent in November 1811. In 1811, the United Provinces of New Granada were proclaimed, headed by Camilo Torres Tenorio. The emergence of two distinct ideological currents among the patriots (federalism and centralism) gave rise to a period of instability called the Patria Boba. Shortly after the Napoleonic Wars ended, Ferdinand VII, recently restored to the throne in Spain, unexpectedly decided to send military forces to retake most of northern South America. The viceroyalty was restored under the command of Juan de Sámano, whose regime punished those who participated in the patriotic movements, ignoring the political nuances of the juntas. The retribution stoked renewed rebellion, which, combined with a weakened Spain, made possible a successful rebellion led by the Venezuelan-born Simón Bolívar, who finally proclaimed independence in 1819. The pro-Spanish resistance was defeated in 1822 in the present territory of Colombia and in 1823 in Venezuela. During the Independence War, between 250 and 400 thousand people (12–20% of the pre-war population) died.

The territory of the Viceroyalty of New Granada became the Republic of Colombia, organized as a union of the current territories of Colombia, Panama, Ecuador, Venezuela, parts of Guyana and Brazil and north of Marañón River. The Congress of Cúcuta in 1821 adopted a constitution for the new Republic. Simón Bolívar became the first President of Colombia, and Francisco de Paula Santander was made Vice President. However, the new republic was unstable and the Gran Colombia ultimately collapsed.

Modern Colombia comes from one of the countries that emerged after the dissolution of Gran Colombia, the other two being Ecuador and Venezuela. Colombia was the first constitutional government in South America, and the Liberal and Conservative parties, founded in 1848 and 1849, respectively, are two of the oldest surviving political parties in the Americas. Slavery was abolished in the country in 1851.

Internal political and territorial divisions led to the dissolution of Gran Colombia in 1830. The so-called &quot;Department of Cundinamarca&quot; adopted the name &quot;New Granada&quot;, which it kept until 1858 when it became the &quot;Confederación Granadina&quot; (Granadine Confederation). After a two-year civil war in 1863, the United States of Colombia was created, which became known as the Republic of Colombia in 1886. Internal divisions remained between the bipartisan political forces, occasionally igniting very bloody civil wars, the most significant being the Thousand Days&#x27; War (1899–1902), in which between 100 and 180 thousand Colombians lost their lives when the Liberal Party, supported by Venezuela, Ecuador, Nicaragua, and Guatemala rebelled against the Nationalist government and took control of Santander, ultimately being defeated in 1902 by nationalist forces.

=== 20th century ===

The United States of America&#x27;s intentions to influence the area (especially the Panama Canal construction and control) led to the secession of the Department of Panama in 1903 and its political independence. The United States paid Colombia $25,000,000 in 1921, seven years after completion of the canal, for redress of President Roosevelt&#x27;s role in the creation of Panama, and Colombia recognized Panama under the terms of the Thomson–Urrutia Treaty. Colombia and Peru went to war because of territory disputes far in the Amazon basin. The war ended with a peace deal brokered by the League of Nations. The League finally awarded the disputed area to Colombia in June 1934.
Soon after, Colombia achieved some degree of political stability, which was interrupted by a bloody conflict that took place between the late 1940s and the early 1950s, a period known as &quot;La Violencia&quot; (&quot;The Violence&quot;). Its cause was mainly mounting tensions between the two leading political parties, which subsequently ignited after the assassination of the Liberal presidential candidate Jorge Eliécer Gaitán on 9 April 1948. The ensuing riots in Bogotá, known as El Bogotazo, spread throughout the country and claimed the lives of at least 180,000 Colombians.

Colombia entered the Korean War when Laureano Gómez was elected president. It was the only Latin American country to join the war in a direct military role as an ally of the United States. Particularly important was the resistance of the Colombian troops at Old Baldy.

The violence between the two political parties decreased first when Gustavo Rojas deposed the President of Colombia in a coup d&#x27;état and negotiated with the guerrillas, and then under the military junta of General Gabriel París.
After Rojas&#x27; deposition, the Colombian Conservative Party and the Colombian Liberal Party agreed to create the National Front, a coalition that would jointly govern the country. Under the deal, the presidency would alternate between conservatives and liberals every 4 years for 16 years; the two parties would have parity in all other elective offices. The National Front ended &quot;La Violencia&quot;, and National Front administrations attempted to institute far-reaching social and economic reforms in cooperation with the Alliance for Progress. Despite the progress in certain sectors, many social and political problems continued, and guerrilla groups were formally created such as the FARC, the ELN and the M-19 to fight the government and political apparatus.

Since the 1960s, the country has suffered from an asymmetric low-intensity armed conflict between government forces, leftist guerrilla groups and right wing paramilitaries. The conflict escalated in the 1990s, mainly in remote rural areas. Since the beginning of the armed conflict, human rights defenders have fought for the respect for human rights, despite staggering opposition. Several guerrillas&#x27; organizations decided to demobilize after peace negotiations in 1989–1994.

The United States has been heavily involved in the conflict since its beginnings, when in the early 1960s the U.S. government encouraged the Colombian military to attack leftist militias in rural Colombia. This was part of the U.S. fight against communism. Mercenaries and multinational corporations such as Chiquita Brands International are some of the international actors that have contributed to the violence of the conflict.

Beginning in the mid-1970s Colombian drug cartels became major producers, processors and exporters of illegal drugs, primarily marijuana and cocaine.

On 4 July 1991, a new Constitution was promulgated. The changes generated by the new constitution are viewed as positive by Colombian society.

===21st century===
The administration of President Álvaro Uribe (2002–2010) adopted the democratic security policy which included an integrated counter-terrorism and counter-insurgency campaign. The government economic plan also promoted confidence in investors. As part of a controversial peace process, the AUC (right-wing paramilitaries) had ceased to function formally as an organization . In February 2008, millions of Colombians demonstrated against FARC and other outlawed groups.

After peace negotiations in Cuba, the Colombian government of President Juan Manuel Santos and the guerrillas of the FARC-EP announced a final agreement to end the conflict. However, a referendum to ratify the deal was unsuccessful. Afterward, the Colombian government and the FARC signed a revised peace deal in November 2016, which the Colombian congress approved. In 2016, President Santos was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. The Government began a process of attention and comprehensive reparation for victims of conflict. Colombia shows modest progress in the struggle to defend human rights, as expressed by HRW. A Special Jurisdiction of Peace has been created to investigate, clarify, prosecute and punish serious human rights violations and grave breaches of international humanitarian law which occurred during the armed conflict and to satisfy victims&#x27; right to justice. During his visit to Colombia, Pope Francis paid tribute to the victims of the conflict.
In June 2018, Iván Duque, the candidate of the right-wing Democratic Center party, won the presidential election. On 7 August 2018, he was sworn in as the new President of Colombia to succeed Juan Manuel Santos. Colombia&#x27;s relations with Venezuela have fluctuated due to ideological differences between the two governments. Colombia has offered humanitarian support with food and medicines to mitigate the shortage of supplies in Venezuela. Colombia&#x27;s Foreign Ministry said that all efforts to resolve Venezuela&#x27;s crisis should be peaceful. Colombia proposed the idea of the Sustainable Development Goals and a final document was adopted by the United Nations. In February 2019, Venezuelan president Nicolás Maduro cut off diplomatic relations with Colombia after Colombian President Ivan Duque had helped Venezuelan opposition politicians deliver humanitarian aid to their country. Colombia recognized Venezuelan opposition leader Juan Guaidó as the country&#x27;s legitimate president. In January 2020, Colombia rejected Maduro&#x27;s proposal that the two countries restore diplomatic relations.

Protests started on 28 April 2021 when the government proposed a tax bill that would greatly expand the range of the 19 percent value-added tax. The 19 June 2022 election run-off vote ended in a win for former guerrilla, Gustavo Petro, taking 50.47% of the vote compared to 47.27% for independent candidate Rodolfo Hernández. The single-term limit for the country&#x27;s presidency prevented President Iván Duque from seeking re-election. On 7 August 2022, Petro was sworn in, becoming the country&#x27;s first leftist president.

==Geography==

The geography of Colombia is characterized by its six main natural regions that present their unique characteristics, from the Andes mountain range region; the Pacific Coastal region; the Caribbean coastal region; the &quot;Llanos&quot; (plains); the Amazon rainforest region; to the insular area, comprising islands in both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans. It shares its maritime limits with Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Honduras, Jamaica, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic.

Colombia is bordered to the northwest by Panama, to the east by Venezuela and Brazil, and to the south by Ecuador and Peru; it established its maritime boundaries with neighboring countries through seven agreements on the Caribbean Sea and three on the Pacific Ocean. It lies between latitudes 12°N and 4°S and between longitudes 67° and 79°W.

East of the Andes lies the savanna of the &quot;Llanos&quot;, part of the Orinoco River basin, and in the far southeast, the jungle of the Amazon rainforest. Together these lowlands make up over half Colombia&#x27;s territory, but they contain less than 6% of the population. To the north the Caribbean coast, home to 21.9% of the population and the location of the major port cities of Barranquilla and Cartagena, generally consists of low-lying plains, but it also contains the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta mountain range, which includes the country&#x27;s tallest peaks (Pico Cristóbal Colón and Pico Simón Bolívar), and the La Guajira Desert. By contrast the narrow and discontinuous Pacific coastal lowlands, backed by the Serranía de Baudó mountains, are sparsely populated and covered in dense vegetation. The principal Pacific port is Buenaventura.

Part of the Ring of Fire, a region of the world subject to earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, in the interior of Colombia the Andes are the prevailing geographical feature. Most of Colombia&#x27;s population centers are located in these interior highlands. Beyond the Colombian Massif (in the southwestern departments of Cauca and Nariño), these are divided into three branches known as &quot;cordilleras&quot; (mountain ranges): the Cordillera Occidental, running adjacent to the Pacific coast and including the city of Cali; the Cordillera Central, running between the Cauca and Magdalena River valleys (to the west and east, respectively) and including the cities of Medellín, Manizales, Pereira, and Armenia; and the Cordillera Oriental, extending northeast to the Guajira Peninsula and including Bogotá, Bucaramanga, and Cúcuta. Peaks in the Cordillera Occidental exceed , and in the Cordillera Central and Cordillera Oriental they reach . At , Bogotá is the highest city of its size in the world.

The main rivers of Colombia are Magdalena, Cauca, Guaviare, Atrato, Meta, Putumayo and Caquetá. Colombia has four main drainage systems: the Pacific drain, the Caribbean drain, the Orinoco Basin and the Amazon Basin. The Orinoco and Amazon Rivers mark limits with Colombia to Venezuela and Peru respectively.

=== Climate ===

The climate of Colombia is characterized for being tropical presenting variations within six natural regions and depending on the altitude, temperature, humidity, winds and rainfall. Colombia has a diverse range of climate zones, including tropical rainforests, savannas, steppes, deserts and mountain climates.

Mountain climate is one of the unique features of the Andes and other high altitude reliefs where climate is determined by elevation. Below in elevation is the warm altitudinal zone, where temperatures are above . About 82.5% of the country&#x27;s total area lies in the warm altitudinal zone. The temperate climate altitudinal zone located between is characterized for presenting an average temperature ranging between . The cold climate is present between and the temperatures vary between . Beyond lies the alpine conditions of the forested zone and then the treeless grasslands of the páramos. Above , where temperatures are below freezing, the climate is glacial, a zone of permanent snow and ice.

=== Biodiversity and conservation ===

Colombia is one of the megadiverse countries in biodiversity, ranking first in bird species. Colombia is the country with the planet&#x27;s highest biodiversity, having the highest rate of species by area as well as the largest number of endemisms (species that are not found naturally anywhere else) of any country. About 10% of the species of the Earth live in Colombia, including over 1,900 species of bird, more than in Europe and North America combined. Colombia has 10% of the world&#x27;s mammals species, 14% of the amphibian species and 18% of the bird species of the world.
As for plants, the country has between 40,000 and 45,000 plant species, equivalent to 10 or 20% of total global species, which is even more remarkable given that Colombia is considered a country of intermediate size. Colombia is the second most biodiverse country in the world, lagging only after Brazil which is approximately 7 times bigger.

Colombia has about 2,000 species of marine fish and is the second most diverse country in freshwater fish. It is also the country with the most endemic species of butterflies, is first in orchid species, and has approximately 7,000 species of beetles. Colombia is second in the number of amphibian species and is the third most diverse country in reptiles and palms. There are about 1,900 species of mollusks and according to estimates there are about 300,000 species of invertebrates in the country. In Colombia there are 32 terrestrial biomes and 314 types of ecosystems.

Protected areas and the &quot;National Park System&quot; cover an area of about and account for 12.77% of the Colombian territory. Compared to neighboring countries, rates of deforestation in Colombia are still relatively low. Colombia had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 8.26/10, ranking it 25th globally out of 172 countries. Colombia is the sixth country in the world by magnitude of total renewable freshwater supply, and still has large reserves of freshwater.

== Government and politics ==


The government of Colombia takes place within the framework of a presidential participatory democratic republic as established in the Constitution of 1991. In accordance with the principle of separation of powers, government is divided into three branches: the executive branch, the legislative branch and the judicial branch.

As the head of the executive branch, the President of Colombia serves as both head of state and head of government, followed by the Vice President and the Council of Ministers. The president is elected by popular vote to serve a single four-year term (In 2015, Colombia&#x27;s Congress approved the repeal of a 2004 constitutional amendment that changed the one-term limit for presidents to a two-term limit). At the provincial level executive power is vested in department governors, municipal mayors and local administrators for smaller administrative subdivisions, such as &quot;corregimientos&quot; or &quot;comunas&quot;. All regional elections are held one year and five months after the presidential election.
The legislative branch of government is represented nationally by the Congress, a bicameral institution comprising a 166-seat Chamber of Representatives and a 102-seat Senate. The Senate is elected nationally and the Chamber of Representatives is elected in electoral districts. Members of both houses are elected to serve four-year terms two months before the president, also by popular vote.
The judicial branch is headed by four high courts, consisting of the Supreme Court which deals with penal and civil matters, the Council of State, which has special responsibility for administrative law and also provides legal advice to the executive, the Constitutional Court, responsible for assuring the integrity of the Colombian constitution, and the Superior Council of Judicature, responsible for auditing the judicial branch. Colombia operates a system of civil law, which since 1991 has been applied through an adversarial system.

Despite a number of controversies, the democratic security policy has ensured that former President Álvaro Uribe remained popular among Colombian people, with his approval rating peaking at 76%, according to a poll in 2009. However, having served two terms, he was constitutionally barred from seeking re-election in 2010. In the run-off elections on 20 June 2010 the former Minister of Defense Juan Manuel Santos won with 69% of the vote against the second most popular candidate, Antanas Mockus. A second round was required since no candidate received over the 50% winning threshold of votes. Santos won re-election with nearly 51% of the vote in second-round elections on 15 June 2014, beating right-wing rival Óscar Iván Zuluaga, who won 45%. In 2018, Iván Duque won in the second round of the election with 54% of the vote, against 42% for his left-wing rival, Gustavo Petro. His term as Colombia&#x27;s president ran for four years, beginning on 7 August 2018. In 2022, Colombia elected Gustavo Petro, who became its first leftist leader, and Francia Marquez, who was the first black person elected as vice president.

=== Foreign affairs ===


The foreign affairs of Colombia are headed by the President, as head of state, and managed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs. Colombia has diplomatic missions in all continents.

Colombia was one of the four founding members of the Pacific Alliance, which is a political, economic and co-operative integration mechanism that promotes the free circulation of goods, services, capital and persons between the members, as well as a common stock exchange and joint embassies in several countries. Colombia is also a member of the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the Organization of American States, the Organization of Ibero-American States, and the Andean Community of Nations.

Colombia is a global partner of NATO and a major non-NATO ally of the United States.

=== Military ===

The executive branch of government is responsible for managing the defense of Colombia, with the President commander-in-chief of the armed forces. The Ministry of Defence exercises day-to-day control of the military and the Colombian National Police. Colombia has 455,461 active military personnel. In 2016, 3.4% of the country&#x27;s GDP went towards military expenditure, placing it 24th in the world. Colombia&#x27;s armed forces are the largest in Latin America, and it is the second largest spender on its military after Brazil. In 2018, Colombia signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.

The Colombian military is divided into three branches: the National Army of Colombia; the Colombian Aerospace Force; and the Colombian Navy. The National Police functions as a gendarmerie, operating independently from the military as the law enforcement agency for the entire country. Each of these operates with their own intelligence apparatus separate from the National Intelligence Directorate (DNI, in Spanish).

The National Army is formed by divisions, brigades, special brigades, and special units, the Colombian Navy by the Naval Infantry, the Naval Force of the Caribbean, the Naval Force of the Pacific, the Naval Force of the South, the Naval Force of the East, Colombia Coast Guards, Naval Aviation, and the Specific Command of San Andres y Providencia and the Aerospace Force by 15 air units.

=== Administrative divisions ===
Colombia is divided into 32 departments and one capital district, which is treated as a department (Bogotá also serves as the capital of the department of Cundinamarca). Departments are subdivided into municipalities, each of which is assigned a municipal seat, and municipalities are in turn subdivided into &quot;corregimientos&quot; in rural areas and into &quot;comunas&quot; in urban areas. Each department has a local government with a governor and assembly directly elected to four-year terms, and each municipality is headed by a mayor and council. There is a popularly elected local administrative board in each of the &quot;corregimientos&quot; or &quot;comunas&quot;.

In addition to the capital, four other cities have been designated districts (in effect special municipalities), on the basis of special distinguishing features. These are Barranquilla, Cartagena, Santa Marta and Buenaventura. Some departments have local administrative subdivisions, where towns have a large concentration of population and municipalities are near each other (for example, in Antioquia and Cundinamarca). Where departments have a low population (for example Amazonas, Vaupés and Vichada), special administrative divisions are employed, such as &quot;department &quot;corregimientos&quot;&quot;, which are a hybrid of a municipality and a &quot;corregimiento&quot;.

== Economy ==

Historically an agrarian economy, Colombia urbanized rapidly in the 20th century, by the end of which just 15.8% of the workforce were employed in agriculture, generating just 6.6% of GDP; 20% of the workforce were employed in industry and 65% in services, responsible for 33% and 60% of GDP respectively. The country&#x27;s economic production is dominated by its strong domestic demand. Consumption expenditure by households is the largest component of GDP.

Colombia&#x27;s market economy grew steadily in the latter part of the 20th century, with gross domestic product (GDP) increasing at an average rate of over 4% per year between 1970 and 1998. The country suffered a recession in 1999 (the first full year of negative growth since the Great Depression), and the recovery was long and painful. However, growth reaching 7% in 2007, one of the highest in Latin America. According to International Monetary Fund estimates, in 2023, Colombia&#x27;s GDP (PPP) was US$1 trillion, 32nd in the world and third in South America, after Brazil and Argentina.

Total government expenditures account for 28% of the domestic economy. External debt equals 40% of gross domestic product. A strong fiscal climate was reaffirmed by a boost in bond ratings. Annual inflation closed 2017 at 4.09% YoY (vs. 5.75% YoY in 2016). The average national unemployment rate in 2017 was 9.4%, although the informality is the biggest problem facing the labour market (the income of formal workers climbed 24.8% in 5 years while labor incomes of informal workers rose only 9%). Colombia has free-trade zones (FTZ), such as Zona Franca del Pacifico, located in the Valle del Cauca, one of the most striking areas for foreign investment.

The financial sector has grown favorably due to good liquidity in the economy, the growth of credit and the positive performance of the Colombian economy. The Colombian Stock Exchange through the Latin American Integrated Market (MILA) offers a regional market to trade equities. Colombia is now one of only three economies with a perfect score on the strength of legal rights index, according to the World Bank.

Colombia is rich in natural resources, and it is heavily dependent on energy and mining exports. Colombia&#x27;s main exports include mineral fuels, oils, distillation products, fruit and other agricultural products, sugars and sugar confectionery, food products, plastics, precious stones, metals, forest products, chemical goods, pharmaceuticals, vehicles, electronic products, electrical equipment, perfumery and cosmetics, machinery, manufactured articles, textile and fabrics, clothing and footwear, glass and glassware, furniture, prefabricated buildings, military products, home and office material, construction equipment, software, among others. Principal trading partners are the United States, China, the European Union and some Latin American countries.

Non-traditional exports have boosted the growth of Colombian foreign sales as well as the diversification of destinations of export thanks to new free trade agreements. Recent economic growth has led to a considerable increase of new millionaires, including the new entrepreneurs, Colombians with a net worth exceeding US$1 billion.

In 2017, however, the National Administrative Department of Statistics (DANE) reported that 26.9% of the population were living below the poverty line, of which 7.4% were in &quot;extreme poverty&quot;. The multidimensional poverty rate stands at 17.0 percent of the population. The Government has also been developing a process of financial inclusion within the country&#x27;s most vulnerable population.

The contribution of tourism to GDP was US$5,880.3bn (2.0% of total GDP) in 2016. Tourism generated 556,135 jobs (2.5% of total employment) in 2016. Foreign tourist visits were predicted to have risen from 0.6 million in 2007 to 4 million in 2017.

=== Agriculture and natural resources ===

In agriculture, Colombia is one of the five largest producers in the world of coffee, avocado and palm oil, and one of the 10 largest producers in the world of sugarcane, banana, pineapple and cocoa. The country also has considerable production of rice, potato and cassava. Although it is not the largest coffee producer in the world (Brazil claims that title), the country has been able to carry out, for decades, a global marketing campaign to add value to the country&#x27;s product. Colombian palm oil production is one of the most sustainable on the planet, compared to the largest existing producers. Colombia is also among the 20 largest producers in the world of beef and chicken meat. Colombia is also the 2nd largest flower exporter in the world, after the Netherlands. Colombian agriculture emits 55% of Colombia&#x27;s greenhouse gas emissions, mostly from deforestation, over-extensive cattle ranching, land grabbing, and illegal agriculture.

Colombia is an important exporter of coal and petroleum – in 2020, more than 40% of the country&#x27;s exports were based on these two products. In 2018 it was the 5th largest coal exporter in the world. In 2019, Colombia was the 20th largest petroleum producer in the world, with 791 thousand barrels/day, exporting a good part of its production – the country was the 19th largest oil exporter in the world in 2020. In mining, Colombia is the world&#x27;s largest producer of emerald, and in the production of gold, between 2006 and 2017, the country produced 15 tons per year until 2007, when its production increased significantly, beating the record of 66.1 tons extracted in 2012. In 2017, it extracted 52.2 tons. Currently, the country is among the 25 largest gold producers in the world.

===Energy and transportation===

The electricity production in Colombia comes mainly from Renewable energy sources. 69.93% is obtained from the hydroelectric generation. Colombia&#x27;s commitment to renewable energy was recognized in the 2014 &quot;Global Green Economy Index (GGEI)&quot;, ranking among the top 10 nations in the world in terms of greening efficiency sectors.

Transportation in Colombia is regulated within the functions of the Ministry of Transport and entities such as the National Roads Institute (INVÍAS) responsible for the Highways in Colombia, the Aerocivil, responsible for civil aviation and airports, the National Infrastructure Agency, in charge of concessions through public–private partnerships, for the design, construction, maintenance, operation, and administration of the transport infrastructure, the General Maritime Directorate (Dimar) has the responsibility of coordinating maritime traffic control along with the Colombian Navy, among others, and under the supervision of the Superintendency of Ports and Transport.

In 2021, Colombia had of roads, of which were paved. At the end of 2017, the country had around of duplicated highways. Rail transportation in Colombia is dedicated almost entirely to freight shipments and the railway network has a length of 1,700 km of potentially active rails. Colombia has 3,960 kilometers of gas pipelines, 4,900 kilometers of oil pipelines, and 2,990 kilometers of refined-products pipelines.

The Colombian government aimed to build 7,000 km of roads between 2016 and 2020, which would reduce travel times by an estimated 30 per cent, and transport costs by an estimated 20 per cent. A toll road concession programme will comprise 40 projects, and is part of a larger strategic goal to invest nearly $50 bn in transport infrastructure, including railway systems, making the Magdalena River navigable again, improving port facilities, and an expansion of El Dorado International Airport. Colombia is a middle-income country.

=== Science and technology ===

Colombia has more than 3,950 research groups in science and technology. iNNpulsa, a government body that promotes entrepreneurship and innovation in the country, provides grants to startups, in addition to other services it and institutions provide. Colombia was ranked 61st in the Global Innovation Index in 2024. Co-working spaces have arisen to serve as communities for startups large and small. Organizations such as the Corporation for Biological Research (CIB) for the support of young people interested in scientific work has been successfully developed in Colombia. The International Center for Tropical Agriculture based in Colombia investigates the increasing challenge of global warming and food security.

Important inventions related to medicine have been made in Colombia, such as the first external artificial pacemaker with internal electrodes, invented by the electrical engineer Jorge Reynolds Pombo, an invention of great importance for those who suffer from heart failure. Also invented in Colombia were the microkeratome and keratomileusis technique, which form the fundamental basis of what now is known as LASIK (one of the most important techniques for the correction of refractive errors of vision) and the Hakim valve for the treatment of hydrocephalus. Colombia has begun to innovate in military technology for its army and other armies of the world; especially in the design and creation of personal ballistic protection products, military hardware, military robots, bombs, simulators and radar.

Some leading Colombian scientists are Joseph M. Tohme, researcher recognized for his work on the genetic diversity of food, Manuel Elkin Patarroyo who is known for his groundbreaking work on synthetic vaccines for malaria, Francisco Lopera who discovered the &quot;Paisa Mutation&quot; or a type of early-onset Alzheimer&#x27;s, Rodolfo Llinás known for his study of the intrinsic neurons properties and the theory of a syndrome that had changed the way of understanding the functioning of the brain, Jairo Quiroga Puello recognized for his studies on the characterization of synthetic substances which can be used to fight fungus, tumors, tuberculosis and even some viruses and Ángela Restrepo who established accurate diagnoses and treatments to combat the effects of a disease caused by &quot;Paracoccidioides brasiliensis&quot;.

== Demographics ==

With an estimated 50 million people in 2020, Colombia is the third-most populous country in Latin America, after Brazil and Mexico. At the beginning of the 20th century, Colombia&#x27;s population was approximately 4 million. Since the early 1970s Colombia has experienced steady declines in its fertility, mortality, and population growth rates. The population growth rate for 2016 is estimated to be 0.9%. About 26.8% of the population were 15 years old or younger, 65.7% were between 15 and 64 years old, and 7.4% were over 65 years old. The proportion of older persons in the total population has begun to increase substantially. Colombia is projected to have a population of 55.3 million by 2050.

Estimates for the population of the area that is now Colombia range between 2.5 and 12 million people in 1500; estimates between the extremes include figures of 6 and 7 million. With the Spanish conquest, the region&#x27;s population had collapsed to around 1.2 million people in 1600, for an estimated decrease of 52–90%. By the end of the colonial period, it had declined further to around 800,000; it began rising in the early 19th century to around 1.4 million, where it would drop again in the Colombian War of Independence to between 1 and 1.2 million. The country&#x27;s population did not recover to pre-conquest levels until the 1940s, nearly 450 years after its 16th-century peak.

The population is concentrated in the Andean highlands and along the Caribbean coast, also the population densities are generally higher in the Andean region. The nine eastern lowland departments, comprising about 54% of Colombia&#x27;s area, have less than 6% of the population. Traditionally a rural society, movement to urban areas was very heavy in the mid-20th century, and Colombia is now one of the most urbanized countries in Latin America. The urban population increased from 31% of the total in 1938 to nearly 60% in 1973, and by 2014 the figure stood at 76%. The population of Bogotá alone has increased from just over 300,000 in 1938 to approximately 8 million today. In total seventy-two cities now have populations of 100,000 or more (2015). Colombia has the world&#x27;s largest populations of internally displaced persons (IDPs), estimated to be up to 4.9 million people.

The life expectancy was 74.8 years in 2015, and infant mortality was 13.1 per thousand in 2016. In 2015, 94.58% of adults and 98.66% of youth are literate and the government spends about 4.49% of its GDP on education.

===Languages===
Around 99.2% of Colombians speak Spanish, also called Castilian; 65 Amerindian languages, two Creole languages, the Romani language and Colombian Sign Language are also used in the country. English has official status in the archipelago of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina.

Including Spanish, a total of 101 languages are listed for Colombia in the Ethnologue database. The specific number of spoken languages varies slightly since some authors consider as different languages what others consider to be varieties or dialects of the same language. Best estimates recorded 71 languages that are spoken in-country today – most of which belong to the Chibchan, Tucanoan, Bora–Witoto, Guajiboan, Arawakan, Cariban, Barbacoan, and Saliban language families. There are currently more than 850,000 speakers of native languages.

=== Ethnic groups ===

Colombia is ethnically diverse, its people descending from the original Native inhabitants, Spanish conquistadors, Africans originally brought to the country as slaves, and 20th-century immigrants from Europe and the Middle East, all contributing to a diverse cultural heritage. The demographic distribution reflects a pattern that is influenced by colonial history. Whites live all throughout the country, mainly in urban centers and the burgeoning highland and coastal cities. The populations of the major cities also include mestizos. Mestizo &quot;campesinos&quot; (people living in rural areas) also live in the Andean highlands where some Spanish conquerors mixed with the women of Amerindian chiefdoms. Mestizos include artisans and small tradesmen that have played a major part in the urban expansion of recent decades. In a study by the American Journal of Physical Anthropology, Colombians have an average ancestry of 47% Amerindian DNA, 42% European DNA, and 11% African DNA.

The 2018 census reported that the &quot;non-ethnic population&quot;, consisting of whites and mestizos (those of mixed European and Amerindian ancestry), constituted 87.6% of the national population. 6.7% is of African ancestry. Indigenous Amerindians constitute 4.3% of the population. Raizal people constitute 0.06% of the population. Palenquero people constitute 0.02% of the population. 0.01% of the population are Roma. A study by Latinobarómetro in 2023 estimates that 50.3% of the population are Mestizo, 26.4% are White, 9.5% are Indigenous, 9.0% are Black, 4.4% are Mulatto, and 0.4% are Asian, these estimates would equate to around 26 million people being Mestizo, 14 million being White, 5 million being Indigenous, 5 million being Black, 2 million being Mulatto, and 200k being Asian.
The Federal Research Division estimated that the 86% of the population that did not consider themselves part of one of the ethnic groups indicated by the 2006 census, white Colombians are mainly of Spanish lineage, but there is also a large population of Middle East descent; in some areas there is a considerable input of German and Italian ancestry.

Many of the Indigenous peoples experienced a reduction in population during the Spanish rule and many others were absorbed into the mestizo population, but the remainder currently represents over eighty distinct cultures. Reserves (&quot;resguardos&quot;) established for indigenous peoples occupy (27% of the country&#x27;s total) and are inhabited by more than 800,000 people. Some of the largest indigenous groups are the Wayuu, the Paez, the Pastos, the Emberá and the Zenú. The departments of La Guajira, Cauca, Nariño, Córdoba and Sucre have the largest indigenous populations.

The Organización Nacional Indígena de Colombia (ONIC), founded at the first National Indigenous Congress in 1982, is an organization representing the indigenous peoples of Colombia. In 1991, Colombia signed and ratified the current international law concerning indigenous peoples, Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989.

Sub-Saharan Africans were brought as slaves, mostly to the coastal lowlands, beginning early in the 16th century and continuing into the 19th century. Large Afro-Colombian communities are found today on the Pacific Coast. Numerous Jamaicans migrated mainly to the islands of San Andres and Providencia. A number of other Europeans and North Americans migrated to the country in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, including people from the former USSR during and after the Second World War.

Many immigrant communities have settled on the Caribbean coast, in particular recent immigrants from the Middle East and Europe. Barranquilla (the largest city of the Colombian Caribbean) and other Caribbean cities have the largest populations of Lebanese, Palestinian, and other Levantines. There are also important communities of Romanis and Jews. There is a major migration trend of Venezuelans, due to the political and economic situation in Venezuela. In August 2019, Colombia offered citizenship to more than 24,000 children of Venezuelan refugees who were born in Colombia.

=== Religion ===

The National Administrative Department of Statistics (DANE) does not collect religious statistics, and accurate reports are difficult to obtain. However, based on various studies and a survey, about 90% of the population adheres to Christianity, the majority of which (70.9%–79%) are Roman Catholic, while a significant minority (16.7%) adhere to Protestantism (primarily Evangelicalism). Some 4.7% of the population is atheist or agnostic, while 3.5% claim to believe in God but do not follow a specific religion. 1.8% of Colombians adhere to Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses and Adventism and less than 1% adhere to other religions, such as the Baháʼí Faith, Islam, Judaism, Buddhism, Mormonism, Hinduism, Indigenous religions, Hare Krishna movement, Rastafari movement, Eastern Orthodox Church, and spiritual studies. The remaining people either did not respond or replied that they did not know. In addition to the above statistics, 35.9% of Colombians reported that they did not practice their faith actively. 1,519,562 people in Colombia, or around 3% of the population reported following an Indigenous religion.

While Colombia remains a mostly Roman Catholic country by baptism numbers, the 1991 Colombian constitution guarantees freedom of religion and all religious faiths and churches are equally free before the law.

===Health===
The overall life expectancy in Colombia at birth is 79.3 years (76.7 years for males and 81.9 years for females). Healthcare reforms have led to massive improvements in the healthcare systems of the country, with health standards in Colombia improving very much since the 1980s. The new system has widened population coverage by the social and health security system from 21% (pre-1993) to 96% in 2012. In 2017, the government declared a cancer research and treatment center as a Project of National Strategic Interest.

A 2016 study conducted by &quot;América Economía&quot; magazine ranked 21 Colombian health care institutions among the top 44 in Latin America, amounting to 48 percent of the total. In 2022, 26 Colombian hospitals were among the 61 best in Latin America (42% total). Also in 2023, two Colombian hospitals were among the top 75 of the world.

=== Education ===

The educational experience of many Colombian children begins with attendance at a preschool academy until age five (&quot;Educación preescolar&quot;). Basic education (&quot;Educación básica&quot;) is compulsory by law. It has two stages: Primary basic education (&quot;Educación básica primaria&quot;) which goes from first to fifth grade – children from six to ten years old, and Secondary basic education (&quot;Educación básica secundaria&quot;), which goes from sixth to ninth grade. Basic education is followed by Middle vocational education (&quot;Educación media vocacional&quot;) that comprises the tenth and eleventh grades. It may have different vocational training modalities or specialties (academic, technical, business, and so on.) according to the curriculum adopted by each school.
After the successful completion of all the basic and middle education years, a high-school diploma is awarded. The high-school graduate is known as a &quot;bachiller&quot;, because secondary basic school and middle education are traditionally considered together as a unit called &quot;bachillerato&quot; (sixth to eleventh grade). Students in their final year of middle education take the ICFES test (now renamed Saber 11) to gain access to higher education (&quot;Educación superior&quot;). This higher education includes undergraduate professional studies, technical, technological and intermediate professional education, and post-graduate studies. Technical professional institutions of Higher Education are also opened to students holder of a qualification in Arts and Business. This qualification is usually awarded by the SENA after a two years curriculum.

&quot;Bachilleres&quot; (high-school graduates) may enter into a professional undergraduate career program offered by a university; these programs last up to five years (or less for technical, technological and intermediate professional education, and post-graduate studies), even as much to six to seven years for some careers, such as medicine. In Colombia, there is not an institution such as college; students go directly into a career program at a university or any other educational institution to obtain a professional, technical or technological title. Once graduated from the university, people are granted a (professional, technical or technological) diploma and licensed (if required) to practice the career they have chosen. For some professional career programs, students are required to take the Saber-Pro test, in their final year of undergraduate academic education.

Public spending on education as a proportion of gross domestic product in 2015 was 4.49%. This represented 15.05% of total government expenditure. The primary and secondary gross enrolment ratios stood at 113.56% and 98.09% respectively. School-life expectancy was 14.42 years. A total of 94.58% of the population aged 15 and older were recorded as literate, including 98.66% of those aged 15–24.

===Crime===

=== Urbanization ===
Colombia is a highly urbanized country with 77.1% of the population living in urban areas. The largest cities in the country are Bogotá, with 7,387,400 inhabitants, Medellín, with 2,382,399 inhabitants, Cali, with 2,172,527 inhabitants, and Barranquilla, with 1,205,284 inhabitants.
== Culture ==
Colombia lies at the crossroads of Latin America and the broader American continent, and as such has been hit by a wide range of cultural influences. Native American, Spanish and other European, African, American, Caribbean, and Middle Eastern influences, as well as other Latin American cultural influences, are all present in Colombia&#x27;s modern culture. Urban migration, industrialization, globalization, and other political, social and economic changes have also left an impression.

Many national symbols, both objects and themes, have arisen from Colombia&#x27;s diverse cultural traditions and aim to represent what Colombia, and the Colombian people, have in common. Cultural expressions in Colombia are promoted by the government through the Ministry of Culture.

=== Literature ===

Colombian literature dates back to pre-Columbian era; a notable example of the period is the epic poem known as the &quot;Legend of Yurupary&quot;. In Spanish colonial times, notable writers include Juan de Castellanos (&quot;Elegías de varones ilustres de Indias&quot;), Hernando Domínguez Camargo and his epic poem to San Ignacio de Loyola, Pedro Simón and Juan Rodríguez Freyle.

Post-independence literature linked to Romanticism highlighted Antonio Nariño, José Fernández Madrid, Camilo Torres Tenorio and Francisco Antonio Zea. In the second half of the nineteenth century and early twentieth century the literary genre known as &quot;costumbrismo&quot; became popular; great writers of this period were Tomás Carrasquilla, Jorge Isaacs and Rafael Pombo (the latter of whom wrote notable works of children&#x27;s literature). Within that period, authors such as José Asunción Silva, José Eustasio Rivera, León de Greiff, Porfirio Barba-Jacob and José María Vargas Vila developed the modernist movement. In 1872, Colombia established the Colombian Academy of Language, the first Spanish language academy in the Americas. Candelario Obeso wrote the groundbreaking &quot;Cantos Populares de mi Tierra&quot; (1877), the first book of poetry by an Afro-Colombian author.

Between 1939 and 1940 seven books of poetry were published under the name &quot;Stone and Sky&quot; in the city of Bogotá that significantly influenced the country; they were edited by the poet Jorge Rojas. In the following decade, Gonzalo Arango founded the movement of &quot;nothingness&quot; in response to the violence of the time; he was influenced by nihilism, existentialism, and the thought of another great Colombian writer: Fernando González Ochoa. During the boom in Latin American literature, successful writers emerged, led by Nobel laureate Gabriel García Márquez and his magnum opus, &quot;One Hundred Years of Solitude&quot;, Eduardo Caballero Calderón, Manuel Mejía Vallejo, and Álvaro Mutis, a writer who was awarded the Cervantes Prize and the Prince of Asturias Award for Letters.

=== Visual arts ===

Colombian art has over 3,000 years of history. Colombian artists have captured the country&#x27;s changing political and cultural backdrop using a range of styles and mediums. There is archeological evidence of ceramics being produced earlier in Colombia than anywhere else in the Americas, dating as early as 3,000 BCE.

The earliest examples of gold craftsmanship have been attributed to the Tumaco people of the Pacific coast and date to around 325 BCE. Roughly between 200 BCE and 800 CE, the San Agustín culture, masters of stonecutting, entered its &quot;classical period&quot;. They erected raised ceremonial centers, sarcophagi, and large stone monoliths depicting anthropomorphic and zoomorphic forms out of stone.

Colombian art has followed the trends of the time, so during the 16th to 18th centuries, Spanish Catholicism had a huge influence on Colombian art, and the popular baroque style was replaced with rococo when the Bourbons ascended to the Spanish crown. During this era, in the Spanish colony, the most important Neogranadine (Colombian) painters were Gregorio Vásquez de Arce y Ceballos, Gaspar de Figueroa, Baltasar Vargas de Figueroa, Baltasar de Figueroa (the Elder), Antonio Acero de la Cruz and Joaquín Gutiérrez, of which their works are preserved. Also important was Alonso de Narváez who, although born in the Province of Seville, spent most of his life in colonial Colombia, also the Italian Angelino Medoro, lived in Colombia and Peru, and left works of art preserved in several churches in Tunja city.

During the mid-19th century, one of the most remarkable painters was Ramón Torres Méndez, who produced a series of good quality paintings depicting the people and their customs of different Colombian regions. Also noteworthy in the 19th century were Andrés de Santa María, Pedro José Figueroa, Epifanio Garay, Mercedes Delgado Mallarino, José María Espinosa, Ricardo Acevedo Bernal, between many others.

More recently, Colombian artists Pedro Nel Gómez and Santiago Martínez Delgado started the Colombian Murial Movement in the 1940s, featuring the neoclassical features of Art Deco. Since the 1950s, the Colombian art started to have a distinctive point of view, reinventing traditional elements under the concepts of the 20th century. Examples of this are the Greiff portraits by Ignacio Gómez Jaramillo, showing what the Colombian art could do with the new techniques applied to typical Colombian themes. Carlos Correa, with his paradigmatic &quot;Naturaleza muerta en silencio&quot; (silent dead nature), combines geometrical abstraction and cubism. Alejandro Obregón is often considered as the father of modern Colombian painting, and one of the most influential artist in this period, due to his originality, the painting of Colombian landscapes with symbolic and expressionist use of animals, (specially the Andean condor). Fernando Botero, Omar Rayo, Enrique Grau, Édgar Negret, David Manzur, Rodrigo Arenas Betancourt, Oscar Murillo, Doris Salcedo and Oscar Muñoz are some of the Colombian artists featured at the international level.

The Colombian sculpture from the sixteenth to 18th centuries was mostly devoted to religious depictions of ecclesiastic art, strongly influenced by the Spanish schools of sacred sculpture. During the early period of the Colombian republic, the national artists were focused in the production of sculptural portraits of politicians and public figures, in a plain neoclassicist trend. During the 20th century, the Colombian sculpture began to develop a bold and innovative work with the aim of reaching a better understanding of national sensitivity.

Colombian photography was marked by the arrival of the daguerreotype. Jean-Baptiste Louis Gros was who brought the daguerreotype process to Colombia in 1841. The Piloto public library has Latin America&#x27;s largest archive of negatives, containing 1.7 million antique photographs covering Colombia 1848 until 2005.

The Colombian press has promoted the work of the cartoonists. In recent decades, fanzines, internet and independent publishers have been fundamental to the growth of the comic in Colombia.

=== Architecture ===

Throughout the times, there have been a variety of architectural styles, from those of indigenous peoples to contemporary ones, passing through colonial (military and religious), Republican, transition and modern styles.


Ancient habitation areas, longhouses, crop terraces, roads as the Inca road system, cemeteries, hypogeums and necropolises are all part of the architectural heritage of indigenous peoples. Some prominent indigenous structures are the preceramic and ceramic archaeological site of Tequendama, Tierradentro (a park that contains the largest concentration of pre-Columbian monumental shaft tombs with side chambers), the largest collection of religious monuments and megalithic sculptures in South America, located in San Agustín, Huila, Lost city (an archaeological site with a series of terraces carved into the mountainside, a net of tiled roads, and several circular plazas), and the large villages mainly built with stone, wood, cane, and mud.
Architecture during the period of conquest and colonization is mainly derived of adapting European styles to local conditions, and Spanish influence, especially Andalusian and Extremaduran, can be easily seen. When Europeans founded cities two things were making simultaneously: the dimensioning of geometrical space (town square, street), and the location of a tangible point of orientation. The construction of forts was common throughout the Caribbean and in some cities of the interior, because of the dangers posed to Spanish colonial settlements from English, French and Dutch pirates and hostile indigenous groups. Churches, chapels, schools, and hospitals belonging to religious orders have a great urban influence. Baroque architecture is used in military buildings and public spaces. Marcelino Arroyo, Francisco José de Caldas and Domingo de Petrés were great representatives of neo-classical architecture.

The National Capitol is a great representative of romanticism. Wood was extensively used in doors, windows, railings, and ceilings during the colonization of Antioquia. The Caribbean architecture acquires a strong Arabic influence. The Teatro Colón in Bogotá is a lavish example of architecture from the 19th century. The quintas houses with innovations in the volumetric conception are some of the best examples of the Republican architecture; the Republican action in the city focused on the design of three types of spaces: parks with forests, small urban parks and avenues and the Gothic style was most commonly used for the design of churches.

Deco style, modern neoclassicism, eclecticism folklorist and art deco ornamental resources significantly influenced the architecture of Colombia, especially during the transition period. Modernism contributed with new construction technologies and new materials (steel, reinforced concrete, glass and synthetic materials) and the topology architecture and lightened slabs system also have a great influence. The most influential architects of the modern movement were Rogelio Salmona and Fernando Martínez Sanabria.

The contemporary architecture of Colombia is designed to give greater importance to the materials, this architecture takes into account the specific natural and artificial geographies and is also an architecture that appeals to the senses. The conservation of the architectural and urban heritage of Colombia has been promoted in recent years.

=== Music ===

Colombia has a vibrant collage of talent that touches a full spectrum of rhythms. It is known as the land of a thousand rhythms, at around 1,024 folk rhythms. Musicians, composers, music producers and singers from Colombia are recognized internationally such as Shakira, Juanes, Carlos Vives and others. Colombian music blends European-influenced guitar and song structure with large gaita flutes and percussion instruments from the indigenous population, while its percussion structure and dance forms come from Africa. Colombia has a diverse and dynamic musical environment.
Guillermo Uribe Holguín, an important cultural figure in the National Symphony Orchestra of Colombia, Luis Antonio Calvo and Blas Emilio Atehortúa are some of the greatest exponents of the art music. The Bogotá Philharmonic Orchestra is one of the most active orchestras in Colombia.

Caribbean music has many vibrant rhythms, such as cumbia (it is played by the maracas, the drums, the gaitas and guacharaca), porro (it is a monotonous but joyful rhythm), mapalé (with its fast rhythm and constant clapping) and the &quot;vallenato&quot;, which originated in the northern part of the Caribbean coast (the rhythm is mainly played by the caja, the guacharaca, and accordion).

The music from the Pacific coast, such as the currulao, is characterized by its strong use of drums (instruments such as the native marimba, the conunos, the bass drum, the side drum, and the cuatro guasas or tubular rattle). An important rhythm of the south region of the Pacific coast is the contradanza (it is used in dance shows due to the striking colours of the costumes). Marimba music, traditional chants and dances from the Colombia South Pacific region are on UNESCO&#x27;s Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.

Important musical rhythms of the Andean Region are the danza (dance of Andean folklore arising from the transformation of the European contredance), the bambuco (it is played with guitar, tiple and mandolin, the rhythm is danced by couples), the pasillo (a rhythm inspired by the Austrian waltz and the Colombian &quot;danza&quot;, the lyrics have been composed by well-known poets), the guabina (the tiple, the bandola and the requinto are the basic instruments), the sanjuanero (it originated in Tolima and Huila Departments, the rhythm is joyful and fast). Apart from these traditional rhythms, salsa music has spread throughout the country, and the city of Cali is considered by many salsa singers to be &#x27;The New Salsa Capital of the World&#x27;.

The instruments that distinguish the music of the Eastern Plains are the harp, the cuatro (a type of four-stringed guitar) and maracas. Important rhythms of this region are the joropo (a fast rhythm and there is also tapping as a result of its flamenco ancestry) and the galeron (it is heard a lot while cowboys are working).

The music of the Amazon region is strongly influenced by the indigenous religious practices. Some of the musical instruments used are the manguaré (a musical instrument of ceremonial type, consisting of a pair of large cylindrical drums), the quena (melodic instrument), the rondador, the congas, bells, and different types of flutes.

The music of the Archipelago of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina is usually accompanied by a mandolin, a tub-bass, a jawbone, a guitar and maracas. Some popular archipelago rhythms are the Schottische, the Calypso, the Polka and the Mento.

=== Popular culture ===

Theater was introduced in Colombia during the Spanish colonization in 1550 through zarzuela companies. Colombian theater is supported by the Ministry of Culture and a number of private and state owned organizations. The Ibero-American Theater Festival of Bogotá is the cultural event of the highest importance in Colombia and one of the biggest theater festivals in the world. Other important theater events are: The Festival of Puppet The Fanfare (Medellín), The Manizales Theater Festival, The Caribbean Theatre Festival (Santa Marta) and The Art Festival of Popular Culture &quot;Cultural Invasion&quot; (Bogotá).

Although the Colombian cinema is young as an industry, more recently the film industry was growing with support from the Film Act passed in 2003. Many film festivals take place in Colombia, but the two most important are the Cartagena Film Festival, which is the oldest film festival in Latin America, and the Bogotá Film Festival.

Some important national circulation newspapers are &quot;El Tiempo&quot; and &quot;El Espectador&quot;. Television in Colombia has two privately owned TV networks and three state-owned TV networks with national coverage, as well as six regional TV networks and dozens of local TV stations. Private channels, RCN and Caracol are the highest-rated. The regional channels and regional newspapers cover a department or more and its content is made in these particular areas.

Colombia has three major national radio networks: Radiodifusora Nacional de Colombia, a state-run national radio; Caracol Radio and RCN Radio, privately owned networks with hundreds of affiliates. There are other national networks, including Cadena Super, Todelar, and Colmundo. Many hundreds of radio stations are registered with the Ministry of Information Technologies and Communications.

=== Cuisine ===

Colombia&#x27;s varied cuisine is influenced by its diverse fauna and flora as well as the cultural traditions of the ethnic groups. Colombian dishes and ingredients vary widely by region. Some of the most common ingredients are: cereals such as rice and maize; tubers such as potato and cassava; assorted legumes; meats, including beef, chicken, pork and goat; fish; and seafood. Colombia cuisine also features a variety of tropical fruits such as cape gooseberry, feijoa, arazá, dragon fruit, mangostino, granadilla, papaya, guava, mora (blackberry), lulo, soursop and passionfruit. Colombia is one of the world&#x27;s largest consumers of fruit juices.

Among the most representative appetizers and soups are patacones (fried green plantains), sancocho de gallina (chicken soup with root vegetables) and ajiaco (potato and corn soup). Representative snacks and breads are pandebono, arepas (corn cakes), aborrajados (fried sweet plantains with cheese), torta de choclo, empanadas and almojábanas. Representative main courses are bandeja paisa, lechona tolimense, mamona, tamales and fish dishes (such as arroz de lisa), especially in coastal regions where kibbeh, suero, costeño cheese and carimañolas are also eaten. Representative side dishes are papas chorreadas (potatoes with cheese), remolachas rellenas con huevo duro (beets stuffed with hard-boiled egg) and arroz con coco (coconut rice). Organic food is a current trend in big cities, although in general across the country the fruits and veggies are very natural and fresh.

Representative desserts are buñuelos, natillas, Maria Luisa cake, bocadillo made of guayaba (guava jelly), cocadas (coconut balls), casquitos de guayaba (candied guava peels), torta de natas, obleas, flan de mango, roscón, milhoja, manjar blanco, dulce de feijoa, dulce de papayuela, torta de mojicón, and esponjado de curuba. Typical sauces (salsas) are hogao (tomato and onion sauce) and Colombian-style ají.

Some representative beverages are coffee (Tinto), champús, cholado, lulada, avena colombiana, sugarcane juice, aguapanela, aguardiente, hot chocolate and fresh fruit juices (often made with water or milk).

===Sports===

Tejo is Colombia&#x27;s national sport and is a team sport that involves launching projectiles to hit a target. But of all sports in Colombia, football is the most popular. Colombia was the champion of the 2001 Copa América, in which they set a new record of being undefeated, conceding no goals and winning each match. Colombia has been awarded &quot;mover of the year&quot; twice.

Colombia is a hub for roller skaters. The national team is a perennial powerhouse at the World Roller Speed Skating Championships. Colombia has traditionally been very good in cycling and a large number of Colombian cyclists have triumphed in major competitions of cycling.

Baseball is popular in cities like Cartagena and Barranquilla. Of those cities have come good players like: Orlando Cabrera, Édgar Rentería, who was champion of the World Series in 1997 and 2010 and others who have played in Major League Baseball. Colombia was world amateur champion in 1947 and 1965.

Boxing is one of the sports that has produced more world champions for Colombia.
Motorsports also occupies an important place in the sporting preferences of Colombians; Juan Pablo Montoya is a race car driver known for winning 7 Formula One events. Colombia also has excelled in sports such as BMX, judo, shooting sport, taekwondo, wrestling, high diving and athletics, also has a long tradition in weightlifting and bowling.

== See also ==

* Index of Colombia-related articles
* Outline of Colombia

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==

===General information===
* Colombia at Britannica.com
* Colombia at &quot;UCB Libraries GovPubs&quot;
* Colombia. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* Key Development Forecasts for Colombia from International Futures
* Official investment portal
* Official Colombia Tourism Website
* Study Spanish in Colombia
* National Administrative Department of Statistics

===Government===
* Colombia Online Government website

===Culture===
* Ministry of Culture

===Geography===
* National parks of Colombia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="0" end="8" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="25" end="45" title="Colombia" label="Republic of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="81" end="94" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312322" start="100" end="115" title="Insular region of Colombia" label="insular regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="119" end="132" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="176" end="189" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="204" end="213" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="241" end="247" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="266" end="270" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="275" end="282" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="315" end="328" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="346" end="352" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q215655" start="399" end="410" title="Departments of Colombia" label="departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="436" end="442" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q56292076" start="455" end="482" title="List of cities in Colombia by population" label="country&amp;#x27;s largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q48278" start="560" end="568" title="Medellín" label="Medellín"/>
<link wikidata="Q51103" start="570" end="574" title="Cali" label="Cali"/>
<link wikidata="Q62823" start="576" end="588" title="Barranquilla" label="Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="590" end="599" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q209016" start="601" end="612" title="Santa Marta" label="Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q216847" start="614" end="620" title="Cúcuta" label="Cúcuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q222755" start="622" end="628" title="Ibagué" label="Ibagué"/>
<link wikidata="Q749224" start="630" end="643" title="Villavicencio" label="Villavicencio"/>
<link wikidata="Q243766" start="648" end="659" title="Bucaramanga" label="Bucaramanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="778" end="795" title="cultural heritage" label="cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005141" start="913" end="924" title="Immigration to Colombia" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="930" end="936" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="945" end="956" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q385967" start="984" end="1000" title="African diaspora" label="African diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="1039" end="1049" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1091" end="1098" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="1106" end="1123" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044587" start="1134" end="1149" title="San Andrés–Providencia Creole" label="Creole, English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351503" start="1154" end="1172" title="Languages of Colombia" label="64 other languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258527" start="1232" end="1263" title="Indigenous peoples in Colombia" label="indigenous peoples and cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056122" start="1319" end="1329" title="Guajira Peninsula" label="La Guajira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077264" start="1437" end="1459" title="New Kingdom of Granada" label="New Kingdom of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="1466" end="1484" title="Santa Fé de Bogotá" label="Santa Fe de Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063789" start="1501" end="1513" title="Colombian War of Independence" label="Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="1523" end="1537" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249661" start="1625" end="1656" title="United Provinces of New Granada" label="United Provinces of New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8961" start="1672" end="1690" title="Spanish reconquest of New Granada" label="Spanish reconquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q199821" start="1745" end="1758" title="Gran Colombia" label="Gran Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141215" start="1825" end="1848" title="Granadine Confederation" label="Granadine Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061488" start="1869" end="1894" title="United States of Colombia" label="United States of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995129" start="1978" end="1982" title="Colombian Constitution of 1886" label="1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089201" start="2034" end="2048" title="Separation of Panama from Colombia" label="Panama seceded"/>
<link wikidata="Q169072" start="2200" end="2214" title="Colombian conflict" label="armed conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690846" start="2458" end="2475" title="Health care in Colombia" label="healthcare system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="2506" end="2519" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="2537" end="2562" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806271" start="2590" end="2609" title="Economy of Colombia" label="diversified economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538989" start="2767" end="2788" title="megadiverse countries" label="megadiverse countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324155" start="2818" end="2830" title="Biodiversity of Colombia" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q130183" start="2924" end="2941" title="Amazon natural region" label="Amazon rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q130359" start="2943" end="2952" title="Andean natural region" label="highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q130322" start="2954" end="2964" title="Orinoquía natural region" label="grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q533861" start="2969" end="2976" title="Tatacoa Desert" label="deserts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002874" start="3063" end="3071" title="Caribbean natural region" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130330" start="3076" end="3083" title="Pacific/Chocó natural region" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3174" end="3176" title="United Nations" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="3182" end="3185" title="World Trade Organization" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="3191" end="3195" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="3201" end="3204" title="Organization of American States" label="OAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122288" start="3210" end="3226" title="Pacific Alliance" label="Pacific Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q471690" start="3235" end="3251" title="Andean Community" label="Andean Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3266" end="3270" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q145560" start="3292" end="3311" title="major non-NATO ally" label="major non-NATO ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3319" end="3332" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="3437" end="3457" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q199821" start="3557" end="3577" title="Gran Colombia" label="Republic of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8965" start="3626" end="3652" title="Viceroyalty of New Granada" label="Viceroyalty of New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16896655" start="3756" end="3768" title="Cundinamarca Department (1820)" label="Cundinamarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252595" start="3817" end="3843" title="Provinces of the Republic of New Granada" label="Department of Cundinamarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q630882" start="3867" end="3890" title="Republic of New Granada" label="Republic of New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141215" start="3953" end="3976" title="Granadine Confederation" label="Granadine Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061488" start="4027" end="4052" title="United States of Colombia" label="United States of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="4352" end="4363" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="4372" end="4381" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="4389" end="4394" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="4399" end="4411" title="Amazon basin" label="Amazon basin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4458" end="4465" title="Pubenza archaeological site" label="Pubenza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4470" end="4479" title="El Totumo archaeological site" label="El Totumo"/>
<link wikidata="Q888099" start="4557" end="4568" title="Paleo-Indians" label="Paleoindian"/>
<link wikidata="Q762517" start="4598" end="4612" title="Puerto Hormiga archaeological site" label="Puerto Hormiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q30607628" start="4646" end="4660" title="Archaic Period (Americas)" label="Archaic Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629521" start="4768" end="4775" title="El Abra" label="El Abra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485396" start="4780" end="4790" title="Tequendama" label="Tequendama"/>
<link wikidata="Q232564" start="4794" end="4806" title="Cundinamarca Department" label="Cundinamarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441919" start="4864" end="4875" title="San Jacinto, Bolívar" label="San Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="4988" end="5003" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28163573" start="5027" end="5033" title="Tibitó" label="Tibitó"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="5072" end="5078" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q191829" start="5136" end="5151" title="Magdalena River" label="Magdalena River"/>
<link wikidata="Q52827" start="5180" end="5191" title="Pictogram" label="pictographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="5669" end="5680" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Amerindians"/>
<link wikidata="Q828578" start="5695" end="5701" title="Muisca" label="Muisca"/>
<link wikidata="Q191322" start="5703" end="5707" title="Zenú" label="Zenú"/>
<link wikidata="Q958351" start="5709" end="5717" title="Quimbaya civilization" label="Quimbaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645057" start="5723" end="5730" title="Tairona" label="Tairona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738715" start="5771" end="5780" title="cacicazgo" label="cacicazgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q215655" start="5912" end="5923" title="Departments of Colombia" label="Departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q121233" start="5927" end="5933" title="Boyacá Department" label="Boyacá"/>
<link wikidata="Q232564" start="5938" end="5950" title="Cundinamarca Department" label="Cundinamarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362189" start="5971" end="5995" title="Altiplano Cundiboyacense" label="Altiplano Cundiboyacense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5782830" start="6025" end="6045" title="Muisca Confederation" label="Muisca Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007270" start="6111" end="6119" title="Colombian emeralds" label="emeralds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314" start="6172" end="6181" title="Halite" label="rock salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q26728" start="6282" end="6310" title="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta" label="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q853332" start="6350" end="6361" title="Cauca River" label="Cauca River"/>
<link wikidata="Q278057" start="6381" end="6388" title="Cordillera Occidental (Colombia)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q143982" start="6393" end="6400" title="Cordillera Central (Colombia)" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="6693" end="6710" title="Austronesian expansion" label="Malayo-Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258527" start="6716" end="6732" title="Indigenous peoples in Colombia" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q313369" start="6886" end="6901" title="Alonso de Ojeda" label="Alonso de Ojeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056122" start="6945" end="6962" title="Guajira Peninsula" label="Guajira Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q453058" start="6998" end="7017" title="Rodrigo de Bastidas" label="Rodrigo de Bastidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3755298" start="7053" end="7068" title="Caribbean Basin" label="Caribbean coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="7078" end="7098" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19080" start="7146" end="7167" title="Vasco Núñez de Balboa" label="Vasco Núñez de Balboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q761784" start="7233" end="7246" title="Gulf of Urabá" label="Gulf of Urabá"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573380" start="7276" end="7309" title="Santa María la Antigua del Darién" label="Santa María la Antigua del Darién"/>
<link wikidata="Q209016" start="7365" end="7376" title="Santa Marta" label="Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="7402" end="7411" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="7429" end="7441" title="conquistador" label="conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q347688" start="7442" end="7468" title="Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada" label="Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077264" start="7577" end="7599" title="New Kingdom of Granada" label="New Kingdom of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738715" start="7676" end="7685" title="cacicazgo" label="cacicazgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5716022" start="7689" end="7697" title="Bacatá" label="Muyquytá"/>
<link wikidata="Q332070" start="7898" end="7921" title="Sebastián de Belalcázar" label="Sebastián de Belalcázar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900" start="7936" end="7941" title="Quito" label="Quito"/>
<link wikidata="Q51103" start="7970" end="7974" title="Cali" label="Cali"/>
<link wikidata="Q335135" start="7989" end="7996" title="Popayán" label="Popayán"/>
<link wikidata="Q61482" start="8046" end="8064" title="Nikolaus Federmann" label="Nikolaus Federmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q130322" start="8077" end="8094" title="Orinoquía natural region" label="Llanos Orientales"/>
<link wikidata="Q143014" start="8113" end="8132" title="Cordillera Oriental (Colombia)" label="Cordillera Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q192550" start="8149" end="8158" title="El Dorado" label="El Dorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628010" start="8338" end="8351" title="List of conquistadors in Colombia" label="conquistadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198846" start="8430" end="8447" title="Indian auxiliaries" label="Indigenous allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="8642" end="8650" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="8872" end="8888" title="Navigation" label="nautical science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046537" start="8971" end="8991" title="Casa de Contratación" label="Casa de Contratación"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983857" start="9044" end="9061" title="Iberian ship development, 1400–1600" label="Iberian expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q211435" start="9177" end="9196" title="Viceroyalty of Peru" label="Viceroyalty of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="9218" end="9222" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695783" start="9358" end="9373" title="Real Audiencia" label="Royal Audiencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077264" start="9438" end="9474" title="Royal Audience of Santa Fe de Bogotá" label="Royal Audience of Santa Fe de Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127285" start="9651" end="9672" title="Council of the Indies" label="Council of the Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="9737" end="9754" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="enslaved Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393765" start="9829" end="9838" title="Factory (trading post)" label="factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q21099469" start="9910" end="9917" title="asiento" label="asiento"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443060" start="10204" end="10212" title="Commoners" label="subjects"/>
<link wikidata="Q211435" start="10574" end="10593" title="Viceroyalty of Peru" label="Viceroyalty of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="10628" end="10652" title="Viceroyalty of New Spain" label="Viceroyalty of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q234912" start="10890" end="10907" title="Córdoba Department" label="Córdoba, Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8965" start="11127" end="11153" title="Viceroyalty of New Granada" label="Viceroyalty of New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="11406" end="11432" title="New Spain" label="Viceroyalties of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q211435" start="11436" end="11440" title="Viceroyalty of Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="11625" end="11629" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="11634" end="11645" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="11752" end="11765" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q54434" start="11779" end="11787" title="War of Jenkins&amp;#x27; Ear" label="on Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="12214" end="12235" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q731937" start="12290" end="12310" title="José Celestino Mutis" label="José Celestino Mutis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607862" start="12336" end="12363" title="Antonio Caballero y Góngora" label="Antonio Caballero y Góngora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373838" start="12460" end="12501" title="Royal Botanical Expedition to New Granada" label="Royal Botanical Expedition to New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="12656" end="12678" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442069" start="12855" end="12879" title="Francisco José de Caldas" label="Francisco José de Caldas"/>
<link wikidata="Q726386" start="12895" end="12916" title="Francisco Antonio Zea" label="Francisco Antonio Zea"/>
<link wikidata="Q959498" start="12932" end="12950" title="Jorge Tadeo Lozano" label="Jorge Tadeo Lozano"/>
<link wikidata="Q27786423" start="12967" end="12980" title="Salvador Rizo" label="Salvador Rizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="13472" end="13486" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8605" start="13585" end="13598" title="Simón Bolívar" label="Simón Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q452017" start="13600" end="13628" title="Francisco de Paula Santander" label="Francisco de Paula Santander"/>
<link wikidata="Q603820" start="13691" end="13705" title="Antonio Nariño" label="Antonio Nariño"/>
<link wikidata="Q12356456" start="13773" end="13784" title="Viceroyalty" label="Viceroyalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="13786" end="13795" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249661" start="13846" end="13877" title="United Provinces of New Granada" label="United Provinces of New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836330" start="13905" end="13926" title="Camilo Torres Tenorio" label="Camilo Torres Tenorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="13999" end="14009" title="federalism" label="federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="14014" end="14024" title="Unitary state" label="centralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859495" start="14074" end="14085" title="Patria Boba" label="Patria Boba"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="14105" end="14120" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q186256" start="14128" end="14141" title="Ferdinand VII" label="Ferdinand VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q8961" start="14206" end="14229" title="Spanish reconquest of New Granada" label="to send military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639205" start="14322" end="14336" title="Juan de Sámano" label="Juan de Sámano"/>
<link wikidata="Q17074534" start="14449" end="14454" title="Junta (Spanish American Independence)" label="junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13649182" start="14602" end="14615" title="Military career of Simón Bolívar" label="Simón Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123201" start="14640" end="14652" title="Spanish American wars of independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375108" start="14666" end="14688" title="Royalist (Spanish American Independence)" label="pro-Spanish resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q199821" start="14939" end="14959" title="Gran Colombia" label="Republic of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878183" start="14976" end="15008" title="subdivisions of Gran Colombia" label="union of the current territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q200174" start="15090" end="15103" title="Marañón River" label="Marañón River"/>
<link wikidata="Q943797" start="15109" end="15127" title="Congress of Cúcuta" label="Congress of Cúcuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q224714" start="15146" end="15158" title="Colombian Constitution of 1821" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q853475" start="15212" end="15233" title="President of Colombia" label="President of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104133" start="15277" end="15291" title="Vice President of Colombia" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q5808489" start="15448" end="15476" title="dissolution of Gran Colombia" label="dissolution of Gran Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="15544" end="15569" title="constitutional government" label="constitutional government"/>
<link wikidata="Q939021" start="15596" end="15603" title="Colombian Liberal Party" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q747333" start="15608" end="15620" title="Colombian Conservative Party" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="15737" end="15744" title="Slavery" label="Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q199821" start="15855" end="15868" title="Gran Colombia" label="Gran Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252595" start="15898" end="15924" title="Cundinamarca Province" label="Department of Cundinamarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q630882" start="15954" end="15965" title="Republic of the New Granada" label="New Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141215" start="16054" end="16077" title="Granadine Confederation" label="Granadine Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067868" start="16088" end="16106" title="Colombian Civil War (1860–1862)" label="two-year civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061488" start="16120" end="16145" title="United States of Colombia" label="United States of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43378" start="16361" end="16384" title="Thousand Days&amp;#x27; War" label="Thousand Days&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q939021" start="16473" end="16486" title="Colombian Liberal Party" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5848651" start="16501" end="16510" title="United States of Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q70161415" start="16512" end="16519" title="History of Ecuador (1895–1925)" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="16521" end="16530" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="16536" end="16545" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q747333" start="16567" end="16589" title="Colombian Conservative Party" label="Nationalist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591872" start="16610" end="16619" title="Santander State" label="Santander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="16786" end="16798" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089201" start="16836" end="16873" title="Secession of Panama from Colombia" label="secession of the Department of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="17035" end="17044" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795915" start="17138" end="17160" title="Thomson–Urrutia Treaty" label="Thomson–Urrutia Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536533" start="17188" end="17191" title="Leticia Incident" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="17233" end="17245" title="Amazon basin" label="Amazon basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="17295" end="17312" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q185407" start="17578" end="17590" title="La Violencia" label="La Violencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132479" start="17796" end="17816" title="Jorge Eliécer Gaitán" label="Jorge Eliécer Gaitán"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327438" start="17872" end="17883" title="El Bogotazo" label="El Bogotazo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="17991" end="18001" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q467701" start="18007" end="18021" title="Laureano Gómez" label="Laureano Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871937" start="18228" end="18237" title="Battle of Old Baldy" label="Old Baldy"/>
<link wikidata="Q455692" start="18308" end="18321" title="Gustavo Rojas Pinilla" label="Gustavo Rojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q467701" start="18334" end="18343" title="Laureano Gómez" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147936" start="18433" end="18447" title="Colombian Military Junta" label="military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q878285" start="18459" end="18472" title="Gabriel París" label="Gabriel París"/>
<link wikidata="Q268566" start="18590" end="18604" title="National Front (Colombia)" label="National Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784516" start="19006" end="19027" title="Alliance for Progress" label="Alliance for Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q155801" start="19171" end="19175" title="Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia" label="FARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q943220" start="19181" end="19184" title="National Liberation Army (Colombia)" label="ELN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789014" start="19193" end="19197" title="19th of April Movement" label="M-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q752673" start="19298" end="19308" title="Asymmetric warfare" label="asymmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q369799" start="19309" end="19322" title="Low intensity conflict" label="low-intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q169072" start="19323" end="19337" title="Colombian armed conflict (1964–present)" label="armed conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990495" start="19346" end="19363" title="Military Forces of Colombia" label="government forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615022" start="19365" end="19389" title="Guerrilla movements in Colombia" label="leftist guerrilla groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q111863815" start="19394" end="19419" title="Paramilitarism in Colombia" label="right wing paramilitaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476215" start="19531" end="19553" title="human rights defenders" label="human rights defenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="19842" end="19857" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="19989" end="19999" title="Mercenarie" label="Mercenarie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074666" start="20040" end="20069" title="Chiquita Brands International" label="Chiquita Brands International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260006" start="20200" end="20211" title="drug cartel" label="drug cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034076" start="20265" end="20278" title="Illegal drug trade in Colombia" label="illegal drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="20290" end="20299" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="20304" end="20311" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837647" start="20336" end="20348" title="Colombian Constitution of 1991" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q187413" start="20509" end="20521" title="Álvaro Uribe" label="Álvaro Uribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q925547" start="20546" end="20572" title="democratic security policy" label="democratic security policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="20602" end="20619" title="counter-terrorism" label="counter-terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q760037" start="20624" end="20642" title="counter-insurgency" label="counter-insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q786385" start="20767" end="20770" title="United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia" label="AUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="20975" end="20979" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589197" start="20985" end="21005" title="Government of Colombia" label="Colombian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q57311" start="21019" end="21037" title="Juan Manuel Santos" label="Juan Manuel Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="21046" end="21056" title="guerrillas" label="guerrillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q26840027" start="21132" end="21142" title="Colombian peace agreement referendum, 2016" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5858325" start="21246" end="21256" title="Colombian peace process" label="peace deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284236" start="21285" end="21303" title="Colombian congress" label="Colombian congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q27132539" start="21356" end="21373" title="2016 Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="21560" end="21563" title="Human Rights Watch" label="HRW"/>
<link wikidata="Q51881311" start="21567" end="21596" title="Special Jurisdiction of Peace" label="Special Jurisdiction of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q381148" start="21714" end="21744" title="international humanitarian law" label="international humanitarian law"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189320" start="21824" end="21831" title="justice" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="21863" end="21875" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17478000" start="21935" end="21945" title="Iván Duque" label="Iván Duque"/>
<link wikidata="Q15909095" start="21979" end="21996" title="Democratic Center (Colombia)" label="Democratic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q24960542" start="22025" end="22033" title="2018 Colombian presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q853475" start="22080" end="22101" title="President of Colombia" label="President of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037785" start="22133" end="22173" title="2010 Colombia–Venezuela diplomatic crisis" label="Colombia&amp;#x27;s relations with Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q826745" start="22271" end="22291" title="Humanitarian aid" label="humanitarian support"/>
<link wikidata="Q28485502" start="22433" end="22456" title="Crisis in Venezuela (2012–present)" label="Venezuela&amp;#x27;s crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="22511" end="22540" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q58132" start="22636" end="22650" title="Nicolás Maduro" label="Nicolás Maduro"/>
<link wikidata="Q58833335" start="22868" end="22879" title="Juan Guaidó" label="Juan Guaidó"/>
<link wikidata="Q106668058" start="23036" end="23044" title="2021 Colombian protests" label="Protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="23164" end="23179" title="value-added tax" label="value-added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q54849949" start="23198" end="23206" title="2022 Colombian presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q704022" start="23257" end="23270" title="Gustavo Petro" label="Gustavo Petro"/>
<link wikidata="Q50358616" start="23343" end="23360" title="Rodolfo Hernández Suárez" label="Rodolfo Hernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321721" start="23641" end="23656" title="Natural regions of Colombia" label="natural regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="23709" end="23714" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q430265" start="23742" end="23755" title="Pacific Coast" label="Pacific Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q141501" start="23806" end="23812" title="Llanos" label="Llanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="23833" end="23850" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312322" start="23866" end="23878" title="Insular Region (Colombia)" label="insular area"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="23975" end="23985" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="23987" end="23996" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="23998" end="24006" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="24008" end="24015" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="24017" end="24022" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="24032" end="24050" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="24094" end="24100" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="24117" end="24126" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="24159" end="24166" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="24171" end="24175" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254902" start="24347" end="24351" title="12th parallel north" label="12°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q524195" start="24356" end="24359" title="4th parallel south" label="4°S"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708801" start="24383" end="24386" title="67th meridian west" label="67°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708894" start="24391" end="24395" title="79th meridian west" label="79°W"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="24425" end="24432" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q141501" start="24446" end="24452" title="Llanos" label="Llanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q131792" start="24472" end="24479" title="Orinoco" label="Orinoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q191086" start="24523" end="24529" title="jungle" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="24537" end="24554" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q130185" start="24691" end="24706" title="Caribbean Region of Colombia" label="Caribbean coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q62823" start="24785" end="24797" title="Barranquilla" label="Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="24802" end="24811" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q26728" start="24878" end="24906" title="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta" label="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q578862" start="24972" end="24992" title="Pico Cristóbal Colón" label="Pico Cristóbal Colón"/>
<link wikidata="Q338790" start="24997" end="25015" title="Pico Simón Bolívar" label="Pico Simón Bolívar"/>
<link wikidata="Q637508" start="25026" end="25043" title="La Guajira Desert" label="La Guajira Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q130330" start="25086" end="25110" title="Pacific Region of Colombia" label="Pacific coastal lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479954" start="25126" end="25143" title="Baudó Mountains" label="Serranía de Baudó"/>
<link wikidata="Q996581" start="25241" end="25253" title="Buenaventura, Colombia" label="Buenaventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783" start="25268" end="25280" title="Pacific Ring of Fire" label="Ring of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="25331" end="25349" title="volcano" label="volcanic eruptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066648" start="25525" end="25541" title="Colombian Massif" label="Colombian Massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q230602" start="25578" end="25583" title="Cauca Department" label="Cauca"/>
<link wikidata="Q230217" start="25588" end="25594" title="Nariño Department" label="Nariño"/>
<link wikidata="Q278057" start="25691" end="25712" title="Cordillera Occidental (Colombia)" label="Cordillera Occidental"/>
<link wikidata="Q51103" start="25778" end="25782" title="Santiago de Cali" label="Cali"/>
<link wikidata="Q143982" start="25788" end="25806" title="Cordillera Central (Colombia)" label="Cordillera Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q853332" start="25828" end="25833" title="Cauca River" label="Cauca"/>
<link wikidata="Q191829" start="25838" end="25853" title="Magdalena River" label="Magdalena River"/>
<link wikidata="Q48278" start="25927" end="25935" title="Medellín" label="Medellín"/>
<link wikidata="Q235190" start="25937" end="25946" title="Manizales" label="Manizales"/>
<link wikidata="Q51111" start="25948" end="25955" title="Pereira, Colombia" label="Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q328518" start="25961" end="25968" title="Armenia, Quindío" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q143014" start="25978" end="25997" title="Cordillera Oriental (Colombia)" label="Cordillera Oriental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056122" start="26026" end="26043" title="Guajira Peninsula" label="Guajira Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q243766" start="26066" end="26077" title="Bucaramanga" label="Bucaramanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q216847" start="26083" end="26089" title="Cúcuta" label="Cúcuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047596" start="26311" end="26319" title="Guaviare River" label="Guaviare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363972" start="26321" end="26327" title="Atrato River" label="Atrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q655251" start="26329" end="26333" title="Meta River" label="Meta"/>
<link wikidata="Q213782" start="26335" end="26343" title="Putumayo River" label="Putumayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171840" start="26348" end="26355" title="Caquetá River" label="Caquetá"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="26494" end="26500" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321721" start="26677" end="26696" title="Natural regions of Colombia" label="six natural regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="26741" end="26749" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q199403" start="26828" end="26847" title="tropical rainforest" label="tropical rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="26850" end="26857" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="26860" end="26866" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="26869" end="26875" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="26901" end="26917" title="Mountain climate" label="Mountain climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118281" start="27061" end="27082" title="tierra caliente" label="warm altitudinal zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116825" start="27199" end="27233" title="tierra templada" label="temperate climate altitudinal zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354534" start="27327" end="27339" title="tierra fría" label="cold climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q427038" start="27490" end="27496" title="páramo" label="páramo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492909" start="27561" end="27568" title="tierra helada" label="glacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538989" start="27667" end="27688" title="megadiverse countries" label="megadiverse countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="27692" end="27704" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343794" start="27723" end="27735" title="List of birds of Colombia" label="bird species"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="27882" end="27890" title="endemism" label="endemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864511" start="28140" end="28147" title="List of mammals of Colombia" label="mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="28168" end="28177" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005089" start="28201" end="28205" title="Endemic birds of Colombia" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="28291" end="28298" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364423" start="28608" end="28619" title="marine fish" label="marine fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072742" start="28662" end="28677" title="freshwater fish" label="freshwater fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002625" start="28735" end="28746" title="List of butterflies of Colombia" label="butterflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25308" start="28760" end="28766" title="orchid" label="orchid"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="28815" end="28821" title="beetle" label="beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6362539" start="28919" end="28927" title="List of reptiles of Colombia" label="reptiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="28932" end="28937" title="Arecaceae" label="palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="28972" end="28979" title="mollusk" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="29043" end="29056" title="invertebrates" label="invertebrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q101998" start="29110" end="29116" title="biomes" label="biomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="29134" end="29144" title="ecosystems" label="ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251679" start="29322" end="29347" title="deforestation in Colombia" label="deforestation in Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="29394" end="29426" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="29733" end="29745" title="presidential system" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q310988" start="29746" end="29770" title="Participatory democracy" label="participatory democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="29860" end="29880" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q853475" start="30037" end="30058" title="President of Colombia" label="President of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="30074" end="30087" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="30092" end="30110" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104133" start="30128" end="30142" title="Vice President of Colombia" label="Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315497" start="30151" end="30171" title="Council of Ministers of the Republic of Colombia" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567518" start="30459" end="30479" title="List of Colombian Department Governors" label="department governors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555896" start="30481" end="30497" title="municipalities of Colombia" label="municipal mayors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172823" start="30578" end="30592" title="Corregimientos of Colombia" label="corregimientos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284236" start="30783" end="30791" title="Congress of Colombia" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571756" start="30839" end="30865" title="Chamber of Representatives of Colombia" label="Chamber of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398781" start="30881" end="30887" title="Senate of Colombia" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302848" start="31140" end="31156" title="Judiciary of Colombia" label="four high courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001110" start="31176" end="31189" title="Supreme Court of Justice of Colombia" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883901" start="31236" end="31252" title="Council of State of Colombia" label="Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q171251" start="31291" end="31309" title="administrative law" label="administrative law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000937" start="31363" end="31383" title="Constitutional Court of Colombia" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881743" start="31463" end="31493" title="Superior Council of Judicature" label="Superior Council of Judicature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="31571" end="31580" title="civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801315" start="31627" end="31645" title="adversarial system" label="adversarial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q925547" start="31687" end="31713" title="democratic security policy" label="democratic security policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187413" start="31748" end="31760" title="Álvaro Uribe" label="Álvaro Uribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124504" start="31986" end="31995" title="2010 Colombian presidential election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q57311" start="32043" end="32061" title="Juan Manuel Santos" label="Juan Manuel Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q380026" start="32130" end="32144" title="Antanas Mockus" label="Antanas Mockus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5828700" start="32310" end="32319" title="2014 Colombian presidential election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174833" start="32362" end="32380" title="Óscar Iván Zuluaga" label="Óscar Iván Zuluaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q17478000" start="32404" end="32414" title="Iván Duque" label="Iván Duque"/>
<link wikidata="Q24960542" start="32446" end="32454" title="2018 Colombian presidential election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q704022" start="32514" end="32527" title="Gustavo Petro" label="Gustavo Petro"/>
<link wikidata="Q54849949" start="32633" end="32640" title="2022 Colombian presidential election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q28501573" start="32697" end="32712" title="Francia Marquez" label="Francia Marquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602530" start="32897" end="32924" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Colombia)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122288" start="33032" end="33048" title="Pacific Alliance" label="Pacific Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="33346" end="33370" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="33376" end="33430" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="33436" end="33467" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q421023" start="33473" end="33510" title="Organization of Ibero-American States" label="Organization of Ibero-American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q471690" start="33520" end="33547" title="Andean Community of Nations" label="Andean Community of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="33582" end="33586" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q145560" start="33593" end="33612" title="major non-NATO ally" label="major non-NATO ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="33620" end="33633" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="33761" end="33779" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062492" start="33805" end="33824" title="Ministry of National Defence (Colombia)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394180" start="33878" end="33903" title="Colombian National Police" label="Colombian National Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="34220" end="34264" title="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115107" start="34326" end="34351" title="National Army of Colombia" label="National Army of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q500407" start="34357" end="34382" title="Colombian Aerospace Force" label="Colombian Aerospace Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526431" start="34392" end="34406" title="Colombian Navy" label="Colombian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="34443" end="34454" title="gendarmerie" label="gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q19694750" start="34631" end="34664" title="National Intelligence Directorate (Colombia)" label="National Intelligence Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989340" start="34800" end="34814" title="Colombian Naval Infantry" label="Naval Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q215655" start="35136" end="35147" title="Departments of Colombia" label="departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="35156" end="35172" title="Bogotá" label="capital district"/>
<link wikidata="Q232564" start="35249" end="35275" title="Cundinamarca Department" label="department of Cundinamarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555896" start="35310" end="35324" title="Municipalities of Colombia" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172823" start="35423" end="35437" title="Corregimientos of Colombia" label="corregimientos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35474" end="35481" title="Comunas of Colombia" label="comunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032103" start="35855" end="35864" title="Districts of Colombia" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q62823" start="35960" end="35972" title="Barranquilla" label="Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="35974" end="35983" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q209016" start="35985" end="35996" title="Santa Marta" label="Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q996581" start="36001" end="36013" title="Buenaventura, Colombia" label="Buenaventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q739302" start="36811" end="36830" title="economic production" label="economic production"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="36858" end="36873" title="domestic demand" label="domestic demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164722" start="36875" end="36898" title="Consumer spending" label="Consumption expenditure"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="36963" end="36977" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="37162" end="37171" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="37230" end="37246" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764970" start="37336" end="37343" title="List of countries by GDP (real) growth rate" label="highest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="37375" end="37402" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="37468" end="37485" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="32nd in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929688" start="37549" end="37572" title="government expenditures" label="government expenditures"/>
<link wikidata="Q461319" start="37614" end="37627" title="External debt" label="External debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577635" start="37719" end="37731" title="bond ratings" label="bond ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="37821" end="37838" title="unemployment rate" label="unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="37916" end="37929" title="labour market" label="labour market"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="38053" end="38068" title="free-trade zone" label="free-trade zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13990" start="38126" end="38141" title="Valle del Cauca Department" label="Valle del Cauca"/>
<link wikidata="Q837171" start="38203" end="38219" title="financial sector" label="financial sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387368" start="38358" end="38382" title="Colombian Stock Exchange" label="Colombian Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817993" start="38429" end="38433" title="Mercado Integrado Latinoamericano" label="MILA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="38600" end="38610" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="38768" end="38780" title="distillation" label="distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="38862" end="38875" title="food products" label="food products"/>
<link wikidata="Q207652" start="38929" end="38943" title="Chemical industry" label="chemical goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="38945" end="38960" title="pharmaceuticals" label="pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147914" start="39531" end="39547" title="Colombia trade agreements" label="trade agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q60852" start="40046" end="40065" title="financial inclusion" label="financial inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829138" start="40141" end="40148" title="Tourism in Colombia" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="40490" end="40496" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q37153" start="40498" end="40505" title="avocado" label="avocado"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="40510" end="40518" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="40572" end="40581" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="40583" end="40589" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="40591" end="40600" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="40605" end="40610" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="40660" end="40664" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="40666" end="40672" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="40677" end="40684" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="41083" end="41087" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q864693" start="41092" end="41104" title="chicken meat" label="chicken meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="41139" end="41145" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="41243" end="41257" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="41406" end="41410" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="41415" end="41424" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="41846" end="41853" title="emerald" label="emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="41880" end="41884" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="42255" end="42271" title="Renewable energy" label="Renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="42309" end="42333" title="Hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315422" start="42612" end="42633" title="Ministry of Transport (Colombia)" label="Ministry of Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4500069" start="42685" end="42691" title="INVÍAS" label="INVÍAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456911" start="42713" end="42733" title="Highways in Colombia" label="Highways in Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499858" start="42739" end="42748" title="Aerocivil" label="Aerocivil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124009" start="42785" end="42793" title="List of airports in Colombia" label="airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081547" start="42799" end="42829" title="National Infrastructure Agency (Colombia)" label="National Infrastructure Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q327209" start="42844" end="42855" title="concession (contract)" label="concessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="42864" end="42890" title="public–private partnership" label="public–private partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315422" start="43182" end="43220" title="Superintendency of Ports and Transport (Colombia)" label="Superintendency of Ports and Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302778" start="43322" end="43341" title="Dual carriageway" label="duplicated highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q265925" start="43343" end="43362" title="Rail transport in Colombia" label="Rail transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234623" start="43407" end="43424" title="Rail freight transport" label="freight shipments"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="43571" end="43584" title="oil pipelines" label="oil pipelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q191829" start="44020" end="44035" title="Magdalena River" label="Magdalena River"/>
<link wikidata="Q201785" start="44100" end="44131" title="El Dorado International Airport" label="El Dorado International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="44485" end="44508" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054314" start="44781" end="44826" title="International Center for Tropical Agriculture" label="International Center for Tropical Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="44886" end="44900" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="44905" end="44918" title="food security" label="food security"/>
<link wikidata="Q372713" start="45008" end="45062" title="Artificial cardiac pacemaker" label="external artificial pacemaker with internal electrodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6278553" start="45100" end="45120" title="Jorge Reynolds Pombo" label="Jorge Reynolds Pombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312212" start="45231" end="45244" title="microkeratome" label="microkeratome"/>
<link wikidata="Q278846" start="45332" end="45337" title="LASIK" label="LASIK"/>
<link wikidata="Q470427" start="45398" end="45414" title="refractive error" label="refractive error"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45435" end="45446" title="Salomón Hakim#The Invention of the valve" label="Hakim valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q193003" start="45468" end="45481" title="hydrocephalus" label="hydrocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235833" start="45681" end="45695" title="military robot" label="military robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q127197" start="45698" end="45702" title="bomb" label="bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q585259" start="45825" end="45842" title="genetic diversity" label="genetic diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q977933" start="45852" end="45874" title="Manuel Elkin Patarroyo" label="Manuel Elkin Patarroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662786" start="45919" end="45936" title="synthetic vaccine" label="synthetic vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="45942" end="45949" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q86508238" start="45951" end="45967" title="Francisco Lopera" label="Francisco Lopera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326566" start="46027" end="46055" title="Early-onset Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="early-onset Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337396" start="46057" end="46071" title="Rodolfo Llinás" label="Rodolfo Llinás"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="46109" end="46115" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662784" start="46304" end="46323" title="synthetic substance" label="synthetic substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="46360" end="46365" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="46368" end="46380" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9206884" start="46448" end="46457" title="Medical diagnosis" label="diagnoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q310186" start="46524" end="46553" title="Paracoccidioides brasiliensis" label="Paracoccidioides brasiliensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="46643" end="46670" title="List of countries by population" label="third-most populous country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063789" start="47784" end="47813" title="Colombian War of Independence" label="Colombian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q130359" start="48015" end="48031" title="Andean Region of Colombia" label="Andean highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q130185" start="48046" end="48061" title="Caribbean Region of Colombia" label="Caribbean coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="48288" end="48311" title="Urbanization" label="movement to urban areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="48565" end="48571" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145466" start="48786" end="48813" title="internally displaced person" label="internally displaced person"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="49169" end="49188" title="Amerindian language" label="Amerindian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="49195" end="49211" title="Creole languages" label="Creole languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="49217" end="49232" title="Romani language" label="Romani language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748229" start="49237" end="49260" title="Colombian Sign Language" label="Colombian Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="49291" end="49298" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q26855" start="49326" end="49383" title="archipelago of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina" label="archipelago of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="49461" end="49471" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q520478" start="49760" end="49768" title="Chibchan languages" label="Chibchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q788144" start="49770" end="49778" title="Tucanoan languages" label="Tucanoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179086" start="49780" end="49791" title="Bora–Witoto languages" label="Bora–Witoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q944056" start="49793" end="49802" title="Guajiboan languages" label="Guajiboan"/>
<link wikidata="Q626753" start="49804" end="49812" title="Arawakan languages" label="Arawakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33090" start="49814" end="49821" title="Cariban languages" label="Cariban"/>
<link wikidata="Q807304" start="49823" end="49832" title="Barbacoan languages" label="Barbacoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q269032" start="49838" end="49845" title="Piaroa–Saliban languages" label="Saliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258527" start="50029" end="50035" title="Indigenous peoples in Colombia" label="Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q388449" start="50072" end="50080" title="African Colombian" label="Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819571" start="50143" end="50165" title="European diaspora" label="immigrants from Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783280" start="50174" end="50185" title="Arab Colombians" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078871" start="50495" end="50502" title="Mestizo Colombian" label="Mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642488" start="50656" end="50665" title="chiefdoms" label="chiefdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q48790679" start="50949" end="50960" title="2018 Colombian Census" label="2018 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994595" start="51028" end="51034" title="White Colombian" label="whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q388449" start="51156" end="51163" title="Afro-Colombian" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258527" start="51174" end="51196" title="Indigenous peoples in Colombia" label="Indigenous Amerindians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285231" start="51232" end="51238" title="Raizal" label="Raizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36665" start="51282" end="51292" title="Palenquero" label="Palenquero"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="51364" end="51368" title="Romani people" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078871" start="51448" end="51455" title="Mestizo Colombians" label="Mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994595" start="51467" end="51472" title="White Colombians" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258527" start="51483" end="51493" title="Indigenous peoples of Colombia" label="Indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q388449" start="51504" end="51509" title="Afro-Colombians" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="51520" end="51527" title="Mulatto" label="Mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q56811511" start="51542" end="51547" title="Asian Colombians" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440366" start="51747" end="51772" title="Federal Research Division" label="Federal Research Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573180" start="51941" end="51948" title="Spanish immigration to Colombia" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783280" start="51998" end="52009" title="Arab Colombians" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q21044244" start="52066" end="52072" title="German Colombian" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916544" start="52077" end="52084" title="Italian Colombian" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258527" start="52108" end="52126" title="Indigenous peoples in Colombia" label="Indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q891077" start="52521" end="52526" title="Wayuu" label="Wayuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046097" start="52532" end="52536" title="Paez people" label="Paez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335017" start="52554" end="52560" title="Emberá people" label="Emberá"/>
<link wikidata="Q191322" start="52569" end="52573" title="Zenú" label="Zenú"/>
<link wikidata="Q272747" start="52594" end="52604" title="Department of La Guajira" label="La Guajira"/>
<link wikidata="Q230602" start="52606" end="52611" title="Cauca Department" label="Cauca"/>
<link wikidata="Q230217" start="52613" end="52619" title="Nariño Department" label="Nariño"/>
<link wikidata="Q234912" start="52621" end="52628" title="Córdoba Department" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q235188" start="52633" end="52638" title="Sucre Department" label="Sucre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973505" start="52685" end="52727" title="National Indigenous Organization of Colombia" label="Organización Nacional Indígena de Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q331590" start="52962" end="53008" title="Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989" label="Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="53011" end="53031" title="Sub-Saharan Africans" label="Sub-Saharan Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="53048" end="53054" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127469" start="53242" end="53251" title="Jamaican people" label="Jamaicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="53462" end="53466" title="Soviet Union" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="53488" end="53504" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366180" start="53612" end="53623" title="Ethnic groups in West Asia" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="53628" end="53634" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510870" start="53754" end="53762" title="Lebanese Colombian" label="Lebanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="53764" end="53775" title="Palestinian people" label="Palestinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783280" start="53787" end="53797" title="Arab Colombians" label="Levantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="53839" end="53846" title="Romani people" label="Romanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146800" start="53851" end="53855" title="History of the Jews in Colombia" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996826" start="53893" end="53904" title="Venezuelan people" label="Venezuelans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190181" start="54111" end="54159" title="National Administrative Department of Statistics" label="National Administrative Department of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="54391" end="54405" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="54454" end="54467" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="54479" end="54493" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="54527" end="54534" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="54651" end="54675" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q215168" start="54680" end="54689" title="Adventism" label="Adventism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="54746" end="54758" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="54760" end="54765" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="54776" end="54784" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q747802" start="54786" end="54795" title="Mormonism" label="Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="54797" end="54805" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="54807" end="54827" title="animism" label="Indigenous religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q190193" start="54829" end="54850" title="Hare Krishna movement" label="Hare Krishna movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q101462" start="54852" end="54870" title="Rastafari movement" label="Rastafari movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="54872" end="54895" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="55277" end="55284" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="55454" end="55469" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421914" start="55880" end="55895" title="cancer research" label="cancer research"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749626" start="55995" end="56011" title="América Economía" label="América Economía"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260475" start="56047" end="56071" title="Health facility" label="health care institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="56203" end="56216" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076052" start="56406" end="56415" title="preschool" label="preschool"/>
<link wikidata="Q20814948" start="57202" end="57221" title="high-school diploma" label="high-school diploma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969556" start="57513" end="57523" title="ICFES Examination" label="ICFES test"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974078" start="57953" end="57957" title="National Service of Learning (Colombia)" label="SENA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640828" start="59024" end="59068" title="Gross enrolment ratio" label="primary and secondary gross enrolment ratios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432369" start="59111" end="59133" title="School-life expectancy" label="School-life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="59434" end="59440" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q48278" start="59470" end="59478" title="Medellín" label="Medellín"/>
<link wikidata="Q51103" start="59508" end="59512" title="Cali" label="Cali"/>
<link wikidata="Q62823" start="59546" end="59558" title="Barranquilla" label="Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496275" start="59637" end="59650" title="Latin American culture" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="59752" end="59767" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327022" start="59769" end="59776" title="Culture of Spain" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377906" start="59787" end="59795" title="Culture of Europe" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q149416" start="59797" end="59804" title="Culture of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="59806" end="59814" title="Culture of the United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193667" start="59816" end="59825" title="Culture of the Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309134" start="59831" end="59845" title="Arab culture" label="Middle Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137161" start="60098" end="60114" title="National symbols of Colombia" label="national symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q579167" start="60356" end="60375" title="Ministry of Culture (Colombia)" label="Ministry of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042774" start="60597" end="60616" title="Juan de Castellanos" label="Juan de Castellanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118450" start="60624" end="60661" title="Elegías de varones ilustres de Indias" label="Elegías de varones ilustres de Indias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066791" start="60741" end="60752" title="Pedro Simón" label="Pedro Simón"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952360" start="60757" end="60778" title="Juan Rodríguez Freyle" label="Juan Rodríguez Freyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q603820" start="60844" end="60858" title="Antonio Nariño" label="Antonio Nariño"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645282" start="60860" end="60881" title="José Fernández Madrid" label="José Fernández Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836330" start="60883" end="60904" title="Camilo Torres Tenorio" label="Camilo Torres Tenorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q726386" start="60909" end="60930" title="Francisco Antonio Zea" label="Francisco Antonio Zea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136545" start="61039" end="61051" title="costumbrismo" label="costumbrismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071317" start="61108" end="61126" title="Tomás Carrasquilla" label="Tomás Carrasquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703852" start="61128" end="61140" title="Jorge Isaacs" label="Jorge Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661285" start="61145" end="61157" title="Rafael Pombo" label="Rafael Pombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983255" start="61266" end="61285" title="José Asunción Silva" label="José Asunción Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q940428" start="61287" end="61307" title="José Eustasio Rivera" label="José Eustasio Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494262" start="61309" end="61323" title="León de Greiff" label="León de Greiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744460" start="61325" end="61345" title="Porfirio Barba-Jacob" label="Porfirio Barba-Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q622861" start="61350" end="61372" title="José María Vargas Vila" label="José María Vargas Vila"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600643" start="61387" end="61396" title="Modernismo" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297341" start="61441" end="61470" title="Colombian Academy of Language" label="Colombian Academy of Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032945" start="61524" end="61540" title="Candelario Obeso" label="Candelario Obeso"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075317" start="61751" end="61764" title="Stone and Sky (movement)" label="Stone and Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537336" start="61903" end="61917" title="Gonzalo Arango" label="Gonzalo Arango"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496232" start="61948" end="61959" title="Nadaism" label="nothingness"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="62028" end="62036" title="nihilism" label="nihilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="62038" end="62052" title="existentialism" label="existentialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850939" start="62105" end="62128" title="Fernando González (writer)" label="Fernando González Ochoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352538" start="62141" end="62174" title="Latin American Boom" label="boom in Latin American literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="62211" end="62225" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5878" start="62226" end="62248" title="Gabriel García Márquez" label="Gabriel García Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q178869" start="62276" end="62305" title="One Hundred Years of Solitude" label="One Hundred Years of Solitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340549" start="62313" end="62339" title="Eduardo Caballero Calderón" label="Eduardo Caballero Calderón"/>
<link wikidata="Q946599" start="62341" end="62361" title="Manuel Mejía Vallejo" label="Manuel Mejía Vallejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q251123" start="62367" end="62379" title="Álvaro Mutis" label="Álvaro Mutis"/>
<link wikidata="Q81466" start="62410" end="62425" title="Miguel de Cervantes Prize" label="Cervantes Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q329157" start="62434" end="62470" title="Prince of Asturias Award for Letters" label="Prince of Asturias Award for Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010129" start="62991" end="63010" title="San Agustín, Huila" label="San Agustín culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794820" start="63023" end="63035" title="Stonemasonry" label="stonecutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627975" start="63099" end="63109" title="Ceremony" label="ceremonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="63119" end="63129" title="sarcophagi" label="sarcophagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q653208" start="63147" end="63155" title="monolith" label="monolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="63167" end="63182" title="anthropomorphic" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q220304" start="63187" end="63197" title="Zoomorphism" label="zoomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="63211" end="63216" title="Rock (geology)" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q868115" start="63308" end="63327" title="Roman Catholicism in Spain" label="Spanish Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="63383" end="63390" title="baroque" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="63415" end="63421" title="rococo" label="rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="63456" end="63469" title="Monarchy of Spain" label="Spanish crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116353" start="63569" end="63604" title="Gregorio Vásquez de Arce y Ceballos" label="Gregorio Vásquez de Arce y Ceballos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63606" end="63624" title="Gaspar de Figueroa" label="Gaspar de Figueroa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63626" end="63653" title="Baltasar Vargas de Figueroa" label="Baltasar Vargas de Figueroa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63655" end="63687" title="Baltasar de Figueroa (the Elder)" label="Baltasar de Figueroa (the Elder)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697681" start="63689" end="63713" title="Antonio Acero de la Cruz" label="Antonio Acero de la Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63718" end="63735" title="Joaquín Gutiérrez (painter)" label="Joaquín Gutiérrez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63792" end="63809" title="Alonso de Narváez" label="Alonso de Narváez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676627" start="63919" end="63934" title="Angelino Medoro" label="Angelino Medoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q236744" start="64019" end="64024" title="Tunja" label="Tunja"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100082" start="64101" end="64120" title="Ramón Torres Méndez" label="Ramón Torres Méndez"/>
<link wikidata="Q524942" start="64282" end="64303" title="Andrés de Santa Maria" label="Andrés de Santa María"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159671" start="64305" end="64324" title="Pedro José Figueroa" label="Pedro José Figueroa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64326" end="64340" title="Epifanio Garay" label="Epifanio Garay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64342" end="64368" title="Mercedes Delgado Mallarino" label="Mercedes Delgado Mallarino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64370" end="64389" title="José María Espinosa" label="José María Espinosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208686" start="64391" end="64413" title="Ricardo Acevedo Bernal" label="Ricardo Acevedo Bernal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997322" start="64470" end="64485" title="Pedro Nel Gómez" label="Pedro Nel Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420315" start="64490" end="64515" title="Santiago Martínez Delgado" label="Santiago Martínez Delgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="64582" end="64594" title="Neoclassicism" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="64607" end="64615" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q134307" start="64802" end="64810" title="portrait" label="portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913297" start="64815" end="64838" title="Ignacio Gómez Jaramillo" label="Ignacio Gómez Jaramillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28643" start="64965" end="64973" title="paradigm" label="paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q162150" start="65063" end="65074" title="Abstraction (art)" label="abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="65079" end="65085" title="cubism" label="cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344035" start="65087" end="65104" title="Alejandro Obregón" label="Alejandro Obregón"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="65290" end="65298" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="symbolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="65303" end="65316" title="Expressionism" label="expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170598" start="65348" end="65361" title="Andean condor" label="Andean condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q272877" start="65364" end="65379" title="Fernando Botero" label="Fernando Botero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741987" start="65381" end="65390" title="Omar Rayo" label="Omar Rayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q558553" start="65392" end="65404" title="Enrique Grau" label="Enrique Grau"/>
<link wikidata="Q573192" start="65406" end="65418" title="Édgar Negret" label="Édgar Negret"/>
<link wikidata="Q5800153" start="65420" end="65432" title="David Manzur" label="David Manzur"/>
<link wikidata="Q332420" start="65434" end="65459" title="Rodrigo Arenas Betancourt" label="Rodrigo Arenas Betancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15698294" start="65461" end="65474" title="Oscar Murillo (artist)" label="Oscar Murillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916050" start="65476" end="65489" title="Doris Salcedo" label="Doris Salcedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593655" start="65494" end="65505" title="Oscar Muñoz (artist)" label="Oscar Muñoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864737" start="65661" end="65681" title="Religious art" label="religious depictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="65749" end="65755" title="sacred" label="sacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="65940" end="65953" title="neoclassicist" label="neoclassicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179744" start="66183" end="66196" title="daguerreotype" label="daguerreotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684668" start="66198" end="66222" title="Jean-Baptiste Louis Gros" label="Jean-Baptiste Louis Gros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114448" start="66495" end="66505" title="cartoonist" label="cartoonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q181298" start="66527" end="66534" title="fanzine" label="fanzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661080" start="66550" end="66571" title="independent publisher" label="independent publisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q18192578" start="66709" end="66729" title="List of architectural styles" label="architectural styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q838625" start="66919" end="66932" title="Terrace (agriculture)" label="crop terraces"/>
<link wikidata="Q948975" start="66947" end="66963" title="Inca road system" label="Inca road system"/>
<link wikidata="Q665247" start="66977" end="66985" title="hypogeum" label="hypogeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200141" start="66991" end="67001" title="necropolis" label="necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874566" start="67024" end="67068" title="Indigenous architecture" label="architectural heritage of indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084141" start="67115" end="67125" title="Andean preceramic" label="preceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="67130" end="67137" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485396" start="67161" end="67171" title="Tequendama" label="Tequendama"/>
<link wikidata="Q179506" start="67173" end="67185" title="Tierradentro" label="Tierradentro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821484" start="67237" end="67250" title="List of pre-Columbian cultures" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969077" start="67262" end="67272" title="shaft tomb" label="shaft tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="67345" end="67355" title="megalithic" label="megalithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887224" start="67396" end="67414" title="San Agustín Archaeological Park" label="San Agustín, Huila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094367" start="67416" end="67425" title="Ciudad Perdida" label="Lost city"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="67599" end="67604" title="stone" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8180985" start="67717" end="67732" title="European architecture" label="European styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712488" start="67758" end="67775" title="Spanish architecture" label="Spanish influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="67788" end="67797" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5777" start="67803" end="67814" title="Extremadura" label="Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q174782" start="67945" end="67956" title="town square" label="town square"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006" start="68007" end="68018" title="Map orientation" label="orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="68040" end="68044" title="fort" label="fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469245" start="68210" end="68217" title="Piracy in the Caribbean" label="pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q391009" start="68304" end="68320" title="Catholic religious order" label="religious orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q840829" start="68351" end="68371" title="Baroque architecture" label="Baroque architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442069" start="68439" end="68463" title="Francisco José de Caldas" label="Francisco José de Caldas"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="68516" end="68542" title="neo-classical architecture" label="neo-classical architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937493" start="68549" end="68565" title="Capitolio Nacional" label="National Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q123304" start="68703" end="68712" title="Antioquia Department" label="Antioquia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130185" start="68718" end="68727" title="Caribbean region of Colombia" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q212940" start="68759" end="68775" title="Arabic architecture" label="Arabic influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518305" start="68781" end="68793" title="Teatro de Cristóbal Colón" label="Teatro Colón"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="68906" end="68916" title="volumetric" label="volumetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938983" start="69064" end="69070" title="Spatial analysis" label="spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q22746" start="69098" end="69108" title="urban park" label="urban park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543083" start="69114" end="69121" title="Avenue (landscape)" label="avenues"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="69130" end="69142" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic style"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535546" start="69207" end="69227" title="Rationalism (architecture)" label="modern neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479493" start="69229" end="69240" title="Eclecticism in architecture" label="eclecticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132116" start="69241" end="69251" title="folklorist" label="folklorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="69256" end="69264" title="art deco" label="art deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q335261" start="69265" end="69275" title="Ornament (art)" label="ornamental"/>
<link wikidata="Q162324" start="69382" end="69391" title="International Style (architecture)" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q206615" start="69447" end="69456" title="Building material" label="materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="69465" end="69484" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="69525" end="69533" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168387" start="69551" end="69573" title="Concrete slab" label="lightened slabs system"/>
<link wikidata="Q998392" start="69663" end="69678" title="Rogelio Salmona" label="Rogelio Salmona"/>
<link wikidata="Q186018" start="69716" end="69741" title="contemporary architecture" label="contemporary architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q206615" start="69800" end="69809" title="Building material" label="materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q618123" start="69861" end="69895" title="Geographical feature" label="natural and artificial geographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="69944" end="69949" title="sense" label="sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193950" start="69956" end="70008" title="Architectural conservation" label="conservation of the architectural and urban heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="70145" end="70151" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q34424" start="70334" end="70341" title="Shakira" label="Shakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q43189" start="70343" end="70349" title="Juanes" label="Juanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q965888" start="70351" end="70363" title="Carlos Vives" label="Carlos Vives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442289" start="70456" end="70468" title="gaita flutes" label="gaita flutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q488305" start="70649" end="70672" title="Guillermo Uribe Holguín" label="Guillermo Uribe Holguín"/>
<link wikidata="Q9287574" start="70710" end="70749" title="National Symphony Orchestra of Colombia" label="National Symphony Orchestra of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583807" start="70838" end="70847" title="art music" label="art music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9053225" start="70853" end="70882" title="Bogotá Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Bogotá Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q723418" start="70984" end="70990" title="Cumbia (Colombia)" label="cumbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39777" start="71012" end="71018" title="maraca" label="maraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552564" start="71047" end="71057" title="guacharaca" label="guacharaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069904" start="71060" end="71065" title="porro" label="porro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423598" start="71106" end="71112" title="mapalé" label="mapalé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322478" start="71148" end="71156" title="clapping" label="clapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574985" start="71172" end="71181" title="vallenato" label="vallenato"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="71234" end="71243" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="71312" end="71321" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q430265" start="71344" end="71357" title="Pacific coast" label="Pacific coast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="71371" end="71379" title="Currulao (music genre)" label="currulao"/>
<link wikidata="Q220971" start="71457" end="71464" title="marimba" label="marimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="71483" end="71492" title="bass drum" label="bass drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="71498" end="71507" title="side drum" label="side drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775526" start="71619" end="71630" title="contradanza" label="contradanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4435332" start="71795" end="71876" title="UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists" label="UNESCO&amp;#x27;s Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q130359" start="71912" end="71925" title="Andean Region (Colombia)" label="Andean Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109360" start="71934" end="71939" title="danza" label="danza"/>
<link wikidata="Q527675" start="72032" end="72039" title="bambuco" label="bambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q56054583" start="72067" end="72072" title="Colombian tiple" label="tiple"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="72077" end="72085" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142141" start="72125" end="72132" title="pasillo" label="pasillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q193434" start="72168" end="72173" title="waltz" label="waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300910" start="72280" end="72285" title="tiple" label="tiple"/>
<link wikidata="Q806351" start="72291" end="72298" title="bandola" label="bandola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753431" start="72307" end="72315" title="requinto" label="requinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418595" start="72348" end="72358" title="sanjuanero" label="sanjuanero"/>
<link wikidata="Q234501" start="72377" end="72383" title="Tolima Department" label="Tolima"/>
<link wikidata="Q234920" start="72388" end="72393" title="Huila Department" label="Huila"/>
<link wikidata="Q208239" start="72477" end="72488" title="salsa music" label="salsa music"/>
<link wikidata="Q51103" start="72540" end="72544" title="Cali" label="Cali"/>
<link wikidata="Q130322" start="72686" end="72700" title="Orinoquía natural region" label="Eastern Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q47369" start="72709" end="72713" title="harp" label="harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q507102" start="72719" end="72725" title="Cuatro (instrument)" label="cuatro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202208" start="72813" end="72819" title="joropo" label="joropo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="72880" end="72888" title="flamenco" label="flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518471" start="72907" end="72914" title="galeron" label="galeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q178521" start="72940" end="72946" title="cowboy" label="cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627975" start="73135" end="73145" title="ceremonial" label="ceremonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199281" start="73182" end="73198" title="cylindrical drum" label="cylindrical drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q841005" start="73206" end="73211" title="quena" label="quena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149665" start="73238" end="73246" title="rondador" label="rondador"/>
<link wikidata="Q270200" start="73252" end="73257" title="conga" label="conga"/>
<link wikidata="Q101401" start="73260" end="73264" title="bell" label="bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q26855" start="73316" end="73373" title="Archipelago of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina" label="Archipelago of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="73402" end="73410" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244764" start="73414" end="73422" title="Washtub bass" label="tub-bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394579" start="73426" end="73433" title="Jawbone (instrument)" label="jawbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q39777" start="73448" end="73454" title="maraca" label="maraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q329385" start="73498" end="73509" title="Schottische" label="Schottische"/>
<link wikidata="Q752785" start="73515" end="73522" title="Calypso music" label="Calypso"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="73528" end="73533" title="Polka" label="Polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262697" start="73542" end="73547" title="Mento" label="Mento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="73621" end="73641" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q148163" start="73658" end="73666" title="zarzuela" label="zarzuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777306" start="73795" end="73836" title="Theater of Colombia" label="Ibero-American Theater Festival of Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973153" start="74206" end="74222" title="Cinema of Colombia" label="Colombian cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070705" start="74418" end="74441" title="Cartagena Film Festival" label="Cartagena Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038463" start="74503" end="74523" title="Bogotá Film Festival" label="Bogotá Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324658" start="74583" end="74592" title="El Tiempo (Colombia)" label="El Tiempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324151" start="74609" end="74622" title="El Espectador" label="El Espectador"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697015" start="74630" end="74652" title="Television in Colombia" label="Television in Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80263" start="74834" end="74837" title="RCN TV" label="RCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035332" start="74842" end="74849" title="Caracol Televisión" label="Caracol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11159817" start="75032" end="75046" title="Radio in Colombia" label="radio networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5843056" start="75048" end="75082" title="Radiodifusora Nacional de Colombia" label="Radiodifusora Nacional de Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382447" start="75112" end="75125" title="Caracol Radio" label="Caracol Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415100" start="75130" end="75139" title="RCN Radio" label="RCN Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016365" start="75240" end="75252" title="Cadena Super" label="Cadena Super"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944224" start="75254" end="75261" title="Todelar" label="Todelar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294414" start="75333" end="75388" title="Ministry of Information Technologies and Communications (Colombia)" label="Ministry of Information Technologies and Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="75696" end="75703" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="75714" end="75720" title="legume" label="legume"/>
<link wikidata="Q165227" start="75857" end="75872" title="Physalis peruviana" label="cape gooseberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q499671" start="75874" end="75880" title="Acca sellowiana" label="feijoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347464" start="75882" end="75887" title="Eugenia stipitata" label="arazá"/>
<link wikidata="Q232755" start="75889" end="75901" title="Pitaya" label="dragon fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q170662" start="75903" end="75913" title="Purple mangosteen" label="mangostino"/>
<link wikidata="Q917921" start="75915" end="75925" title="Passiflora ligularis" label="granadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q34887" start="75927" end="75933" title="papaya" label="papaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181909" start="75935" end="75940" title="guava" label="guava"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842373" start="75948" end="75958" title="blackberry" label="blackberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q795069" start="75961" end="75965" title="Solanum quitoense" label="lulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709343" start="75967" end="75974" title="Annona muricata" label="soursop"/>
<link wikidata="Q156790" start="75979" end="75991" title="passionfruit" label="passionfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412544" start="76120" end="76129" title="Tostones" label="patacones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891863" start="76155" end="76163" title="sancocho" label="sancocho"/>
<link wikidata="Q412754" start="76215" end="76221" title="ajiaco" label="ajiaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130544" start="76283" end="76292" title="pandebono" label="pandebono"/>
<link wikidata="Q642702" start="76294" end="76299" title="arepa" label="arepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668424" start="76315" end="76325" title="aborrajado" label="aborrajado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573026" start="76364" end="76369" title="torta" label="torta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171183" start="76373" end="76379" title="choclo" label="choclo"/>
<link wikidata="Q747457" start="76381" end="76389" title="empanada" label="empanada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839137" start="76395" end="76405" title="almojábana" label="almojábana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572447" start="76440" end="76453" title="bandeja paisa" label="bandeja paisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23015" start="76455" end="76472" title="lechona tolimense" label="lechona tolimense"/>
<link wikidata="Q720254" start="76474" end="76480" title="Ternera a la llanera" label="mamona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147853" start="76482" end="76489" title="tamales" label="tamales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5706337" start="76515" end="76528" title="arroz de lisa" label="arroz de lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644022" start="76567" end="76573" title="kibbeh" label="kibbeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554952" start="76575" end="76580" title="suero" label="suero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175115" start="76582" end="76596" title="costeño cheese" label="costeño cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039582" start="76601" end="76611" title="carimañola" label="carimañola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062531" start="76756" end="76771" title="hard-boiled egg" label="hard-boiled egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139863" start="76777" end="76791" title="coconut rice" label="arroz con coco"/>
<link wikidata="Q380778" start="76808" end="76820" title="Organic food" label="Organic food"/>
<link wikidata="Q8705390" start="76974" end="76981" title="buñuelo" label="buñuelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690488" start="76984" end="76991" title="natilla" label="natilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5997362" start="76994" end="77010" title="Maria Luisa cake" label="Maria Luisa cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q529941" start="77012" end="77021" title="bocadillo (dessert)" label="bocadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981212" start="77053" end="77060" title="cocadas" label="cocadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917025" start="77122" end="77135" title="torta de nata" label="torta de nata"/>
<link wikidata="Q15941833" start="77138" end="77143" title="oblea" label="oblea"/>
<link wikidata="Q374381" start="77146" end="77150" title="Crème caramel" label="flan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169" start="77154" end="77159" title="mango" label="mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367597" start="77161" end="77167" title="roscón" label="roscón"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990632" start="77169" end="77176" title="milhoja" label="milhoja"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690488" start="77178" end="77191" title="manjar blanco" label="manjar blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q499671" start="77202" end="77208" title="feijoa" label="feijoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15588942" start="77219" end="77228" title="Mountain papaya" label="papayuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573026" start="77230" end="77235" title="torta" label="torta"/>
<link wikidata="Q415622" start="77265" end="77271" title="curuba" label="curuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q9004419" start="77301" end="77306" title="hogao" label="hogao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699717" start="77352" end="77355" title="Ají (sauce)" label="ají"/>
<link wikidata="Q797948" start="77392" end="77398" title="Coffee production in Colombia" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070230" start="77408" end="77415" title="champús" label="champús"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104275" start="77417" end="77424" title="cholado" label="cholado"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702764" start="77426" end="77432" title="lulada" label="lulada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828028" start="77434" end="77439" title="avena (beverage)" label="avena"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="77452" end="77461" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062449" start="77469" end="77479" title="aguapanela" label="aguapanela"/>
<link wikidata="Q397926" start="77481" end="77492" title="aguardiente" label="aguardiente"/>
<link wikidata="Q13261" start="77494" end="77507" title="hot chocolate" label="hot chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q939785" start="77579" end="77583" title="Tejo (sport)" label="Tejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="77722" end="77730" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q212564" start="77752" end="77760" title="Colombia national football team" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q545012" start="77785" end="77802" title="2001 Copa América" label="2001 Copa América"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77931" end="77948" title="FIFA World Rankings#Best Mover of the Year" label="mover of the year"/>
<link wikidata="Q618786" start="77985" end="77999" title="Inline speed skating" label="roller skaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215841" start="78139" end="78146" title="Cycle sport" label="cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="78273" end="78282" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q62823" start="78287" end="78299" title="Barranquilla" label="Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178832" start="78346" end="78361" title="Orlando Cabrera" label="Orlando Cabrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q168880" start="78363" end="78377" title="Édgar Rentería" label="Édgar Rentería"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="78403" end="78415" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317331" start="78419" end="78423" title="1997 World Series" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q928040" start="78428" end="78432" title="2010 World Series" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="78463" end="78484" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q809874" start="78499" end="78521" title="Baseball World Cup" label="world amateur champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="78541" end="78547" title="Boxing" label="Boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="78622" end="78632" title="Motorsport" label="Motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q172744" start="78710" end="78728" title="Juan Pablo Montoya" label="Juan Pablo Montoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290385" start="78835" end="78838" title="UCI BMX World Championships" label="BMX"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="78840" end="78844" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="78846" end="78860" title="Shooting sports" label="shooting sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q36389" start="78862" end="78871" title="taekwondo" label="taekwondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42486" start="78873" end="78882" title="wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q98959563" start="78884" end="78895" title="high diving" label="high diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="78900" end="78909" title="Sport of athletics" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83462" start="78940" end="78953" title="Olympic weightlifting" label="weightlifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177899" start="78958" end="78965" title="bowling" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243158" start="78986" end="79020" title="Index of Colombia-related articles" label="Index of Colombia-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112231" start="79023" end="79042" title="Outline of Colombia" label="Outline of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="79135" end="79149" title="Britannica.com" label="Britannica.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="79216" end="79234" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="79242" end="79269" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="79317" end="79338" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5224" wikidata="Q24815" url="?curid=5224" title="Citizen Kane">
<text>Citizen Kane is a 1941 American drama film directed by, produced by and starring Orson Welles and co-written by Welles and Herman J. Mankiewicz. It was Welles&#x27;s first feature film. 

&quot;Citizen Kane&quot; is frequently cited as the greatest film ever made. For 40 years (five decennial polls: 1962, 1972, 1982, 1992 and 2002), it stood at number one in the British Film Institute&#x27;s &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; decennial poll of critics, and it topped the American Film Institute&#x27;s 100 Years ... 100 Movies list in 1998, as well as its 2007 update. The film was nominated for Academy Awards in nine categories and it won for Best Writing (Original Screenplay) by Mankiewicz and Welles. &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; is praised for Gregg Toland&#x27;s cinematography, Robert Wise&#x27;s editing, Bernard Herrmann&#x27;s score and its narrative structure, all of which have been considered innovative and precedent-setting.

The quasi-biographical film examines the life and legacy of Charles Foster Kane, played by Welles, a composite character based on American media barons William Randolph Hearst and Joseph Pulitzer, Chicago tycoons Samuel Insull and Harold McCormick, as well as aspects of the screenwriters&#x27; own lives. Upon its release, Hearst prohibited any mention of the film in his newspapers.

After the Broadway success of Welles&#x27;s Mercury Theatre and the controversial 1938 radio broadcast &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; on &quot;The Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot;, Welles was courted by Hollywood. He signed a contract with RKO Pictures in 1939. Although it was unusual for an untried director, he was given freedom to develop his own story, to use his own cast and crew, and to have final cut privilege. Following two abortive attempts to get a project off the ground, he wrote the screenplay for &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; with Herman J. Mankiewicz. Principal photography took place in 1940, the same year its innovative trailer was shown, and the film was released in 1941. Cecilia Ager, reviewing it in &quot;PM Magazine&quot;, wrote: “Seeing it, it’s as if you never really saw a movie before.”

Although it was a critical success, &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; failed to recoup its costs at the box office. The film faded from view after its release, but it returned to public attention when it was praised by French critics such as André Bazin and re-released in 1956. In 1958, the film was voted number nine on the prestigious Brussels 12 list at the 1958 World Expo. The Library of Congress selected &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; as an inductee of the 1989 inaugural group of 25 films for preservation in the United States National Film Registry for being &quot;culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant&quot;.
Roger Ebert wrote of it: Its surface is as much fun as any movie ever made. Its depths surpass understanding. I have analyzed it a shot at a time with more than 30 groups, and together we have seen, I believe, pretty much everything that is there on the screen. The more clearly I can see its physical manifestation, the more I am stirred by its mystery.
==Plot==
In a mansion called Xanadu, part of a vast palatial estate in Florida, the elderly Charles Foster Kane is on his deathbed. Holding a snow globe, he utters his last word, &quot;Rosebud&quot;, and dies. A newsreel obituary tells the life story of Kane, an enormously wealthy newspaper publisher and industry magnate. Kane&#x27;s death becomes sensational news around the world, and the newsreel&#x27;s producer tasks reporter Jerry Thompson with discovering the meaning of &quot;Rosebud&quot;.

Thompson sets out to interview Kane&#x27;s friends and associates. He tries to approach Kane&#x27;s second wife, Susan Alexander Kane, now an alcoholic nightclub owner, but she refuses to talk to him. Thompson goes to the private archive of the late banker Walter Parks Thatcher. Through Thatcher&#x27;s written memoirs, Thompson learns about Kane&#x27;s rise from a Colorado boarding house and the decline of his fortune.

In 1871, gold was discovered through a mining deed belonging to Kane&#x27;s mother, Mary Kane. She hired Thatcher to establish a trust that would provide for Kane&#x27;s education and assume guardianship of him. While the parents and Thatcher discussed arrangements inside the boarding house, the young Kane played happily with a sled in the snow outside. When Kane&#x27;s parents introduced him to Thatcher and told him he would live with Thatcher, the boy struck Thatcher with his sled and attempted to run away.

By the time Kane gained control of his trust at the age of 25, the mine&#x27;s productivity and Thatcher&#x27;s prudent investing had made Kane one of the richest men in the world. Kane took control of the &quot;New York Inquirer&quot; newspaper and embarked on a career of yellow journalism, publishing scandalous articles that attacked Thatcher&#x27;s (and his own) business interests. Kane sold his newspaper empire to Thatcher after the 1929 stock market crash left him short of cash.

Thompson interviews Kane&#x27;s personal business manager, Mr. Bernstein. Bernstein recalls that Kane hired the best journalists available to build the &quot;Inquirer&quot;″s circulation. Kane rose to power by successfully manipulating public opinion regarding the Spanish–American War and marrying Emily Norton, the niece of the President of the United States.

Thompson interviews Kane&#x27;s estranged best friend, Jedediah Leland, in a retirement home. Leland says that Kane&#x27;s marriage to Emily disintegrated over the years, and he began an affair with amateur singer Susan Alexander while running for Governor of New York. Both his wife and his political opponent discovered the affair, and the public scandal ended his political career. Kane married Susan and forced her into a humiliating career as an opera singer (for which she had neither the talent nor the ambition). Kane arranged for a large opera house to be built in Chicago for Susan to perform in. After Leland began to write a negative review of Susan&#x27;s disastrous opera debut, Kane fired him but finished the negative review and printed it. Susan protested that she never wanted the opera career anyway, but Kane forced her to continue the season.

Susan consents to an interview with Thompson and describes the aftermath of her opera career. She attempted suicide, and Kane finally allowed her to abandon singing. After many unhappy years living at Xanadu with Kane, the two had an argument that culminated in Kane slapping Susan. Susan decided to leave Kane. Kane&#x27;s butler Raymond recounts that, after Susan moved out of Xanadu, Kane began violently destroying the contents of her former bedroom. When Kane discovered a snow globe, he calmed down and tearfully said &quot;Rosebud&quot;. Thompson concludes that he cannot solve the mystery and that the meaning of Kane&#x27;s last word will remain unknown.

At Xanadu, Kane&#x27;s belongings are cataloged or discarded by the mansion&#x27;s staff. They find a sled, the one on which eight-year-old Kane was playing on the day that he was taken from his home in Colorado, and throw it into a furnace with other items. Unknown to the staff, the sled&#x27;s trade name, printed on top, becomes visible through the flames: &quot;Rosebud&quot;.

==Cast==
The beginning of the film&#x27;s ending credits states that &quot;Most of the principal actors in &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; are new to motion pictures. The Mercury Theatre is proud to introduce them.&quot; The cast is then listed in the following order, with Orson Welles&#x27; credit for playing Charles Foster Kane appearing last:
* Joseph Cotten as Jedediah Leland, Kane&#x27;s best friend and a reporter for &quot;The Inquirer&quot;. Cotten also appears (hidden in darkness) in the &quot;News on the March&quot; screening room.
* Dorothy Comingore as Susan Alexander Kane, Kane&#x27;s mistress and second wife.
* Agnes Moorehead as Mary Kane, Kane&#x27;s mother.
* Ruth Warrick as Emily Monroe Norton Kane, Kane&#x27;s first wife.
* Ray Collins as Jim W. Gettys, Kane&#x27;s political rival for the post of Governor of New York.
* Erskine Sanford as Herbert Carter, editor of &quot;The Inquirer&quot;. Sanford also appears (hidden in darkness) in the &quot;News on the March&quot; screening room.
* Everett Sloane as Mr. Bernstein, Kane&#x27;s friend and employee at &quot;The Inquirer&quot;.
* William Alland as Jerry Thompson, a reporter for &quot;News on the March&quot;. Alland also voices the narrator of the &quot;News on the March&quot; newsreel.
* Paul Stewart as Raymond, Kane&#x27;s butler.
* George Coulouris as Walter Parks Thatcher, a banker who becomes Kane&#x27;s legal guardian.
* Fortunio Bonanova as Signor Matiste, vocal coach of Susan Alexander Kane.
* Gus Schilling as John, headwaiter at the El Rancho nightclub. Schilling also appears (hidden in darkness) in the &quot;News on the March&quot; screening room.
* Philip Van Zandt as Mr. Rawlston, &quot;News on the March&quot; open at the producer.
* Georgia Backus as Bertha Anderson, attendant at the library of Walter Parks Thatcher.
* Harry Shannon as Jim Kane, Kane&#x27;s father.
* Sonny Bupp as Charles Foster Kane III, Kane&#x27;s son.
* Buddy Swan as Charles Foster Kane, age eight.
* Orson Welles as Charles Foster Kane, a wealthy newspaper publisher.

Additionally, Charles Bennett appears as the entertainer at the head of the chorus line in the &quot;Inquirer&quot; party sequence, and cinematographer Gregg Toland makes a cameo appearance as an interviewer depicted in part of the &quot;News on the March&quot; newsreel. Actor Alan Ladd, still unknown at that time, makes a small appearance as a reporter smoking a pipe at the end of the film.

==Production==
===Development===
Hollywood had shown interest in Welles as early as 1936. He turned down three scripts sent to him by Warner Bros. In 1937, he declined offers from David O. Selznick, who asked him to head his film company&#x27;s story department, and William Wyler, who wanted him for a supporting role in &quot;Wuthering Heights&quot;. &quot;Although the possibility of making huge amounts of money in Hollywood greatly attracted him,&quot; wrote biographer Frank Brady, &quot;he was still totally, hopelessly, insanely in love with the theater, and it is there that he had every intention of remaining to make his mark.&quot;

Following the 1938 &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; broadcast of his CBS radio series &quot;The Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot;, Welles was lured to Hollywood with a remarkable contract. RKO Pictures studio head George J. Schaefer wanted to work with Welles after the notorious broadcast, believing that Welles had a gift for attracting mass attention. RKO was also uncharacteristically profitable and was entering into a series of independent production contracts that would add more artistically prestigious films to its roster. Throughout the spring and early summer of 1939, Schaefer constantly tried to lure the reluctant Welles to Hollywood. Welles was in financial trouble after failure of his plays &quot;Five Kings&quot; and &quot;The Green Goddess&quot;. At first he simply wanted to spend three months in Hollywood and earn enough money to pay his debts and fund his next theatrical season. Welles first arrived on July 20, 1939, and on his first tour, he called the movie studio &quot;the greatest electric train set a boy ever had&quot;.

Welles signed his contract with RKO on August 21, which stipulated that Welles would act in, direct, produce and write two films. Mercury would get $100,000 for the first film by January 1, 1940, plus 20% of profits after RKO recouped $500,000, and $125,000 for a second film by January 1, 1941, plus 20% of profits after RKO recouped $500,000. The most controversial aspect of the contract was granting Welles complete artistic control of the two films so long as RKO approved both projects&#x27; stories and the budget did not exceed $500,000. RKO executives would not be allowed to see any footage until Welles chose to show it to them, and no cuts could be made to either film without Welles&#x27;s approval. Welles was allowed to develop the story without interference, select his own cast and crew, and have the right of final cut. Granting the final cut privilege was unprecedented for a studio because it placed artistic considerations over financial investment. The contract was deeply resented in the film industry, and the Hollywood press took every opportunity to mock RKO and Welles. Schaefer remained a great supporter and saw the unprecedented contract as good publicity. Film scholar Robert L. Carringer wrote: &quot;The simple fact seems to be that Schaefer believed Welles was going to pull off something really big almost as much as Welles did himself.&quot;
Welles spent the first five months of his RKO contract trying to get his first project going, without success. &quot;They are laying bets over on the RKO lot that the Orson Welles deal will end up without Orson ever doing a picture there,&quot; wrote &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot;. It was agreed that Welles would film &quot;Heart of Darkness&quot;, previously adapted for &quot;The Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot;, which would be presented entirely through a first-person camera. After elaborate pre-production and a day of test shooting with a hand-held camera—unheard of at the time—the project never reached production because Welles was unable to trim $50,000 from its budget. Schaefer told Welles that the $500,000 budget could not be exceeded; as war loomed, revenue was declining sharply in Europe by the fall of 1939.

He then started work on the idea that became &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;. Knowing the script would take time to prepare, Welles suggested to RKO that while that was being done—&quot;so the year wouldn&#x27;t be lost&quot;—he make a humorous political thriller. Welles proposed &quot;The Smiler with a Knife&quot;, from a novel by Cecil Day-Lewis. When that project stalled in December 1939, Welles began brainstorming other story ideas with screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz, who had been writing Mercury radio scripts. &quot;Arguing, inventing, discarding, these two powerful, headstrong, dazzlingly articulate personalities thrashed toward &quot;Kane&quot;&quot;, wrote biographer Richard Meryman.

===Screenplay===


One of the long-standing controversies about &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; has been the authorship of the screenplay. Welles conceived the project with screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz, who was writing radio plays for Welles&#x27;s CBS Radio series, &quot;The Campbell Playhouse&quot;. Mankiewicz based the original outline on the life of William Randolph Hearst, whom he knew socially and came to hate after being exiled from Hearst&#x27;s circle.

In February 1940 Welles supplied Mankiewicz with 300 pages of notes and put him under contract to write the first draft screenplay under the supervision of John Houseman, Welles&#x27;s former partner in the Mercury Theatre. Welles later explained, &quot;I left him on his own finally, because we&#x27;d started to waste too much time haggling. So, after mutual agreements on storyline and character, Mank went off with Houseman and did his version, while I stayed in Hollywood and wrote mine.&quot; Taking these drafts, Welles drastically condensed and rearranged them, then added scenes of his own. The industry accused Welles of underplaying Mankiewicz&#x27;s contribution to the script, but Welles countered the attacks by saying, &quot;At the end, naturally, I was the one making the picture, after all—who had to make the decisions. I used what I wanted of Mank&#x27;s and, rightly or wrongly, kept what I liked of my own.&quot;

The contract stated that Mankiewicz was to receive no credit for his work, as he was hired as a script doctor. Before he signed the contract Mankiewicz was advised by his agents that all credit for his work belonged to Welles and the Mercury Theatre, the &quot;author and creator&quot;. As the film neared release, however, Mankiewicz began wanting a writing credit and even threatened to take out full-page advertisements in trade papers and to get his friend Ben Hecht to write an exposé for &quot;The Saturday Evening Post&quot;. Mankiewicz also threatened to go to the Screen Writers Guild and claim full credit for writing the entire script by himself.

After lodging a protest with the Screen Writers Guild, Mankiewicz withdrew it, then vacillated. The question was resolved in January 1941 when the studio, RKO Pictures, awarded Mankiewicz credit. The guild credit form listed Welles first, Mankiewicz second. Welles&#x27;s assistant Richard Wilson said that the person who circled Mankiewicz&#x27;s name in pencil, then drew an arrow that put it in first place, was Welles. The official credit reads, &quot;Screenplay by Herman J. Mankiewicz and Orson Welles&quot;. Mankiewicz&#x27;s rancor toward Welles grew over the remaining twelve years of his life.

Questions over the authorship of the &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; screenplay were revived in 1971 by influential film critic Pauline Kael, whose controversial 50,000-word essay &quot;Raising Kane&quot; was commissioned as an introduction to the shooting script in &quot;The Citizen Kane Book&quot;, published in October 1971. The book-length essay first appeared in February 1971, in two consecutive issues of &quot;The New Yorker&quot; magazine.
In the ensuing controversy, Welles was defended by colleagues, critics, biographers and scholars, but his reputation was damaged by its charges. The essay&#x27;s thesis was later questioned and some of Kael&#x27;s findings were also contested in later years.

Questions of authorship continued to come into sharper focus with Carringer&#x27;s 1978 thoroughly researched essay, &quot;The Scripts of &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;&quot;. Carringer studied the collection of script records—&quot;almost a day-to-day record of the history of the scripting&quot;—that was then still intact at RKO. He reviewed all seven drafts and concluded that &quot;the full evidence reveals that Welles&#x27;s contribution to the &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; script was not only substantial but definitive.&quot;

===Casting===

&quot;Citizen Kane&quot; was a rare film in that its principal roles were played by actors new to motion pictures. Ten were billed as Mercury Actors, members of the skilled repertory company assembled by Welles for the stage and radio performances of the Mercury Theatre, an independent theater company he founded with Houseman in 1937. &quot;He loved to use the Mercury players,&quot; wrote biographer Charles Higham, &quot;and consequently he launched several of them on movie careers.&quot;

The film represents the feature film debuts of William Alland, Ray Collins, Joseph Cotten, Agnes Moorehead, Erskine Sanford, Everett Sloane, Paul Stewart and Welles himself. Despite never having appeared in feature films, some of the cast members were already well known to the public. Cotten had recently become a Broadway star in the hit play &quot;The Philadelphia Story&quot; with Katharine Hepburn and Sloane was well known for his role on the radio show &quot;The Goldbergs&quot;. Mercury actor George Coulouris was a star of the stage in New York and London.

Not all of the cast came from the Mercury Players. Welles cast Dorothy Comingore, an actress who played supporting parts in films since 1934 using the name &quot;Linda Winters&quot;, as Susan Alexander Kane. A discovery of Charlie Chaplin, Comingore was recommended to Welles by Chaplin, who then met Comingore at a party in Los Angeles and immediately cast her.

Welles had met stage actress Ruth Warrick while visiting New York on a break from Hollywood and remembered her as a good fit for Emily Norton Kane, later saying that she looked the part. Warrick told Carringer that she was struck by the extraordinary resemblance between herself and Welles&#x27;s mother when she saw a photograph of Beatrice Ives Welles. She characterized her own personal relationship with Welles as motherly.

&quot;He trained us for films at the same time that he was training himself,&quot; recalled Agnes Moorehead. &quot;Orson believed in good acting, and he realized that rehearsals were needed to get the most from his actors. That was something new in Hollywood: nobody seemed interested in bringing in a group to rehearse before scenes were shot. But Orson knew it was necessary, and we rehearsed every sequence before it was shot.&quot;

When &quot;The March of Time&quot; narrator Westbrook Van Voorhis asked for $25,000 to narrate the &quot;News on the March&quot; sequence, Alland demonstrated his ability to imitate Van Voorhis, and Welles cast him.

Welles later said that casting character actor Gino Corrado in the small part of the waiter at the El Rancho broke his heart. Corrado had appeared in many Hollywood films, often as a waiter, and Welles wanted all of the actors to be new to films. Other uncredited roles went to Thomas A. Curran as Teddy Roosevelt in the faux newsreel; Richard Baer as Hillman, a man at Madison Square Garden, and a man in the &quot;News on the March&quot; screening room; and Alan Ladd, Arthur O&#x27;Connell and Louise Currie as reporters at Xanadu.

===Filming===
Production advisor Miriam Geiger quickly compiled a handmade film textbook for Welles, a practical reference book of film techniques that he studied carefully. He then taught himself filmmaking by matching its visual vocabulary to &quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot;, which he ordered from the Museum of Modern Art, and films by Frank Capra, René Clair, Fritz Lang, King Vidor and Jean Renoir. The one film he genuinely studied was John Ford&#x27;s &quot;Stagecoach&quot;, which he watched 40 times. &quot;As it turned out, the first day I ever walked onto a set was my first day as a director,&quot; Welles said. &quot;I&#x27;d learned whatever I knew in the projection room—from Ford. After dinner every night for about a month, I&#x27;d run &quot;Stagecoach&quot;, often with some different technician or department head from the studio, and ask questions. &#x27;How was this done?&#x27; &#x27;Why was this done?&#x27; It was like going to school.&quot;

Welles&#x27;s cinematographer for the film was Gregg Toland, described by Welles as &quot;just then, the number-one cameraman in the world.&quot; To Welles&#x27;s astonishment, Toland visited him at his office and said, &quot;I want you to use me on your picture.&quot; He had seen some of the Mercury stage productions (including &quot;Caesar&quot;) and said he wanted to work with someone who had never made a movie. RKO hired Toland on loan from Samuel Goldwyn Productions in the first week of June 1940. 

&quot;And he never tried to impress us that he was doing any miracles,&quot; Welles recalled. &quot;I was calling for things only a beginner would have been ignorant enough to think anybody could ever do, and there he was, &quot;doing&quot; them.&quot; Toland later explained that he wanted to work with Welles because he anticipated the first-time director&#x27;s inexperience and reputation for audacious experimentation in the theater would allow the cinematographer to try new and innovative camera techniques that typical Hollywood films would never have allowed him to do. Unaware of filmmaking protocol, Welles adjusted the lights on set as he was accustomed to doing in the theater; Toland quietly re-balanced them, and was angry when one of the crew informed Welles that he was infringing on Toland&#x27;s responsibilities. During the first few weeks of June, Welles had lengthy discussions about the film with Toland and art director Perry Ferguson in the morning, and in the afternoon and evening he worked with actors and revised the script.
On June 29, 1940—a Saturday morning when few inquisitive studio executives would be around—Welles began filming &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;. After the disappointment of having &quot;Heart of Darkness&quot; canceled, Welles followed Ferguson&#x27;s suggestion and deceived RKO into believing that he was simply shooting camera tests. &quot;But we were shooting the &quot;picture&quot;,&quot; Welles said, &quot;because we wanted to get started and be already into it before anybody knew about it.&quot;

At the time RKO executives were pressuring him to agree to direct a film called &quot;The Men from Mars&quot;, to capitalize on &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; radio broadcast. Welles said that he would consider making the project but wanted to make a different film first. At this time he did not inform them that he had already begun filming &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;.

The early footage was called &quot;Orson Welles Tests&quot; on all paperwork. The first &quot;test&quot; shot was the &quot;News on the March&quot; projection room scene, economically filmed in a real studio projection room in darkness that masked many actors who appeared in other roles later in the film. &quot;At $809 Orson did run substantially beyond the test budget of $528—to create one of the most famous scenes in movie history,&quot; wrote Barton Whaley.

The next scenes were the El Rancho nightclub scenes and the scene in which Susan attempts suicide. Welles later said that the nightclub set was available after another film had wrapped and that filming took 10 to 12 days to complete. For these scenes Welles had Comingore&#x27;s throat sprayed with chemicals to give her voice a harsh, raspy tone. Other scenes shot in secret included those in which Thompson interviews Leland and Bernstein, which were also shot on sets built for other films.
During production, the film was referred to as &quot;RKO 281&quot;. Most of the filming took place in what is now Stage 19 on the Paramount Pictures lot in Hollywood. There was some location filming at Balboa Park in San Diego and the San Diego Zoo. Photographs of German-Jewish investment banker Otto Hermann Kahn&#x27;s real-life estate Oheka Castle were used to portray the fictional Xanadu.

In the end of July, RKO approved the film and Welles was allowed to officially begin shooting, despite having already been filming &quot;tests&quot; for several weeks. Welles leaked stories to newspaper reporters that the &quot;tests&quot; had been so good that there was no need to re-shoot them. The first &quot;official&quot; scene to be shot was the breakfast montage sequence between Kane and his first wife Emily. To strategically save money and appease the RKO executives who opposed him, Welles rehearsed scenes extensively before actually shooting and filmed very few takes of each shot set-up. Welles never shot master shots for any scene after Toland told him that Ford never shot them. To appease the increasingly curious press, Welles threw a cocktail party for selected reporters, promising that they could watch a scene being filmed. When the journalists arrived Welles told them they had &quot;just finished&quot; shooting for the day but still had the party. Welles told the press that he was ahead of schedule (without factoring in the month of &quot;test shooting&quot;), thus discrediting claims that after a year in Hollywood without making a film he was a failure in the film industry.
Welles usually worked 16 to 18 hours a day on the film. He often began work at 4 a.m. since the special effects make-up used to age him for certain scenes took up to four hours to apply. Welles used this time to discuss the day&#x27;s shooting with Toland and other crew members. The special contact lenses used to make Welles look elderly proved very painful, and a doctor was employed to place them into Welles&#x27;s eyes. Welles had difficulty seeing clearly while wearing them, which caused him to badly cut his wrist when shooting the scene in which Kane breaks up the furniture in Susan&#x27;s bedroom. While shooting the scene in which Kane shouts at Gettys on the stairs of Susan Alexander&#x27;s apartment building, Welles fell ten feet; an X-ray revealed two bone chips in his ankle.

The injury required him to direct the film from a wheelchair for two weeks.&lt;ref name=&quot;cinephiliabeyond/citizen-kane&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; He eventually wore a steel brace to resume performing on camera; it is visible in the low-angle scene between Kane and Leland after Kane loses the election. For the final scene, a stage at the Selznick studio was equipped with a working furnace, and multiple takes were required to show the sled being put into the fire and the word &quot;Rosebud&quot; consumed. Paul Stewart recalled that on the ninth take the Culver City Fire Department arrived in full gear because the furnace had grown so hot the flue caught fire. &quot;Orson was delighted with the commotion&quot;, he said.

When &quot;Rosebud&quot; was burned, Welles choreographed the scene while he had composer Bernard Herrmann&#x27;s cue playing on the set.

Unlike Schaefer, many members of RKO&#x27;s board of governors did not like Welles or the control that his contract gave him. However such board members as Nelson Rockefeller and NBC chief David Sarnoff were sympathetic to Welles. Throughout production Welles had problems with these executives not respecting his contract&#x27;s stipulation of non-interference and several spies arrived on set to report what they saw to the executives. When the executives would sometimes arrive on set unannounced the entire cast and crew would suddenly start playing softball until they left. Before official shooting began the executives intercepted all copies of the script and delayed their delivery to Welles. They had one copy sent to their office in New York, resulting in it being leaked to press.

Principal shooting wrapped October 24. Welles then took several weeks away from the film for a lecture tour, during which he also scouted additional locations with Toland and Ferguson. Filming resumed November 15 with some re-shoots. Toland had to leave due to a commitment to shoot Howard Hughes&#x27; &quot;The Outlaw&quot;, but Toland&#x27;s camera crew continued working on the film and Toland was replaced by RKO cinematographer Harry J. Wild. The final day of shooting on November 30 was Kane&#x27;s death scene. Welles boasted that he only went 21 days over his official shooting schedule, without factoring in the month of &quot;camera tests&quot;. According to RKO records, the film cost $839,727. Its estimated budget had been $723,800.

===Post-production===
&quot;Citizen Kane&quot; was edited by Robert Wise and assistant editor Mark Robson. Both would become successful film directors. Wise was hired after Welles finished shooting the &quot;camera tests&quot; and began officially making the film. Wise said that Welles &quot;had an older editor assigned to him for those tests and evidently he was not too happy and asked to have somebody else. I was roughly Orson&#x27;s age and had several good credits.&quot; Wise and Robson began editing the film while it was still shooting and said that they &quot;could tell certainly that we were getting something very special. It was outstanding film day in and day out.&quot;

Welles gave Wise detailed instructions and was usually not present during the film&#x27;s editing. The film was very well planned out and intentionally shot for such post-production techniques as slow dissolves. The lack of coverage made editing easy since Welles and Toland edited the film &quot;in camera&quot; by leaving few options of how it could be put together. Wise said the breakfast table sequence took weeks to edit and get the correct &quot;timing&quot; and &quot;rhythm&quot; for the whip pans and overlapping dialogue. The &quot;News on the March&quot; sequence was edited by RKO&#x27;s newsreel division to give it authenticity. They used stock footage from Pathé News and the General Film Library.

During post-production Welles and special effects artist Linwood G. Dunn experimented with an optical printer to improve certain scenes that Welles found unsatisfactory from the footage. Whereas Welles was often immediately pleased with Wise&#x27;s work, he would require Dunn and post-production audio engineer James G. Stewart to re-do their work several times until he was satisfied.

Welles hired Bernard Herrmann to compose the film&#x27;s score. Where most Hollywood film scores were written quickly, in as few as two or three weeks after filming was completed, Herrmann was given 12 weeks to write the music. He had sufficient time to do his own orchestrations and conducting, and worked on the film reel by reel as it was shot and cut. He wrote complete musical pieces for some of the montages, and Welles edited many of the scenes to match their length.
==Style==
Film scholars and historians view &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; as Welles&#x27;s attempt to create a new style of filmmaking by studying various forms of it and combining them into one. However, Welles stated that his love for cinema began only when he started working on the film. When asked where he got the confidence as a first-time director to direct a film so radically different from contemporary cinema, he responded, &quot;Ignorance, ignorance, sheer ignorance—you know there&#x27;s no confidence to equal it. It&#x27;s only when you know something about a profession, I think, that you&#x27;re timid or careful.&quot;

David Bordwell wrote that &quot;The best way to understand &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; is to stop worshipping it as a triumph of technique.&quot; Bordwell argues that the film did not invent any of its famous techniques such as deep focus cinematography, shots of the ceilings, chiaroscuro lighting and temporal jump-cuts, and that many of these stylistics had been used in German Expressionist films of the 1920s, such as &quot;The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari&quot;. But Bordwell asserts that the film did put them all together for the first time and perfected the medium in one single film. In a 1948 interview, D. W. Griffith said, &quot;I loved &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; and particularly loved the ideas he took from me.&quot;

Arguments against the film&#x27;s cinematic innovations were made as early as 1946 when French historian Georges Sadoul wrote, &quot;The film is an encyclopedia of old techniques.&quot; He pointed out such examples as compositions that used both the foreground and the background in the films of Auguste and Louis Lumière, special effects used in the films of Georges Méliès, shots of the ceiling in Erich von Stroheim&#x27;s &quot;Greed&quot; and newsreel montages in the films of Dziga Vertov.

French film critic André Bazin defended the film, writing: &quot;In this respect, the accusation of plagiarism could very well be extended to the film&#x27;s use of panchromatic film or its exploitation of the properties of gelatinous silver halide.&quot; Bazin disagreed with Sadoul&#x27;s comparison to Lumière&#x27;s cinematography since &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; used more sophisticated lenses, but acknowledged that it had similarities to such previous works as &quot;The Power and the Glory&quot;. Bazin stated that &quot;even if Welles did not invent the cinematic devices employed in &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;, one should nevertheless credit him with the invention of their &quot;meaning&quot;.&quot; Bazin championed the techniques in the film for its depiction of heightened reality, but Bordwell believed that the film&#x27;s use of special effects contradicted some of Bazin&#x27;s theories.

===Storytelling techniques===
&quot;Citizen Kane&quot; rejects the traditional linear, chronological narrative and tells Kane&#x27;s story entirely in flashbacks using different points of view, many of them from Kane&#x27;s aged and forgetful associates, the cinematic equivalent of the unreliable narrator in literature. Welles also dispenses with the idea of a single storyteller and uses multiple narrators to recount Kane&#x27;s life, a technique not used previously in Hollywood films. Each narrator recounts a different part of Kane&#x27;s life, with each story overlapping another. The film depicts Kane as an enigma, a complicated man who leaves viewers with more questions than answers as to his character, such as the newsreel footage where he is attacked for being both a communist and a fascist.

The technique of flashbacks had been used in earlier films, notably &quot;The Power and the Glory&quot; (1933), but no film was as immersed in it as &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;. Thompson the reporter acts as a surrogate for the audience, questioning Kane&#x27;s associates and piecing together his life.

Films typically had an &quot;omniscient perspective&quot; at the time, which Marilyn Fabe says give the audience the &quot;illusion that we are looking with impunity into a world which is unaware of our gaze&quot;. &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; also begins in that fashion until the &quot;News on the March&quot; sequence, after which we the audience see the film through the perspectives of others. The &quot;News on the March&quot; sequence gives an overview of Kane&#x27;s entire life (and the film&#x27;s entire story) at the beginning of the film, leaving the audience without the typical suspense of wondering how it will end. Instead, the film&#x27;s repetitions of events compels the audience to analyze and wonder why Kane&#x27;s life happened the way that it did, under the pretext of finding out what &quot;Rosebud&quot; means. The film then returns to the omniscient perspective in the final scene, when only the audience discovers what &quot;Rosebud&quot; is.

===Cinematography===
The most innovative technical aspect of &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; is the extended use of deep focus, where the foreground, background and everything in between are all in sharp focus. Cinematographer Toland did this through his experimentation with lenses and lighting. Toland described the achievement in an article for &quot;Theatre Arts&quot; magazine, made possible by the sensitivity of modern speed film:

New developments in the science of motion picture photography are not abundant at this advanced stage of the game but periodically one is perfected to make this a greater art. Of these I am in an excellent position to discuss what is termed &quot;Pan-focus&quot;, as I have been active for two years in its development and used it for the first time in &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;. Through its use, it is possible to photograph action from a range of eighteen inches from the camera lens to over two hundred feet away, with extreme foreground and background figures and action both recorded in sharp relief. Hitherto, the camera had to be focused either for a close or a distant shot, all efforts to encompass both at the same time resulting in one or the other being out of focus. This handicap necessitated the breaking up of a scene into long and short angles, with much consequent loss of realism. With pan-focus, the camera, like the human eye, sees an entire panorama at once, with everything clear and lifelike.

Another unorthodox method used in the film was the low-angle shots facing upwards, thus allowing ceilings to be shown in the background of several scenes. Every set was built with a ceiling. which broke with studio convention, and many were constructed of fabric that concealed microphones. Welles felt that the camera should show what the eye sees, and that it was a bad theatrical convention to pretend that there was no ceiling—&quot;a big lie in order to get all those terrible lights up there,&quot; he said. He became fascinated with the look of low angles, which made even dull interiors look interesting. One extremely low angle is used to photograph the encounter between Kane and Leland after Kane loses the election. A hole was dug for the camera, which required drilling into the concrete floor.

Welles credited Toland on the same title card as himself. &quot;It&#x27;s impossible to say how much I owe to Gregg,&quot; he said. &quot;He was superb.&quot; He called Toland &quot;the best director of photography that ever existed.&quot;

===Sound===
&quot;Citizen Kane&quot;″s sound was recorded by Bailey Fesler and re-recorded in post-production by audio engineer James G. Stewart, both of whom had worked in radio. Stewart said that Hollywood films never deviated from a basic pattern of how sound could be recorded or used, but with Welles &quot;deviation from the pattern was possible because he demanded it.&quot; Although the film is known for its complex soundtrack, much of the audio is heard as it was recorded by Fesler and without manipulation.

Welles used techniques from radio like overlapping dialogue. The scene in which characters sing &quot;Oh, Mr. Kane&quot; was especially complicated and required mixing several soundtracks together. He also used different &quot;sound perspectives&quot; to create the illusion of distances, such as in scenes at Xanadu where characters speak to each other at far distances. Welles experimented with sound in post-production, creating audio montages, and chose to create all of the sound effects for the film instead of using RKO&#x27;s library of sound effects.

Welles used an aural technique from radio called the &quot;lightning-mix&quot;. Welles used this technique to link complex montage sequences via a series of related sounds or phrases. For example, Kane grows from a child into a young man in just two shots. As Thatcher hands eight-year-old Kane a sled and wishes him a Merry Christmas, the sequence suddenly jumps to a shot of Thatcher fifteen years later, completing the sentence he began in both the previous shot and the chronological past. Other radio techniques include using a number of voices, each saying a sentence or sometimes merely a fragment of a sentence, and splicing the dialogue together in quick succession, such as the projection room scene. The film&#x27;s sound cost $16,996, but was originally budgeted at $7,288.

Film critic and director François Truffaut wrote that &quot;Before &quot;Kane&quot;, nobody in Hollywood knew how to set music properly in movies. &quot;Kane&quot; was the first, in fact the only, great film that uses radio techniques. ... A lot of filmmakers know enough to follow Auguste Renoir&#x27;s advice to fill the eyes with images at all costs, but only Orson Welles understood that the sound track had to be filled in the same way.&quot; Cedric Belfrage of &quot;The Clipper&quot; wrote &quot;of all of the delectable flavours that linger on the palate after seeing &quot;Kane&quot;, the use of sound is the strongest.&quot;

===Make-up===
The make-up for &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; was created and applied by Maurice Seiderman, a junior member of the RKO make-up department. He had not been accepted into the union, which recognized him as only an apprentice, but RKO nevertheless used him to make up principal actors. &quot;Apprentices were not supposed to make up any principals, only extras, and an apprentice could not be on a set without a journeyman present,&quot; wrote make-up artist Dick Smith, who became friends with Seiderman in 1979. &quot;During his years at RKO I suspect these rules were probably overlooked often.&quot; &quot;Seiderman had gained a reputation as one of the most inventive and creatively precise up-and-coming makeup men in Hollywood,&quot; wrote biographer Frank Brady.

On an early tour of RKO, Welles met Seiderman in the small make-up lab that he created for himself in an unused dressing room. &quot;Welles fastened on to him at once,&quot; wrote biographer Charles Higham, as Seiderman had developed his own makeup methods &quot;that ensured complete naturalness of expression—a naturalness unrivaled in Hollywood.&quot; Seiderman developed a thorough plan for aging the principal characters, first making a plaster cast of the face of each of the actors who aged. He made a plaster mold of Welles&#x27;s body down to the hips.

&quot;My sculptural techniques for the characters&#x27; aging were handled by adding pieces of white modeling clay, which matched the plaster, onto the surface of each bust,&quot; Seiderman told Norman Gambill. When Seiderman achieved the desired effect, he cast the clay pieces in a soft plastic material that he formulated himself. These appliances were then placed onto the plaster bust and a four-piece mold was made for each phase of aging. The castings were then fully painted and paired with the appropriate wig for evaluation.

Before the actors went before the cameras each day, the pliable pieces were applied directly to their faces to recreate Seiderman&#x27;s sculptural image. The facial surface was underpainted in a flexible red plastic compound; The red ground resulted in a warmth of tone that was picked up by the panchromatic film. Over that was applied liquid grease paint, and finally a colorless translucent talcum. Seiderman created the effect of skin pores on Kane&#x27;s face by stippling the surface with a negative cast made from an orange peel.

Welles often arrived on the set at 2:30 am, as application of the sculptural make-up took 3½ hours for the oldest incarnation of Kane. The make-up included appliances to age Welles&#x27;s shoulders, breast, and stomach. &quot;In the film and production photographs, you can see that Kane had a belly that overhung,&quot; Seiderman said. &quot;That was not a costume, it was the rubber sculpture that created the image. You could see how Kane&#x27;s silk shirt clung wetly to the character&#x27;s body. It could not have been done any other way.&quot;

Seiderman worked with Charles Wright on the wigs. These went over a flexible skull cover that Seiderman created and sewed into place with elastic thread. When he found the wigs too full, he untied one hair at a time to alter their shape. Kane&#x27;s mustache was inserted into the makeup surface a few hairs at a time, to realistically vary the color and texture. He also made scleral lenses for Welles, Dorothy Comingore, George Coulouris, and Everett Sloane to dull the brightness of their young eyes. The lenses took a long time to fit properly, and Seiderman began work on them before devising any of the other makeup. &quot;I painted them to age in phases, ending with the blood vessels and the &quot;arcus senilis&quot; of old age.&quot; Seiderman&#x27;s tour de force was the breakfast montage, shot all in one day. &quot;Twelve years, two years shot at each scene,&quot; he said.

The major studios gave screen credit for make-up only to the department head. When RKO make-up department head Mel Berns refused to share credit with Seiderman, who was only an apprentice, Welles told Berns that there would be no make-up credit. Welles signed a large advertisement in the Los Angeles newspaper:

THANKS TO EVERYBODY WHO GETS SCREEN CREDIT FOR &quot;CITIZEN KANE&quot;AND THANKS TO THOSE WHO DON&#x27;TTO ALL THE ACTORS, THE CREW, THE OFFICE, THE MUSICIANS, EVERYBODYAND PARTICULARLY TO MAURICE SEIDERMAN, THE BEST MAKE-UP MAN IN THE WORLD

===Sets===
Although credited as an assistant, the film&#x27;s art direction was done by Perry Ferguson. Welles and Ferguson got along during their collaboration. In the weeks before production began Welles, Toland and Ferguson met regularly to discuss the film and plan every shot, set design and prop. Ferguson would take notes during these discussions and create rough designs of the sets and story boards for individual shots. After Welles approved the rough sketches, Ferguson made miniature models for Welles and Toland to experiment on with a periscope in order to rehearse and perfect each shot. Ferguson then had detailed drawings made for the set design, including the film&#x27;s lighting design. The set design was an integral part of the film&#x27;s overall look and Toland&#x27;s cinematography.

In the original script the Great Hall at Xanadu was modeled after the Great Hall in Hearst Castle and its design included a mixture of Renaissance and Gothic styles. &quot;The Hearstian element is brought out in the almost perverse juxtaposition of incongruous architectural styles and motifs,&quot; wrote Carringer. Before RKO cut the film&#x27;s budget, Ferguson&#x27;s designs were more elaborate and resembled the production designs of early Cecil B. DeMille films and &quot;Intolerance&quot;. The budget cuts reduced Ferguson&#x27;s budget by 33 percent and his work cost $58,775 total, which was below average at that time.

To save costs Ferguson and Welles re-wrote scenes in Xanadu&#x27;s living room and transported them to the Great Hall. A large staircase from another film was found and used at no additional cost. When asked about the limited budget, Ferguson said &quot;Very often—as in that much-discussed &#x27;Xanadu&#x27; set in &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;—we can make a foreground piece, a background piece, and imaginative lighting suggests a great deal more on the screen than actually exists on the stage.&quot; According to the film&#x27;s official budget there were 81 sets built, but Ferguson said there were between 106 and 116.

Still photographs of Oheka Castle in Huntington, New York, were used in the opening montage, representing Kane&#x27;s Xanadu estate. Ferguson also designed statues from Kane&#x27;s collection with styles ranging from Greek to German Gothic. The sets were also built to accommodate Toland&#x27;s camera movements. Walls were built to fold and furniture could quickly be moved. The film&#x27;s famous ceilings were made out of muslin fabric and camera boxes were built into the floors for low angle shots. Welles later said that he was proud that the film production value looked much more expensive than the film&#x27;s budget. Although neither worked with Welles again, Toland and Ferguson collaborated in several films in the 1940s.

===Special effects===
The film&#x27;s special effects were supervised by RKO department head Vernon L. Walker. Welles pioneered several visual effects to cheaply shoot things like crowd scenes and large interior spaces. For example, the scene in which the camera in the opera house rises dramatically to the rafters, to show the workmen showing a lack of appreciation for Susan Alexander Kane&#x27;s performance, was shot by a camera craning upwards over the performance scene, then a curtain wipe to a miniature of the upper regions of the house, and then another curtain wipe matching it again with the scene of the workmen. Other scenes effectively employed miniatures to make the film look much more expensive than it truly was, such as various shots of Xanadu.

Some shots included rear screen projection in the background, such as Thompson&#x27;s interview of Leland and some of the ocean backgrounds at Xanadu. Bordwell claims that the scene where Thatcher agrees to be Kane&#x27;s guardian used rear screen projection to depict young Kane in the background, despite this scene being cited as a prime example of Toland&#x27;s deep focus cinematography. A special effects camera crew from Walker&#x27;s department was required for the extreme close-up shots such as Kane&#x27;s lips when he says &quot;Rosebud&quot; and the shot of the typewriter typing Susan&#x27;s bad review.

Optical effects artist Dunn claimed that &quot;up to 80 percent of some reels was optically printed.&quot; These shots were traditionally attributed to Toland for years. The optical printer improved some of the deep focus shots. One problem with the optical printer was that it sometimes created excessive graininess, such as the optical zoom out of the snow globe. Welles decided to superimpose snow falling to mask the graininess in these shots. Toland said that he disliked the results of the optical printer, but acknowledged that &quot;RKO special effects expert Vernon Walker, ASC, and his staff handled their part of the production—a by no means inconsiderable assignment—with ability and fine understanding.&quot;

Any time deep focus was impossible—as in the scene in which Kane finishes a negative review of Susan&#x27;s opera while at the same time firing the person who began writing the review—an optical printer was used to make the whole screen appear in focus, visually layering one piece of film onto another. However, some apparently deep-focus shots were the result of in-camera effects, as in the famous scene in which Kane breaks into Susan&#x27;s room after her suicide attempt. In the background, Kane and another man break into the room, while simultaneously the medicine bottle and a glass with a spoon in it are in closeup in the foreground. The shot was an in-camera matte shot. The foreground was shot first, with the background dark. Then the background was lit, the foreground darkened, the film rewound, and the scene re-shot with the background action.

===Music===
&quot;Kane&quot; was the first film scored by Bernard Herrmann, who had composed for Welles for his &quot;Mercury Theatre on the Air&quot;. Because it was Herrmann&#x27;s first motion picture score, RKO wanted to pay him only a small fee, but Welles insisted he be paid at the same rate as Max Steiner.

The score established Herrmann as an important new film composer and eschewed the typical Hollywood practice of scoring a film with virtually non-stop music. Instead Herrmann used what he later described as &quot;radio scoring&quot;, musical cues typically 5–15 seconds in length that bridge the action or suggest a different emotional response. The breakfast montage sequence begins with a graceful waltz theme and gets darker with each variation on that theme as the passage of time leads to the hardening of Kane&#x27;s personality and the breakdown of his first marriage.

Herrmann realized that musicians slated to play his music were hired for individual unique sessions; there was no need to write for existing ensembles. This meant that he was free to score for unusual combinations of instruments, even instruments that are not commonly heard. In the opening sequence, for example, the tour of Kane&#x27;s estate Xanadu, Herrmann introduces a recurring leitmotif played by low woodwinds, including a quartet of alto flutes.

For Susan Alexander Kane&#x27;s operatic sequence, Welles suggested that Herrmann compose a witty parody of a Mary Garden vehicle, an aria from &quot;Salammbô&quot;. &quot;Our problem was to create something that would give the audience the feeling of the quicksand into which this simple little girl, having a charming but small voice, is suddenly thrown,&quot; Herrmann said. Writing in the style of a 19th-century French Oriental opera, Herrmann put the aria in a key that would force the singer to strain to reach the high notes, culminating in a high D, well outside the range of Susan Alexander. Soprano Jean Forward dubbed the vocal part for Comingore. Houseman claimed to have written the libretto, based on Jean Racine&#x27;s &quot;Athalie&quot; and &quot;Phedre&quot;, although some confusion remains since Lucille Fletcher remembered preparing the lyrics. Fletcher, then Herrmann&#x27;s wife, wrote the libretto for his opera &quot;Wuthering Heights&quot;.

Music enthusiasts consider the scene in which Susan Alexander Kane attempts to sing the famous cavatina &quot;Una voce poco fa&quot; from &quot;Il barbiere di Siviglia&quot; by Gioachino Rossini with vocal coach Signor Matiste as especially memorable for depicting the horrors of learning music through mistakes.

Some incidental music came from other sources. Welles heard the tune used for the publisher&#x27;s theme, &quot;Oh, Mr. Kane&quot;, in Mexico. Called &quot;A Poco No&quot;, the song was written by Pepe Guízar and special lyrics were written by Herman Ruby. &quot;In a Mizz&quot;, a 1939 jazz song by Charlie Barnet and Haven Johnson, bookends Thompson&#x27;s second interview of Susan Alexander Kane. &quot;I kind of based the whole scene around that song,&quot; Welles said. &quot;The music is by Nat Cole—it&#x27;s his trio.&quot; Later—beginning with the lyrics, &quot;It can&#x27;t be love&quot;—&quot;In a Mizz&quot; is performed at the Everglades picnic, framing the fight in the tent between Susan and Kane. Musicians including bandleader Cee Pee Johnson (drums), Alton Redd (vocals), Raymond Tate (trumpet), Buddy Collette (alto sax) and Buddy Banks (tenor sax) are featured. All of the music used in the newsreel came from the RKO music library, edited at Welles&#x27;s request by the newsreel department to achieve what Herrmann called &quot;their own crazy way of cutting&quot;. The &quot;News on the March&quot; theme that accompanies the newsreel titles is &quot;Belgian March&quot; by Anthony Collins, from the film &quot;Nurse Edith Cavell&quot;. Other examples are an excerpt from Alfred Newman&#x27;s score for &quot;Gunga Din&quot; (the exploration of Xanadu), Roy Webb&#x27;s theme for the film &quot;Reno&quot; (the growth of Kane&#x27;s empire), and bits of Webb&#x27;s score for &quot;Five Came Back&quot; (introducing Walter Parks Thatcher).

Herrmann explained his use of motifs: 
I am not a great believer in the leitmotiv as a device for motion picture music—but in this film its use was practically imperative, because of the story itself and the manner in which it is unfolded. 

There are two main motifs. One—a simple four-note figure in the brass—is that of Kane&#x27;s power. It is given out in the first two bars of the film. The second motif is that of Rosebud. Heard as a solo in the vibraphone, it first appears in the death scene at the very beginning of the picture. It is heard again and again throughout the film in various guises, and if followed closely, is a clue to the ultimate identity of Rosebud itself.

The motif of power is also transformed, becoming a vigorous piece of ragtime, a hornpipe polka and, at the end of the picture, a commentary on Kane&#x27;s life.

In 1972, Herrmann said, &quot;I was fortunate to start my career with a film like &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;, it&#x27;s been a downhill run ever since!&quot; Welles loved Herrmann&#x27;s score and told director Henry Jaglom that it was 50 percent responsible for the film&#x27;s artistic success.

===Editing===
One of the editing techniques used in &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; was the use of montage to collapse time and space, using an episodic sequence on the same set while the characters changed costume and make-up between cuts so that the scene following each cut would look as if it took place in the same location, but at a time long after the previous cut. In the breakfast montage, Welles chronicles the breakdown of Kane&#x27;s first marriage in five vignettes that condense 16 years of story time into two minutes of screen time. Welles said that the idea for the breakfast scene &quot;was stolen from &quot;The Long Christmas Dinner&quot; by Thornton Wilder ... a one-act play, which is a long Christmas dinner that takes you through something like 60 years of a family&#x27;s life.&quot; The film often uses long dissolves to signify the passage of time and its psychological effect of the characters, such as the scene in which the abandoned sled is covered with snow after the young Kane is sent away with Thatcher.

Welles was influenced by the editing theories of Sergei Eisenstein by using jarring cuts that caused &quot;sudden graphic or associative contrasts&quot;, such as the cut from Kane&#x27;s deathbed to the beginning of the &quot;News on the March&quot; sequence and a sudden shot of a shrieking cockatoo at the beginning of Raymond&#x27;s flashback. Although the film typically favors mise-en-scène over montage, the scene in which Kane goes to Susan Alexander&#x27;s apartment after first meeting her is the only one that is primarily cut as close-ups with shots and counter shots between Kane and Susan. Fabe says that &quot;by using a standard Hollywood technique sparingly, [Welles] revitalizes its psychological expressiveness.&quot;

==Sources==

Welles never confirmed a principal source for the character of Charles Foster Kane. Houseman wrote that Kane is a synthesis of different personalities, with Hearst&#x27;s life used as the main source. Some events and details were invented, and Houseman wrote that he and Mankiewicz also &quot;grafted anecdotes from other giants of journalism, including Pulitzer, Northcliffe and Mank&#x27;s first boss, Herbert Bayard Swope&quot;. Welles said, &quot;Mr. Hearst was quite a bit like Kane, although Kane isn&#x27;t really founded on Hearst in particular. Many people sat for it, so to speak&quot;. He specifically acknowledged that aspects of Kane were drawn from the lives of two business tycoons familiar from his youth in Chicago—Samuel Insull and Harold Fowler McCormick.

The character of Jedediah Leland was based on drama critic Ashton Stevens, George Stevens&#x27;s uncle and Welles&#x27;s close boyhood friend. Some detail came from Mankiewicz&#x27;s own experience as a drama critic in New York.

Many assumed that the character of Susan Alexander Kane was based on Marion Davies, Hearst&#x27;s mistress whose career he managed. This assumption was a major reason Hearst tried to destroy &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;. Welles denied that the character was based on Davies, whom he called &quot;an extraordinary woman—nothing like the character Dorothy Comingore played in the movie.&quot; He cited Insull&#x27;s building of the Chicago Opera House, and McCormick&#x27;s lavish promotion of the opera career of his second wife, Ganna Walska, as direct influences on the screenplay.

The character of political boss Jim W. Gettys is based on Charles F. Murphy, a leader in New York City&#x27;s infamous Tammany Hall political machine.

Welles credited &quot;Rosebud&quot; to Mankiewicz. Biographer Richard Meryman wrote that the symbol of Mankiewicz&#x27;s own damaged childhood was a treasured bicycle, stolen while he visited the public library and not replaced by his family as punishment. He regarded it as the prototype of Charles Foster Kane&#x27;s sled. In his 2015 Welles biography, Patrick McGilligan reported that Mankiewicz himself stated that the word &quot;Rosebud&quot; was taken from the name of a famous racehorse, Old Rosebud. Mankiewicz had a bet on the horse in the 1914 Kentucky Derby, which he won, and McGilligan wrote that &quot;Old Rosebud symbolized his lost youth, and the break with his family&quot;. In testimony for a copyright infringement suit brought by Hearst biographer Ferdinand Lundberg, Mankiewicz said, &quot;I had undergone psycho-analysis, and Rosebud, under circumstances slightly resembling the circumstances in [&quot;Citizen Kane&quot;], played a prominent part.&quot; Gore Vidal has argued in the &quot;New York Review of Books&quot; that &quot;Rosebud was what Hearst called his friend Marion Davies&#x27;s clitoris&quot;.

The &quot;News on the March&quot; sequence that begins the film satirizes the journalistic style of &quot;The March of Time&quot;, the news documentary and dramatization series presented in movie theaters by Time Inc. From 1935 to 1938 Welles was a member of the uncredited company of actors that presented the original radio version.

Houseman claimed that banker Walter P. Thatcher was loosely based on J. P. Morgan. Bernstein was named for Dr. Maurice Bernstein, appointed Welles&#x27;s guardian; Sloane&#x27;s portrayal was said to be based on Bernard Herrmann. Herbert Carter, editor of &quot;The Inquirer&quot;, was named for actor Jack Carter.

==Political themes==
Laura Mulvey explored the anti-fascist themes of &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; in her 1992 monograph for the British Film Institute. The &quot;News on the March&quot; newsreel presents Kane keeping company with Hitler and other dictators while he smugly assures the public that there will be no war. She wrote that the film reflects &quot;the battle between intervention and isolationism&quot; then being waged in the United States; the film was released six months before the attack on Pearl Harbor, while President Franklin D. Roosevelt was laboring to win public opinion for entering World War II. &quot;In the rhetoric of &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;,&quot; Mulvey writes, &quot;the destiny of isolationism is realised in metaphor: in Kane&#x27;s own fate, dying wealthy and lonely, surrounded by the detritus of European culture and history.&quot;

Journalist Ignacio Ramonet has cited the film as an early example of mass media manipulation of public opinion and the power that media conglomerates have on influencing the democratic process. He believes that this early example of a media mogul influencing politics is outdated and that today &quot;there are media groups with the power of a thousand Citizen Kanes.&quot; Media mogul Rupert Murdoch is sometimes labeled as a latter-day &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;.

Comparisons have also been made between the career and character of Donald Trump and Charles Foster Kane. &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; is reported to be one of Trump&#x27;s favorite films, and his biographer Tim O&#x27;Brien has said that Trump is fascinated by and identifies with Kane.

==Pre-release controversy==
To ensure that Hearst&#x27;s life&#x27;s influence on &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; was a secret, Welles limited access to dailies and managed the film&#x27;s publicity. A December 1940 feature story in &quot;Stage&quot; magazine compared the film&#x27;s narrative to &quot;Faust&quot; and made no mention of Hearst.

The film was scheduled to premiere at RKO&#x27;s flagship theater Radio City Music Hall on February 14, but in early January 1941 Welles was not finished with post-production work and told RKO that it still needed its musical score. Writers for national magazines had early deadlines and so a rough cut was previewed for a select few on January 3, 1941 for such magazines as &quot;Life&quot;, &quot;Look&quot; and &quot;Redbook&quot;. Gossip columnist Hedda Hopper (an arch-rival of Louella Parsons, the Hollywood correspondent for Hearst papers) showed up to the screening uninvited. Most of the critics at the preview said that they liked the film and gave it good advanced reviews. Hopper wrote negatively about it, calling the film a &quot;vicious and irresponsible attack on a great man&quot; and criticizing its corny writing and old fashioned photography.

&quot;Friday&quot; magazine ran an article drawing point-by-point comparisons between Kane and Hearst and documented how Welles had led on Parsons. Up until this Welles had been friendly with Parsons. The magazine quoted Welles as saying that he could not understand why she was so nice to him and that she should &quot;wait until the woman finds out that the picture&#x27;s about her boss.&quot; Welles immediately denied making the statement and the editor of &quot;Friday&quot; admitted that it might be false. Welles apologized to Parsons and assured her that he had never made that remark.
Shortly after &quot;Friday&quot;″s article, Hearst sent Parsons an angry letter complaining that he had learned about &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; from Hopper and not her. The incident made a fool of Parsons and compelled her to start attacking Welles and the film. Parsons demanded a private screening of the film and personally threatened Schaefer on Hearst&#x27;s behalf, first with a lawsuit and then with a vague threat of consequences for everyone in Hollywood. On January 10 Parsons and two lawyers working for Hearst were given a private screening of the film. James G. Stewart was present at the screening and said that she walked out of the film.

Soon after, Parsons called Schaefer and threatened RKO with a lawsuit if they released &quot;Kane&quot;. She also contacted the management of Radio City Music Hall and demanded that they should not screen it. The next day, the front page headline in &quot;Daily Variety&quot; read, &quot;HEARST BANS RKO FROM PAPERS.&quot; Hearst began this ban by suppressing promotion of RKO&#x27;s &quot;Kitty Foyle&quot;, but in two weeks the ban was lifted for everything except &quot;Kane&quot;.

When Schaefer did not submit to Parsons she called other studio heads and made more threats on behalf of Hearst to expose the private lives of people throughout the entire film industry. Welles was then threatened with an exposé about his romance with the married actress Dolores del Río, who wanted the affair kept secret until her divorce was finalized. In a statement to journalists Welles denied that the film was about Hearst. Hearst began preparing an injunction against the film for libel and invasion of privacy, but Welles&#x27;s lawyer told him that he doubted Hearst would proceed due to the negative publicity and required testimony that an injunction would bring.

&quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; ran a front-page story on January 13 that Hearst papers were about to run a series of editorials attacking Hollywood&#x27;s practice of hiring refugees and immigrants for jobs that could be done by Americans. The goal was to put pressure on the other studios to force RKO to shelve &quot;Kane&quot;. Many of those immigrants had fled Europe after the rise of fascism and feared losing the haven of the United States. Soon afterwards, Schaefer was approached by Nicholas Schenck, head of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer&#x27;s parent company, with an offer on the behalf of Louis B. Mayer and other Hollywood executives to RKO Pictures of $805,000 to destroy all prints of the film and burn the negative.

Once RKO&#x27;s legal team reassured Schaefer, the studio announced on January 21 that &quot;Kane&quot; would be released as scheduled, and with one of the largest promotional campaigns in the studio&#x27;s history. Schaefer brought Welles to New York City for a private screening of the film with the New York corporate heads of the studios and their lawyers. There was no objection to its release provided that certain changes, including the removal or softening of specific references that might offend Hearst, were made. Welles agreed and cut the running time from 122 minutes to 119 minutes. The cuts satisfied the corporate lawyers.

==Trailer==

Now that the film was completed, RKO had to sell it to moviegoers. The usual method was for a studio film editor to compile a montage of highlights for a coming-attractions trailer, which would be shown to audiences shortly before the film came to their local theater. The trailer for &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; was something special, and like the feature itself was radically different from the general run. It was really a pioneer of what is now known as a teaser trailer, which piqued viewers&#x27; curiosity about the film without actually revealing any of the content.

Written and directed by Welles at Toland&#x27;s suggestion, the &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; trailer does not feature a single second of footage of the actual film itself, but acts as a wholly original, tongue-in-cheek, pseudo-documentary piece on the film&#x27;s production. Filmed at the same time as &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; itself, it offers the only existing behind-the-scenes footage of the film. The trailer, shot by staff cameraman Harry Wild instead of Toland, follows an unseen Welles as he provides narration for a tour around the film set, introductions to the film&#x27;s core cast members, and a brief overview of Kane&#x27;s character. The trailer also contains a number of trick shots, including one of Everett Sloane appearing at first to be running into the camera, which turns out to be the reflection of the camera in a mirror.

At the time, it was almost unprecedented for a film trailer to not actually feature anything of the film itself; and while &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; is frequently cited as a groundbreaking, influential film, Simon Callow argues its trailer was no less original in its approach. Callow writes that it has &quot;great playful charm ... it is a miniature documentary, almost an introduction to the cinema ... Teasing, charming, completely original, it is a sort of conjuring trick: Without his face appearing once on the screen, Welles entirely dominates its five [sic] minutes&#x27; duration.&quot;

==Release==

Radio City Music Hall&#x27;s management refused to screen &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; for its premiere. A possible factor was Parsons&#x27;s threat that &quot;The American Weekly&quot; would run a defamatory story on the grandfather of major RKO stockholder Nelson Rockefeller. Other exhibitors feared being sued for libel by Hearst and refused to show the film. In March Welles threatened the RKO board of governors with a lawsuit if they did not release the film. Schaefer stood by Welles and opposed the board of governors. When RKO still delayed the film&#x27;s release Welles offered to buy the film for $1 million and the studio finally agreed to release the film on May 1.

Schaefer managed to book a few theaters willing to show the film. Hearst papers refused to accept advertising. RKO&#x27;s publicity advertisements for the film erroneously promoted it as a love story.

&quot;Kane&quot; opened at the RKO Palace Theatre on Broadway in New York on May 1, 1941, in Chicago on May 6, and in Los Angeles on May 8. Welles said that at the Chicago premiere that he attended the theater was almost empty.

===Contemporary response===
The day following the premiere of &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;, &quot;The New York Times&quot; critic Bosley Crowther wrote that &quot;it comes close to being the most sensational film ever made in Hollywood... Count on Mr. Welles: he doesn&#x27;t do things by halves. ... Upon the screen he discovered an area large enough for his expansive whims to have free play. And the consequence is that he has made a picture of tremendous and overpowering scope, not in physical extent so much as in its rapid and graphic rotation of thoughts. Mr. Welles has put upon the screen a motion picture that really moves&quot;.

&quot;The Washington Post&quot; called it &quot;one of the most important films in the history&quot; of filmmaking. &quot;The Washington Evening Star&quot; said Welles was a genius who created &quot;a superbly dramatic biography of another genius&quot; and &quot;a picture that is revolutionary&quot;. &quot;New York Daily News&quot; critic Kate Cameron called it &quot;one of the most interesting and technically superior films that has ever come out of a Hollywood studio&quot;. &quot;New York World-Telegram&quot; critic William Boehnel said that the film was &quot;staggering and belongs at once among the greatest screen achievements&quot;. &quot;Time&quot; magazine wrote that &quot;it has found important new techniques in picture-making and story-telling.&quot; &quot;Life&quot; magazine&#x27;s review said that &quot;few movies have ever come from Hollywood with such powerful narrative, such original technique, such exciting photography.&quot; John C. Mosher of &quot;The New Yorker&quot; called the film&#x27;s style &quot;like fresh air&quot; and raved &quot;Something new has come to the movie world at last.&quot; Anthony Bower of &quot;The Nation&quot; called it &quot;brilliant&quot; and praised the cinematography and performances by Welles, Comingore and Cotten. John O&#x27;Hara&#x27;s &quot;Newsweek&quot; review called it the best picture he&#x27;d ever seen and said Welles was &quot;the best actor in the history of acting.&quot; Welles called O&#x27;Hara&#x27;s review &quot;the greatest review that anybody ever had.&quot;

In the UK C. A. Lejeune of &quot;The Observer&quot; called it &quot;The most exciting film that has come out of Hollywood in twenty-five years&quot; and Dilys Powell of &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; said the film&#x27;s style was made &quot;with the ease and boldness and resource of one who controls and is not controlled by his medium.&quot; Edward Tangye Lean of &quot;Horizon&quot; praised the film&#x27;s technical style, calling it &quot;perhaps a decade ahead of its contemporaries.&quot;

Other reviews were mixed. Edwin Schallert of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; said it was brilliant and skillful at times, but had an ending that &quot;rather fizzled&quot;. The &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; called the film interesting and different but &quot;its sacrifice of simplicity to eccentricity robs it of distinction and general entertainment value&quot;. Otis Ferguson of &quot;The New Republic&quot; said it was &quot;the boldest free-hand stroke in major screen production since Griffith and Bitzer were running wild to unshackle the camera&quot;, but also criticized its style, calling it a &quot;retrogression in film technique&quot; and stating that &quot;it holds no great place&quot; in film history. Ferguson reacted to some of the film&#x27;s celebrated visual techniques by calling them &quot;just willful dabbling&quot; and &quot;the old shell game.&quot; In a rare film review, filmmaker Erich von Stroheim criticized the film&#x27;s story and non-linear structure, but praised the technical style and performances, and wrote &quot;Whatever the truth may be about it, &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; is a great picture and will go down in screen history. More power to Welles!&quot;

Some prominent critics wrote negative reviews. None of them dismissed the film as being altogether bad, noting the film&#x27;s undeniable technical effects, but they did find fault with the narrative. Eileen Creelman of &quot;The New York Sun&quot; called it &quot;a cold picture, unemotional, a puzzle rather than a drama&quot;. In his 1941 review for &quot;Sur&quot;, Jorge Luis Borges famously called the film &quot;a labyrinth with no center&quot; and predicted that its legacy would be a film &quot;whose historical value is undeniable but which no one cares to see again.&quot; &quot;The Argus Weekend Magazine&quot; critic Erle Cox called the film &quot;amazing&quot; but thought that Welles&#x27;s break with Hollywood traditions was &quot;overdone&quot;. &quot;Tatler&quot;″s James Agate called it &quot;the well-intentioned, muddled, amateurish thing one expects from high-brows&quot;; he admitted that it was &quot;a quite good film&quot; but insisted that it &quot;tries to run the psychological essay in harness with your detective thriller, and doesn&#x27;t quite succeed.&quot; Other people who disliked the film were W. H. Auden and James Agee. After watching the film on January 29, 1942, future British star Kenneth Williams, then aged 15, curtly described the film in his first diary as &quot;boshey rot&quot;.

===Reception from the public===
The film did well in cities and larger towns, but it fared poorly in more remote areas. RKO still had problems getting exhibitors to show the film. For example, one chain controlling more than 500 theaters got Welles&#x27;s film as part of a package but refused to play it, reportedly out of fear of Hearst. Hearst&#x27;s disruption of the film&#x27;s release damaged its box office performance and, as a result, it lost $160,000 during its initial run. The film earned $23,878 during its first week in New York. By the ninth week it only made $7,279. Overall it lost money in New York, Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, San Francisco and Washington, D.C., but made a profit in Seattle. According to the Motion Picture Herald, an industry trade paper run by conservative catholic publisher Martin Quigley, many theater owners criticized the low box office appeal, even though some had positive views of the movie&#x27;s artistic value.

===Hearst&#x27;s response===
Hearing about &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; enraged Hearst so much that he banned any advertising, reviewing, or mentioning of it in his papers, and had his journalists libel Welles. Welles used Hearst&#x27;s opposition as a pretext for previewing the film in several opinion-making screenings in Los Angeles, lobbying for its artistic worth against the hostile campaign that Hearst was waging. A special press screening took place in early March. Henry Luce was in attendance and reportedly wanted to buy the film from RKO for $1 million to distribute it himself. The reviews for this screening were positive. A &quot;Hollywood Review&quot; headline read: &quot;Mr. Genius Comes Through; &#x27;Kane&#x27; Astonishing Picture&quot;. The &quot;Motion Picture Herald&quot; reported about the screening and Hearst&#x27;s intention to sue RKO. &quot;Time&quot; wrote that &quot;The objection of Mr. Hearst, who founded a publishing empire on sensationalism, is ironic. For to most of the several hundred people who have seen the film at private screenings, &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; is the most sensational product of the U.S. movie industry.&quot; A second press screening occurred in April.

When Schaefer rejected Hearst&#x27;s offer to suppress the film, Hearst banned every newspaper and station in his media conglomerate from reviewing—or even mentioning—the film. He also had many movie theaters ban it, and many did not show it through fear of being socially exposed by his massive newspaper empire. The Oscar-nominated documentary &quot;The Battle Over Citizen Kane&quot; lays the blame for the film&#x27;s relative failure squarely at the feet of Hearst. The film did decent business at the box office; it went on to be the sixth highest grossing film in its year of release, a modest success its backers found acceptable. Nevertheless, the film&#x27;s commercial performance fell short of its creators&#x27; expectations. Hearst&#x27;s biographer David Nasaw points out that Hearst&#x27;s actions were not the only reason &quot;Kane&quot; failed, however: the innovations Welles made with narrative, as well as the dark message at the heart of the film (that the pursuit of success is ultimately futile) meant that a popular audience could not appreciate its merits.

Hearst&#x27;s attacks against Welles went beyond attempting to suppress the film. Welles said that while he was on his post-filming lecture tour a police detective approached him at a restaurant and advised him not to go back to his hotel. A 14-year-old girl had reportedly been hidden in the closet of his room, and two photographers were waiting for him to walk in. Knowing he would be jailed after the resulting publicity, Welles did not return to the hotel but waited until the train left town the following morning. &quot;But that wasn&#x27;t Hearst,&quot; Welles said, &quot;that was a hatchet man from the local Hearst paper who thought he would advance himself by doing it.&quot;

In March 1941, Welles directed a Broadway version of Richard Wright&#x27;s &quot;Native Son&quot; (and, for luck, used a &quot;Rosebud&quot; sled as a prop). &quot;Native Son&quot; received positive reviews, but Hearst-owned papers used the opportunity to attack Welles as a communist. The Hearst papers vociferously attacked Welles after his April 1941 radio play, &quot;His Honor, the Mayor&quot;, produced for The Free Company radio series on CBS.

Welles described his chance encounter with Hearst in an elevator at the Fairmont Hotel on the night &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; opened in San Francisco. Hearst and Welles&#x27;s father were acquaintances, so Welles introduced himself and asked Hearst if he would like to come to the opening. Hearst did not respond. &quot;As he was getting off at his floor, I said, &#x27;Charles Foster Kane would have accepted.&#x27; No reply&quot;, recalled Welles. &quot;And Kane would have, you know. That was his style—just as he finished Jed Leland&#x27;s bad review of Susan as an opera singer.&quot;

In 1945, Hearst journalist Robert Shaw wrote that the film got &quot;a full tide of insensate fury&quot; from Hearst papers, &quot;then it ebbed suddenly. With one brain cell working, the chief realized that such hysterical barking by the trained seals would attract too much attention to the picture. But to this day the name of Orson Welles is on the official son-of-a-bitch list of every Hearst newspaper&quot;.

Despite Hearst&#x27;s attempts to destroy the film, since 1941 references to his life and career have usually included a reference to &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;, such as the headline &#x27;Son of Citizen Kane Dies&#x27; for the obituary of Hearst&#x27;s son. In 2012, the Hearst estate agreed to screen the film at Hearst Castle in San Simeon, breaking Hearst&#x27;s ban on the film.

== Re-evaluation==
Modern critics have given &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; an even more positive response. Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes reports that 99% of 125 critics gave the film a positive review, with an average rating of 9.70/10. In April 2021, it was noted that the addition of an 80-year-old negative review from the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; reduced the film&#x27;s rating from 100% to 99% on the site; &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; held its 100% rating until early 2021. On Metacritic, however, the film still has a rare weighted average score of 100 out of 100 based on 19 critics, indicating &quot;universal acclaim&quot;.

The film was included by the Vatican in a list of important films compiled in 1995, under the category of &quot;Art&quot;.

===Accolades===


It was widely believed the film would win most of its Academy Award nominations, but it received only the award for Best Original Screenplay. &quot;Variety&quot; reported that block voting by screen extras deprived &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; of Best Picture and Best Actor, and similar prejudices were likely to have been responsible for the film receiving no technical awards.

==Legacy==

&quot;Citizen Kane&quot; was the only film made under Welles&#x27;s original contract with RKO Pictures, which gave him complete creative control. Welles&#x27;s new business manager and attorney permitted the contract to lapse. In July 1941, Welles reluctantly signed a new and less favorable deal with RKO under which he produced and directed &quot;The Magnificent Ambersons&quot; (1942), produced &quot;Journey into Fear&quot; (1943), and began &quot;It&#x27;s All True&quot;, a film he agreed to do without payment. In the new contract Welles was an employee of the studio and lost the right to final cut, which later allowed RKO to modify and re-cut &quot;The Magnificent Ambersons&quot; over his objections. In June 1942, Schaefer resigned the presidency of RKO Pictures and Welles&#x27;s contract was terminated by his successor.

The European release of &quot;Kane&quot; was delayed until after World War II, premiering in Paris in 1946. Initial reception by French critics was influenced by negative views from Jean-Paul Sartre and Georges Sadoul, who criticized Hollywood&#x27;s cultural sophistication and the film&#x27;s nostalgic use of flashbacks. However, critic André Bazin delivered a transformative speech in 1946 that shifted public opinion. Bazin praised the film for its innovative use of mise-en-scène and deep focus cinematography, advocating for a filmic realism that allows audiences to engage more actively with the narrative. Bazin&#x27;s essays, especially &quot;The Technique of Citizen Kane,&quot; played a crucial role in enhancing the film&#x27;s reputation, arguing it revolutionized film language and aesthetics. His defense of &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; as a work of art influenced other critics and contributed to a broader re-evaluation of the film in Europe and the United States.

In the U.S., the film was initially neglected until it began appearing on television in the 1950s and was re-released in theaters. American film critic Andrew Sarris was significant in reviving its reputation, describing it as a profoundly influential American film. Over the decades, &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; has been consistently ranked highly in critical surveys and polls, often cited as the greatest film ever made.&#x27;

The film&#x27;s narrative structure, cinematography and themes have influenced countless filmmakers and films worldwide, asserting its place as a cornerstone in the history of cinema. Martin Scorsese recalls: &quot;I saw &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; on TV...And I began to become aware of editing and camera positions...Welles was not afraid of being self-conscious with the camera and making self-referential remarks with the camera.&quot; Steven Spielberg says It means everything to me... It is an icon of courage...It&#x27;s about courage and audacity, and I&#x27;m making this my way, and I&#x27;m going to make this my way, and I&#x27;m going to deepen the focus...we&#x27;re going to see from one inch to infinity in every shot, and we&#x27;re going to see ceilings, and we&#x27;re going to tell a very convoluted mystery story about a man&#x27;s life. It is just one of the greatest movies ever made. In 1982, Spielberg bought one of the prop sleds from &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;. Spielberg called &quot;Kane&quot; &#x27;the most classic movie ever made,&quot; and the sled &quot;a symbolic emblem of quality in the film business.&quot;

Roger Ebert wrote: 


==Rights and home media==
The composited camera negative of &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; is believed to be lost forever. The most commonly reported explanation is that it was destroyed in a New Jersey film laboratory fire in the 1970s. However, in 2021, Nicolas Falacci revealed that he had been told &quot;the real story&quot; by a colleague, when he was one of two employees in the film restoration lab which assembled the 1991 &quot;restoration&quot; from the best available elements. Falacci noted that throughout the process he had daily visits in 1990-91 from an unnamed &quot;older RKO executive showing up every day – nervous and sweating&quot;. According to Falacci&#x27;s colleague, this elderly man was keen to cover up a clerical error he had made decades earlier when in charge of the studio&#x27;s inventory, which had resulted in the original camera negatives being sent to a silver reclamation plant, destroying the nitrate film to extract its valuable silver content. Falacci&#x27;s account is impossible to verify, but it would have been fully in keeping with industry standard practice for many decades, which was to destroy prints and negatives of countless older films deemed non-commercially viable, to extract the silver.

Subsequent prints were derived from a master positive (a fine-grain preservation element) made in the 1940s and originally intended for use in overseas distribution. Modern techniques were used to produce a pristine print for a 50th Anniversary theatrical reissue in 1991 which Paramount Pictures released for then-owner Turner Broadcasting System, which earned $1.6 million in North America and worldwide.

In 1955, RKO sold the American television rights to its film library, including &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;, to C&amp;C Television Corp. In 1960, television rights to the pre-1959 RKO&#x27;s live-action library were acquired by United Artists. RKO kept the non-broadcast television rights to its library.

In 1976, when home video was in its infancy, entrepreneur Snuff Garrett bought cassette rights to the RKO library for what United Press International termed &quot;a pittance&quot;. In 1978 The Nostalgia Merchant released the film through Media Home Entertainment. By 1980 the 800-title library of The Nostalgia Merchant was earning $2.3 million a year. &quot;Nobody wanted cassettes four years ago,&quot; Garrett told UPI. &quot;It wasn&#x27;t the first time people called me crazy. It was a hobby with me which became big business.&quot; RKO Home Video released the film on VHS and Betamax in 1985.

On December 3, 1984, The Criterion Collection released the film as its first LaserDisc. It was made from a fine grain master positive provided by the UCLA Film and Television Archive. When told about the then-new concept of having an audio commentary on the disc, Welles was skeptical but said &quot;theoretically, that&#x27;s good for teaching movies, so long as they don&#x27;t talk nonsense.&quot; In 1992 Criterion released a new 50th Anniversary Edition LaserDisc. This version had an improved transfer and additional special features, including the documentary &quot;The Legacy of Citizen Kane&quot; and Welles&#x27;s early short &quot;The Hearts of Age&quot;.

Turner Broadcasting System acquired broadcast television rights to the RKO library in 1986 and the full worldwide rights to the library in 1987. The RKO Home Video unit was reorganized into Turner Home Entertainment that year. In 1991 Turner released a 50th Anniversary Edition on VHS and as a collector&#x27;s edition that includes the film, the documentary &quot;Reflections On Citizen Kane&quot;, Harlan Lebo&#x27;s 50th anniversary album, a poster and a copy of the original script. In 1996, Time Warner acquired Turner and Warner Home Video absorbed Turner Home Entertainment. In 2011, Time Warner&#x27;s Warner Bros. unit had distribution rights for the film.

In 2001, Warner Home Video released a 60th Anniversary Collectors Edition DVD. The two-disc DVD included feature-length commentaries by Roger Ebert and Peter Bogdanovich, as well as a second DVD with the feature-length documentary &quot;The Battle Over Citizen Kane&quot; (1999). It was simultaneously released on VHS. The DVD was criticized for being &quot; bright, ; the dirt and grime had been cleared away, but so had a good deal of the texture, the depth, and the sense of film grain.&quot;

In 2003, Welles&#x27;s daughter Beatrice Welles sued Turner Entertainment, claiming the Welles estate is the legal copyright holder of the film. She claimed that Welles&#x27;s deal to terminate his contracts with RKO meant that Turner&#x27;s copyright of the film was null and void. She also claimed that the estate of Orson Welles was owed 20% of the film&#x27;s profits if her copyright claim was not upheld. In 2007 she was allowed to proceed with the lawsuit, overturning the 2004 decision in favor of Turner Entertainment on the issue of video rights.

In 2011, it was released on Blu-ray and DVD in a 70th Anniversary Edition. The &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; called it &quot;the Blu-ray release of the year.&quot; Supplements included everything available on the 2001 Warner Home Video release, including &quot;The Battle Over Citizen Kane&quot; DVD. A 70th Anniversary Ultimate Collector&#x27;s Edition added a third DVD with &quot;RKO 281&quot; (1999), an award-winning TV movie about the making of the film. Its packaging extras included a hardcover book and a folio containing mini reproductions of the original souvenir program, lobby cards, and production memos and correspondence. The transfer for the US releases were scanned as 4K resolution from three different 35mm prints and rectified the quality issues of the 2001 DVD. The rest of the world continued to receive home video releases based on the older transfer. This was partially rectified in 2016 with the release of the 75th Anniversary Edition in both the UK and US, which was a straight repackaging of the main disc from the 70th Anniversary Edition.

On August 11, 2021 Criterion announced their first 4K Ultra HD releases, a six-film slate, would include &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;. Criterion indicated each title was to be available in a combo pack including a 4K UHD disc of the feature film as well as the film and special features on the companion Blu-rays. &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; was released on November 23, 2021 by the collection as a 4K and 3-Blu-ray-disc package. However, the release was recalled because at the half-hour mark on the regular Blu-ray, the contrast fell sharply, which resulted in a much darker image than what was supposed to occur. However, this issue does not apply to the 4K version itself.

===Colorization controversy===
In the 1980s, &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; became a catalyst in the controversy over the colorization of black-and-white films. One proponent of film colorization was Ted Turner, whose Turner Entertainment Company owned the RKO library. A Turner Entertainment spokesperson initially stated that &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; would not be colorized, but in July 1988 Turner said, &quot;&quot;Citizen Kane?&quot; I&#x27;m thinking of colorizing it.&quot; In early 1989 it was reported that two companies were producing color tests for Turner Entertainment. Criticism increased when filmmaker Henry Jaglom stated that shortly before his death Welles had implored him &quot;don&#x27;t let Ted Turner deface my movie with his crayons.&quot;

In February 1989, Turner Entertainment President Roger Mayer announced that work to colorize the film had been stopped due to provisions in Welles&#x27;s 1939 contract with RKO that &quot;could be read to prohibit colorization without permission of the Welles estate.&quot; Mayer added that Welles&#x27;s contract was &quot;quite unusual&quot; and &quot;other contracts we have checked out are not like this at all.&quot; Turner had only colorized the final reel of the film before abandoning the project. In 1991 one minute of the colorized test footage was included in the BBC &quot;Arena&quot; documentary &quot;The Complete Citizen Kane&quot;.

The colorization controversy was a factor in the passage of the National Film Preservation Act in 1988 which created the National Film Registry the following year. ABC News anchor Peter Jennings reported that &quot;one major reason for doing this is to require people like the broadcaster Ted Turner, who&#x27;s been adding color to some movies and re-editing others for television, to put notices on those versions saying that the movies have been altered&quot;.

==Bibliography==

* Bazin, André. &quot;The Technique of Citizen Kane&quot;. Paris, France: Les Temps modernes 2, number 17, 1947. pp. 943–949.
* Biskind, Peter (ed.), Jaglom, Henry and Welles, Orson. &quot;My Lunches with Orson: Conversations between Henry Jaglom and Orson Welles&quot;. New York: Metropolitan Books, 2013. .
* Bogdanovich, Peter and Welles, Orson. &quot;This is Orson Welles&quot;. HarperPerennial 1992. 
* Bogdanovich, Peter and Welles, Orson (uncredited). &quot;The Kane Mutiny&quot;, in &quot;Esquire&quot;, October 1972.
* Brady, Frank. &quot;Citizen Welles: A Biography of Orson Welles&quot;. New York: Charles Scribner&#x27;s Sons, 1989. .
* Callow, Simon. &quot;Orson Welles: The Road to Xanadu&quot;. London: Jonathan Cape, 1995. 
* Carringer, Robert L. &quot;The Making of Citizen Kane&quot;. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1985. hardcover; 1996 revised and updated edition paperback
* Carringer, Robert L. &quot;The Scripts of &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;&quot;, in &quot;Critical Inquiry&quot; No. 5, 1978.
* Cook, David A. &quot;A History of Narrative Film&quot;. W.W. Norton Company, 2004. 
* Gottesman, Ronald (ed.). &quot;Focus on Citizen Kane&quot;. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1976. 
* Gottesman, Ronald (ed.). &quot;Perspectives on Citizen Kane&quot;. New York: G. K. Hall &amp; Co., 1996. 
* Heylin, Clinton. &quot;Despite the System: Orson Welles Versus the Hollywood Studios&quot;, Chicago Review Press, 2005. 
* Howard, James. &quot;The Complete Films of Orson Welles&quot;. New York: Carol Publishing Group, 1991. .
* Kael, Pauline, Welles, Orson and Mankiewicz, Herman J. &quot;The Citizen Kane Book&quot;. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1971.
* Leaming, Barbara. &quot;Orson Welles, A Biography&quot;. New York: Viking Press, 1985. .
* Meryman, Richard. &quot;Mank: The Wit, World and Life of Herman Mankiewicz&quot;. New York: William Morrow and Company, 1978. .
* Mulvey, Laura. &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;. London: British Film Institute, 1992. 
* Naremore, James (ed.). &quot;Orson Welles&#x27;s Citizen Kane: A Casebook in Criticism&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004. 
* Nasaw, David. &quot;The Chief: The Life of William Randolph Hearst&quot;. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2000. 
* Rippy, Marguerite H. &quot;Orson Welles and the Unfinished RKO Projects: A Postmodern Perspective&quot;. Southern Illinois University Press, Illinois, 2009. 
* Rosenbaum, Jonathan. &quot;I Missed It at the Movies: Objections to &#x27;Raising Kane&#x27;&quot;, in &quot;Film Comment&quot;, Spring 1972.
* Stern, Sydney Ladensohn. &quot;The Brothers Mankiewicz: Hope, Heartbreak, and Hollywood Classics&quot;. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2019. 
==See also==
*List of cult films

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
===Database===
* 
* 
* 
* Citizen Kane at Cinema Belgica

===Other===
* &quot;&quot;Citizen Kane&quot;: The Once and Future Kane&quot;, essay by Bilge Ebiri on The Criterion Collection
* &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; essay by Godfrey Cheshire on the National Film Registry website
* &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; essay by Daniel Eagan in &quot;America&#x27;s Film Legacy: The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry&quot;, A&amp;C Black, 2010 , pp. 735–737
* &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; bibliography via the UC Berkeley Media Resources Center
* The American Film Institute&#x27;s &quot;100 Greatest Movies&quot; list
* &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; and Bernard Herrmann&#x27;s film score
* PBS: &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; (Archived)
* &quot;Bright Lights Film Journal&quot; Essay
* Roger Ebert: &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;
* &quot;The Unofficial Citizen Kane Page&quot;
* &quot;Time&quot; Magazine Top 100
* Greatest films
* DVD review
* &quot;Scene-by-scene analysis&quot; at Movie Movie</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="32" end="42" title="drama film" label="drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="81" end="93" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q956533" start="123" end="143" title="Herman J. Mankiewicz" label="Herman J. Mankiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616757" start="166" end="184" title="List of directorial debuts" label="first feature film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898121" start="236" end="264" title="List of films considered the best" label="the greatest film ever made."/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="365" end="387" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="401" end="418" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="470" end="493" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q719345" start="501" end="525" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies" label="100 Years ... 100 Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q620121" start="555" end="566" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)" label="2007 update"/>
<link wikidata="Q508406" start="595" end="609" title="14th Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41417" start="644" end="678" title="Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay" label="Best Writing (Original Screenplay)"/>
<link wikidata="Q166000" start="745" end="757" title="Gregg Toland" label="Gregg Toland"/>
<link wikidata="Q59821" start="781" end="792" title="Robert Wise" label="Robert Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q296804" start="809" end="825" title="Bernard Herrmann" label="Bernard Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449041" start="941" end="964" title="film à clef" label="quasi-biographical film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959094" start="997" end="1016" title="Charles Foster Kane" label="Charles Foster Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156750" start="1038" end="1057" title="composite character" label="composite character"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420621" start="1076" end="1088" title="Media proprietor" label="media barons"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="1089" end="1112" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q173417" start="1117" end="1132" title="Joseph Pulitzer" label="Joseph Pulitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1134" end="1141" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871944" start="1150" end="1163" title="Samuel Insull" label="Samuel Insull"/>
<link wikidata="Q9286520" start="1168" end="1184" title="Harold Fowler McCormick" label="Harold McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1333" end="1341" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q442909" start="1367" end="1382" title="Mercury Theatre" label="Mercury Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q24958" start="1432" end="1453" title="The War of the Worlds (1938 radio drama)" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855378" start="1469" end="1499" title="The Mercury Theatre on the Air" label="The Mercury Theatre on the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="1566" end="1578" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042860" start="1726" end="1745" title="final cut privilege" label="final cut privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905188" start="1825" end="1864" title="Screenplay for Citizen Kane" label="screenplay for &amp;quot;Citizen Kane&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385294" start="1948" end="1970" title="Citizen Kane trailer" label="its innovative trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055868" start="2017" end="2029" title="Cecilia Ager" label="Cecilia Ager"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119805" start="2053" end="2064" title="PM Magazine" label="PM Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q362544" start="2374" end="2385" title="André Bazin" label="André Bazin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2470" end="2481" title="Expo 58#International film poll" label="Brussels 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="2515" end="2534" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="2662" end="2684" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="2763" end="2774" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042879" start="3147" end="3153" title="Xanadu (Citizen Kane)" label="Xanadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="3189" end="3196" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959094" start="3210" end="3229" title="Charles Foster Kane" label="Charles Foster Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q262046" start="3260" end="3270" title="snow globe" label="snow globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q735478" start="3330" end="3338" title="newsreel" label="newsreel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="3762" end="3771" title="alcoholic" label="alcoholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="3987" end="3995" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q181388" start="4374" end="4378" title="sled" label="sled"/>
<link wikidata="Q231443" start="4834" end="4851" title="yellow journalism" label="yellow journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="5001" end="5024" title="1929 stock market crash" label="1929 stock market crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q17946" start="5286" end="5300" title="public opinion" label="public opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="5315" end="5335" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908" start="5490" end="5505" title="retirement home" label="retirement home"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347975" start="5661" end="5681" title="Governor of New York" label="Governor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q934744" start="5755" end="5769" title="Political scandal" label="public scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="5864" end="5869" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q153562" start="5960" end="5971" title="opera house" label="opera house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="5987" end="5994" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q442909" start="7490" end="7505" title="Mercury Theatre" label="Mercury Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="7593" end="7605" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q95148" start="7669" end="7682" title="Joseph Cotten" label="Joseph Cotten"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7686" end="7701" title="Sources for Citizen Kane#Jedediah Leland" label="Jedediah Leland"/>
<link wikidata="Q221874" start="7868" end="7885" title="Dorothy Comingore" label="Dorothy Comingore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7889" end="7909" title="Sources for Citizen Kane#Susan Alexander Kane" label="Susan Alexander Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q231221" start="7951" end="7966" title="Agnes Moorehead" label="Agnes Moorehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q456375" start="8003" end="8015" title="Ruth Warrick" label="Ruth Warrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550341" start="8071" end="8082" title="Ray Collins (actor)" label="Ray Collins"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8086" end="8099" title="Sources for Citizen Kane#Jim W. Gettys" label="Jim W. Gettys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057498" start="8169" end="8184" title="Erskine Sanford" label="Erskine Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q600233" start="8337" end="8351" title="Everett Sloane" label="Everett Sloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q925872" start="8433" end="8447" title="William Alland" label="William Alland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385381" start="8594" end="8606" title="Paul Stewart (actor)" label="Paul Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507169" start="8641" end="8657" title="George Coulouris" label="George Coulouris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439141" start="8735" end="8752" title="Fortunio Bonanova" label="Fortunio Bonanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387120" start="8811" end="8824" title="Gus Schilling" label="Gus Schilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464819" start="8972" end="8988" title="Philip Van Zandt" label="Philip Van Zandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547351" start="9060" end="9074" title="Georgia Backus" label="Georgia Backus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127914" start="9148" end="9161" title="Harry Shannon (actor)" label="Harry Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490635" start="9197" end="9207" title="Sonny Bupp" label="Sonny Bupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984951" start="9255" end="9265" title="Buddy Swan" label="Buddy Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="9303" end="9315" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959094" start="9319" end="9338" title="Charles Foster Kane" label="Charles Foster Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958529" start="9386" end="9401" title="Charles Bennett (actor)" label="Charles Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q166000" start="9524" end="9536" title="Gregg Toland" label="Gregg Toland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="9545" end="9561" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q346280" start="9650" end="9659" title="Alan Ladd" label="Alan Ladd"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="9902" end="9914" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q72291" start="9948" end="9965" title="David O. Selznick" label="David O. Selznick"/>
<link wikidata="Q51495" start="10035" end="10048" title="William Wyler" label="William Wyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140611" start="10096" end="10113" title="Wuthering Heights (1939 film)" label="Wuthering Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q24958" start="10438" end="10459" title="The War of the Worlds (1938 radio drama)" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855378" start="10506" end="10536" title="The Mercury Theatre on the Air" label="The Mercury Theatre on the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="10602" end="10614" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544335" start="10627" end="10645" title="George J. Schaefer" label="George J. Schaefer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11128" end="11138" title="Chimes at Midnight#Five Kings (1939)" label="Five Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987409" start="11155" end="11172" title="The Green Goddess (play)" label="The Green Goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042860" start="12285" end="12303" title="final cut privilege" label="right of final cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="13102" end="13124" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q129778" start="13175" end="13192" title="Heart of Darkness" label="Heart of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q263963" start="13311" end="13330" title="Point-of-view shot" label="first-person camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q954383" start="14006" end="14021" title="Cecil Day-Lewis" label="Cecil Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q956533" start="14130" end="14150" title="Herman J. Mankiewicz" label="Herman J. Mankiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q20671986" start="14359" end="14374" title="Richard Meryman" label="Richard Meryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906829" start="14648" end="14670" title="The Campbell Playhouse (radio series)" label="The Campbell Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="14731" end="14754" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q315734" start="14998" end="15011" title="John Houseman" label="John Houseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q442909" start="15049" end="15064" title="Mercury Theatre" label="Mercury Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q839935" start="15873" end="15886" title="script doctor" label="script doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q267441" start="16238" end="16247" title="Ben Hecht" label="Ben Hecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302345" start="16277" end="16302" title="The Saturday Evening Post" label="The Saturday Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439023" start="16350" end="16370" title="Screen Writers Guild" label="Screen Writers Guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="16591" end="16603" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q16740205" start="16718" end="16732" title="Richard Wilson (director)" label="Richard Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q436910" start="17162" end="17174" title="Pauline Kael" label="Pauline Kael"/>
<link wikidata="Q20874663" start="17220" end="17232" title="Raising Kane" label="Raising Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q217305" start="17453" end="17467" title="The New Yorker" label="The New Yorker"/>
<link wikidata="Q442909" start="18540" end="18555" title="Mercury Theatre" label="Mercury Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q925872" start="18827" end="18841" title="William Alland" label="William Alland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550341" start="18843" end="18854" title="Ray Collins (actor)" label="Ray Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q95148" start="18856" end="18869" title="Joseph Cotten" label="Joseph Cotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q231221" start="18871" end="18886" title="Agnes Moorehead" label="Agnes Moorehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057498" start="18888" end="18903" title="Erskine Sanford" label="Erskine Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q600233" start="18905" end="18919" title="Everett Sloane" label="Everett Sloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385381" start="18921" end="18933" title="Paul Stewart (actor)" label="Paul Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756900" start="19131" end="19153" title="The Philadelphia Story (play)" label="The Philadelphia Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q56016" start="19165" end="19182" title="Katharine Hepburn" label="Katharine Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561866" start="19246" end="19259" title="The Goldbergs (broadcast series)" label="The Goldbergs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507169" start="19281" end="19297" title="George Coulouris" label="George Coulouris"/>
<link wikidata="Q221874" start="19410" end="19427" title="Dorothy Comingore" label="Dorothy Comingore"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="19570" end="19585" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q456375" start="19740" end="19752" title="Ruth Warrick" label="Ruth Warrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987185" start="20621" end="20642" title="Westbrook Van Voorhis" label="Westbrook Van Voorhis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563216" start="20841" end="20853" title="Gino Corrado" label="Gino Corrado"/>
<link wikidata="Q151579" start="21072" end="21088" title="Thomas A. Curran" label="Thomas A. Curran"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="21092" end="21107" title="Teddy Roosevelt" label="Teddy Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323969" start="21130" end="21142" title="Richard Barr" label="Richard Baer"/>
<link wikidata="Q346280" start="21254" end="21263" title="Alan Ladd" label="Alan Ladd"/>
<link wikidata="Q710888" start="21265" end="21286" title="Arthur O&amp;#x27;Connell" label="Arthur O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688701" start="21291" end="21304" title="Louise Currie" label="Louise Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q153886" start="21581" end="21608" title="The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari" label="The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="21642" end="21662" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q51492" start="21677" end="21688" title="Frank Capra" label="Frank Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q55388" start="21690" end="21700" title="René Clair" label="René Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q19504" start="21702" end="21712" title="Fritz Lang" label="Fritz Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q51133" start="21714" end="21724" title="King Vidor" label="King Vidor"/>
<link wikidata="Q50713" start="21729" end="21740" title="Jean Renoir" label="Jean Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q51114" start="21780" end="21789" title="John Ford" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q50714" start="21803" end="21813" title="Stagecoach (1939 film)" label="Stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q166000" start="22353" end="22365" title="Gregg Toland" label="Gregg Toland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25182893" start="22643" end="22649" title="Caesar (Mercury Theatre)" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411497" start="22755" end="22781" title="Samuel Goldwyn Productions" label="Samuel Goldwyn Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q542554" start="24186" end="24198" title="Screen test" label="camera tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="25833" end="25851" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q804697" start="25905" end="25916" title="Balboa Park (San Diego)" label="Balboa Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q818395" start="25938" end="25951" title="San Diego Zoo" label="San Diego Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q215006" start="26000" end="26017" title="Otto Hermann Kahn" label="Otto Hermann Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q696927" start="26042" end="26054" title="Oheka Castle" label="Oheka Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042879" start="26090" end="26096" title="Xanadu (Citizen Kane)" label="Xanadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q473220" start="26721" end="26732" title="master shot" label="master shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630964" start="28875" end="28888" title="Blocking (stage)" label="choreographed"/>
<link wikidata="Q296804" start="28921" end="28937" title="Bernard Herrmann" label="Bernard Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="29126" end="29144" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="Nelson Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q360106" start="29159" end="29172" title="David Sarnoff" label="David Sarnoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="29763" end="29781" title="Principal shooting" label="Principal shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="30046" end="30059" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521254" start="30072" end="30082" title="The Outlaw" label="The Outlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586588" start="30197" end="30210" title="Harry J. Wild" label="Harry J. Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q59821" start="30572" end="30583" title="Robert Wise" label="Robert Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q31225" start="30605" end="30616" title="Mark Robson (film director)" label="Mark Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q331408" start="31401" end="31410" title="Dissolve (filmmaking)" label="dissolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993699" start="31697" end="31705" title="whip pan" label="whip pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087558" start="31854" end="31867" title="stock footage" label="stock footage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893565" start="31873" end="31883" title="Pathé News" label="Pathé News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827126" start="31972" end="31987" title="Linwood G. Dunn" label="Linwood G. Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8320" start="32009" end="32024" title="optical printer" label="optical printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q638397" start="33412" end="33426" title="David Bordwell" label="David Bordwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q160476" start="33783" end="33809" title="German expressionist cinema" label="German Expressionist films"/>
<link wikidata="Q51123" start="34019" end="34033" title="D. W. Griffith" label="D. W. Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q935301" start="34241" end="34255" title="Georges Sadoul" label="Georges Sadoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q55965" start="34432" end="34457" title="Auguste and Louis Lumière" label="Auguste and Louis Lumière"/>
<link wikidata="Q152272" start="34496" end="34510" title="Georges Méliès" label="Georges Méliès"/>
<link wikidata="Q78508" start="34536" end="34554" title="Erich von Stroheim" label="Erich von Stroheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q690583" start="34562" end="34579" title="Greed (1924 film)" label="&amp;quot;Greed&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q55193" start="34618" end="34630" title="Dziga Vertov" label="Dziga Vertov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091985" start="35105" end="35128" title="The Power and the Glory (1933 film)" label="The Power and the Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q650118" start="35823" end="35842" title="unreliable narrator" label="unreliable narrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091985" start="36419" end="36442" title="The Power and the Glory (1933 film)" label="The Power and the Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182433" start="37725" end="37735" title="deep focus" label="deep focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680430" start="40243" end="40259" title="James G. Stewart" label="James G. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q237893" start="41319" end="41326" title="film editing" label="montage"/>
<link wikidata="Q53002" start="42008" end="42025" title="François Truffaut" label="François Truffaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="42265" end="42279" title="Auguste Renoir" label="Auguste Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057071" start="42431" end="42446" title="Cedric Belfrage" label="Cedric Belfrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209793" start="43084" end="43094" title="Dick Smith (make-up artist)" label="Dick Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q280995" start="44793" end="44810" title="panchromatic film" label="panchromatic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434127" start="45964" end="45976" title="scleral lens" label="scleral lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q120136" start="46293" end="46306" title="arcus senilis" label="arcus senilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810644" start="46587" end="46596" title="Mel Berns" label="Mel Berns"/>
<link wikidata="Q509223" start="47121" end="47135" title="Perry Ferguson" label="Perry Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183122" start="47582" end="47591" title="periscope" label="periscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q236122" start="47978" end="47989" title="Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="47994" end="48000" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q72267" start="48289" end="48305" title="Cecil B. DeMille" label="Cecil B. DeMille"/>
<link wikidata="Q192206" start="48322" end="48333" title="Intolerance (film)" label="Intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q696927" start="49118" end="49130" title="Oheka Castle" label="Oheka Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q999123" start="49134" end="49154" title="Huntington, New York" label="Huntington, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q617793" start="49314" end="49319" title="Ancient Greek sculpture" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q46825" start="49323" end="49336" title="Gothic art" label="German Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q725457" start="49522" end="49528" title="muslin" label="muslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491690" start="49925" end="49941" title="Vernon L. Walker" label="Vernon L. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723013" start="50266" end="50273" title="Crane shot" label="craning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562761" start="50317" end="50329" title="wipe (transition)" label="curtain wipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q768292" start="50619" end="50641" title="Rear projection effect" label="rear screen projection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51073" end="51089" title="Close-up#Types of close-up" label="extreme close-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q8320" start="51392" end="51407" title="optical printer" label="optical printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q627994" start="51524" end="51534" title="graininess" label="graininess"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008611" start="52306" end="52322" title="in-camera effect" label="in-camera effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662817" start="52612" end="52617" title="Matte (filmmaking)" label="matte"/>
<link wikidata="Q296804" start="52862" end="52878" title="Bernard Herrmann" label="Bernard Herrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855378" start="52922" end="52948" title="Mercury Theatre on the Air" label="Mercury Theatre on the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q350704" start="53106" end="53117" title="Max Steiner" label="Max Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q221117" start="54082" end="54091" title="leitmotif" label="leitmotif"/>
<link wikidata="Q544352" start="54140" end="54150" title="alto flute" label="alto flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q242752" start="54264" end="54275" title="Mary Garden" label="Mary Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q117182" start="54304" end="54312" title="Salammbô" label="Salammbô"/>
<link wikidata="Q742" start="54870" end="54881" title="Jean Racine" label="Jean Racine"/>
<link wikidata="Q754687" start="54895" end="54902" title="Athalie" label="Athalie"/>
<link wikidata="Q969098" start="54919" end="54925" title="Phedre" label="Phedre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249482" start="54971" end="54987" title="Lucille Fletcher" label="Lucille Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021131" start="55097" end="55114" title="Wuthering Heights (Herrmann)" label="Wuthering Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q208659" start="55267" end="55290" title="Il barbiere di Siviglia" label="Il barbiere di Siviglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9726" start="55300" end="55317" title="Gioachino Rossini" label="Gioachino Rossini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071769" start="55634" end="55645" title="Pepe Guízar" label="Pepe Guízar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066820" start="55737" end="55751" title="Charlie Barnet" label="Charlie Barnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q137042" start="55935" end="55943" title="Nat Cole" label="Nat Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057197" start="56183" end="56198" title="Cee Pee Johnson" label="Cee Pee Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q486899" start="56253" end="56267" title="Buddy Collette" label="Buddy Collette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001119" start="56283" end="56294" title="Buddy Banks (saxophonist)" label="Buddy Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q573038" start="56636" end="56651" title="Anthony Vincent Collins" label="Anthony Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070194" start="56673" end="56691" title="Nurse Edith Cavell" label="Nurse Edith Cavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q367032" start="56734" end="56747" title="Alfred Newman" label="Alfred Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q760012" start="56771" end="56780" title="Gunga Din (film)" label="Gunga Din"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367973" start="56816" end="56824" title="Roy Webb" label="Roy Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313374" start="56857" end="56861" title="Reno (1939 film)" label="Reno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073109" start="56944" end="56958" title="Five Came Back" label="Five Came Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q221117" start="57075" end="57084" title="leitmotiv" label="leitmotiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606917" start="58060" end="58072" title="Henry Jaglom" label="Henry Jaglom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748180" start="58767" end="58792" title="The Long Christmas Dinner" label="The Long Christmas Dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q155087" start="58802" end="58817" title="Thornton Wilder" label="Thornton Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003" start="59229" end="59246" title="Sergei Eisenstein" label="Sergei Eisenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q31448" start="59472" end="59480" title="cockatoo" label="cockatoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959094" start="59993" end="60012" title="Charles Foster Kane" label="Charles Foster Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156750" start="60044" end="60053" title="Composite character" label="synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173417" start="60284" end="60292" title="Joseph Pulitzer" label="Pulitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q335193" start="60294" end="60305" title="Alfred Harmsworth, 1st Viscount Northcliffe" label="Northcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524682" start="60334" end="60354" title="Herbert Bayard Swope" label="Herbert Bayard Swope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871944" start="60662" end="60675" title="Samuel Insull" label="Samuel Insull"/>
<link wikidata="Q9286520" start="60680" end="60703" title="Harold Fowler McCormick" label="Harold Fowler McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806076" start="60765" end="60779" title="Ashton Stevens" label="Ashton Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q51490" start="60781" end="60795" title="George Stevens" label="George Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q221874" start="61278" end="61295" title="Dorothy Comingore" label="Dorothy Comingore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1833594" start="61362" end="61381" title="Civic Opera House (Chicago)" label="Chicago Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521415" start="61461" end="61473" title="Ganna Walska" label="Ganna Walska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430775" start="61533" end="61547" title="political boss" label="political boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077782" start="61574" end="61591" title="Charles F. Murphy" label="Charles F. Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q432139" start="61635" end="61647" title="Tammany Hall" label="Tammany Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q20671986" start="61730" end="61745" title="Richard Meryman" label="Richard Meryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147147" start="62023" end="62041" title="Patrick McGilligan (biographer)" label="Patrick McGilligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084874" start="62163" end="62174" title="Old Rosebud" label="Old Rosebud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559851" start="62217" end="62236" title="1914 Kentucky Derby" label="1914 Kentucky Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4253832" start="62436" end="62454" title="Ferdinand Lundberg" label="Ferdinand Lundberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q167821" start="62645" end="62655" title="Gore Vidal" label="Gore Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="62680" end="62704" title="New York Review of Books" label="New York Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412728" start="62908" end="62925" title="The March of Time" label="The March of Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411739" start="63010" end="63019" title="Time Inc." label="Time Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q23020002" start="63122" end="63135" title="The March of Time (radio program)" label="radio version"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="63207" end="63219" title="J. P. Morgan" label="J. P. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111596" start="63440" end="63451" title="Jack Carter (actor)" label="Jack Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q440887" start="63475" end="63487" title="Laura Mulvey" label="Laura Mulvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="63579" end="63601" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="63987" end="64008" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q447776" start="64331" end="64346" title="Ignacio Ramonet" label="Ignacio Ramonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="64389" end="64393" title="mass media" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606852" start="64394" end="64412" title="media manipulation" label="media manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="64706" end="64720" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="64853" end="64865" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q11897758" start="64989" end="65005" title="Timothy L. O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Tim O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453378" start="65216" end="65223" title="dailies" label="dailies"/>
<link wikidata="Q332885" start="65367" end="65372" title="Faust" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q753437" start="65477" end="65498" title="Radio City Music Hall" label="Radio City Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="65792" end="65796" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740768" start="65810" end="65814" title="Look (American magazine)" label="Look"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430019" start="65831" end="65838" title="Redbook" label="Redbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q271324" start="65863" end="65875" title="Hedda Hopper" label="Hedda Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q249143" start="65894" end="65909" title="Louella Parsons" label="Louella Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471328" start="67914" end="67925" title="Kitty Foyle (film)" label="Kitty Foyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q124057" start="68282" end="68297" title="Dolores del Río" label="Dolores del Río"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="68694" end="68716" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q143548" start="69184" end="69200" title="Nicholas Schenck" label="Nicholas Schenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="69210" end="69229" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q319682" start="69284" end="69298" title="Louis B. Mayer" label="Louis B. Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q622550" start="70242" end="70249" title="trailer (promotion)" label="trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q110996780" start="70526" end="70540" title="teaser trailer" label="teaser trailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993049" start="70841" end="70856" title="tongue-in-cheek" label="tongue-in-cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q459435" start="70858" end="70876" title="mockumentary" label="pseudo-documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q600233" start="71357" end="71371" title="Everett Sloane" label="Everett Sloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q731187" start="71694" end="71706" title="Simon Callow" label="Simon Callow"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="71838" end="71849" title="documentary" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q753437" start="72097" end="72118" title="Radio City Music Hall" label="Radio City Music Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953544" start="72253" end="72272" title="The American Weekly" label="The American Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360756" start="73008" end="73026" title="RKO Palace Theatre" label="RKO Palace Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="73030" end="73038" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="73300" end="73318" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q894444" start="73332" end="73347" title="Bosley Crowther" label="Bosley Crowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="73850" end="73869" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489540" start="73966" end="73993" title="The Washington Evening Star" label="The Washington Evening Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q627827" start="74152" end="74171" title="New York Daily News" label="New York Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014854" start="74331" end="74354" title="New York World-Telegram" label="New York World-Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="74620" end="74624" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q18715812" start="74799" end="74813" title="John Mosher (writer)" label="John C. Mosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="74996" end="75006" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q548345" start="75126" end="75142" title="John O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="John O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="75156" end="75164" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930468" start="75404" end="75417" title="C. A. Lejeune" label="C. A. Lejeune"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="75427" end="75439" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028012" start="75547" end="75559" title="Dilys Powell" label="Dilys Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="75569" end="75585" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345555" start="75737" end="75755" title="Edward Tangye Lean" label="Edward Tangye Lean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786777" start="75765" end="75772" title="Horizon (British magazine)" label="Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="75945" end="75962" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="76075" end="76090" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108782" start="76255" end="76268" title="Otis Ferguson" label="Otis Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="76278" end="76294" title="The New Republic" label="The New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51123" start="76381" end="76389" title="D. W. Griffith" label="Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q329965" start="76394" end="76400" title="Billy Bitzer" label="Bitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q78508" start="76800" end="76818" title="Erich von Stroheim" label="Erich von Stroheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983260" start="77315" end="77331" title="The Sun (New York)" label="The New York Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269998" start="77448" end="77451" title="Sur (magazine)" label="Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q909" start="77459" end="77476" title="Jorge Luis Borges" label="Jorge Luis Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714229" start="77679" end="77705" title="The Argus (Australia)" label="The Argus Weekend Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078212" start="77859" end="77865" title="Tatler" label="Tatler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11716750" start="77874" end="77885" title="James Agate" label="James Agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="78222" end="78233" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q352963" start="78238" end="78248" title="James Agee" label="James Agee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093792" start="78315" end="78331" title="Kenneth Williams" label="Kenneth Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917756" start="79152" end="79173" title="Motion Picture Herald" label="Motion Picture Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q685935" start="79187" end="79198" title="trade paper" label="trade paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q21069753" start="79238" end="79252" title="Martin Quigley (publisher)" label="Martin Quigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="79578" end="79583" title="libel" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917756" start="80152" end="80173" title="Motion Picture Herald" label="Motion Picture Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="80249" end="80265" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q778575" start="80718" end="80730" title="Conglomerate (company)" label="conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715833" start="80950" end="80978" title="The Battle Over Citizen Kane" label="The Battle Over Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q319820" start="82425" end="82439" title="Richard Wright (author)" label="Richard Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q165599" start="82453" end="82463" title="Native Son" label="Native Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q16387257" start="82536" end="82546" title="Native Son (play)" label="Native Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272608" start="82896" end="82910" title="Fairmont San Francisco" label="Fairmont Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="84342" end="84357" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="84553" end="84568" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298003" start="84611" end="84615" title="List of films with a 100% rating on Rotten Tomatoes" label="100%"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="84703" end="84713" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557998" start="84895" end="84920" title="Vatican&amp;#x27;s list of films" label="a list of important films"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="85051" end="85064" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q41417" start="85113" end="85137" title="Best Original Screenplay" label="Best Original Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="85240" end="85252" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="85257" end="85267" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q628664" start="85736" end="85761" title="The Magnificent Ambersons (film)" label="The Magnificent Ambersons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733208" start="85791" end="85808" title="Journey into Fear (1943 film)" label="Journey into Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155779" start="85839" end="85857" title="It&amp;#x27;s All True (film)" label="It&amp;#x27;s All True"/>
<link wikidata="Q23023191" start="86207" end="86220" title="Charles Koerner" label="his successor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9364" start="86405" end="86421" title="Jean-Paul Sartre" label="Jean-Paul Sartre"/>
<link wikidata="Q935301" start="86426" end="86440" title="Georges Sadoul" label="Georges Sadoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q362544" start="86563" end="86574" title="André Bazin" label="André Bazin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607241" start="86695" end="86708" title="mise-en-scène" label="mise-en-scène"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182433" start="86713" end="86723" title="deep focus" label="deep focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q507162" start="87355" end="87368" title="Andrew Sarris" label="Andrew Sarris"/>
<link wikidata="Q107478" start="87796" end="87813" title="history of cinema" label="history of cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="87815" end="87830" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="88068" end="88084" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="88772" end="88783" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q732256" start="89044" end="89059" title="Nicolas Falacci" label="Nicolas Falacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q143874" start="89722" end="89734" title="nitrate film" label="nitrate film"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="90314" end="90332" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855903" start="90357" end="90383" title="Turner Broadcasting System" label="Turner Broadcasting System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005766" start="90553" end="90577" title="C&amp;amp;C Group" label="C&amp;amp;C Television Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="90669" end="90683" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548824" start="90805" end="90818" title="Snuff Garrett" label="Snuff Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q493845" start="90870" end="90896" title="United Press International" label="United Press International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805494" start="90985" end="91009" title="Media Home Entertainment" label="Media Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="91322" end="91325" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q690148" start="91330" end="91337" title="Betamax" label="Betamax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="91369" end="91393" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q273309" start="91425" end="91434" title="LaserDisc" label="LaserDisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864025" start="91498" end="91530" title="UCLA Film and Television Archive" label="UCLA Film and Television Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q440991" start="91582" end="91598" title="audio commentary" label="audio commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008506" start="91990" end="92007" title="The Hearts of Age" label="The Hearts of Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="92512" end="92523" title="Time Warner" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188361" start="92544" end="92561" title="Warner Home Video" label="Warner Home Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="92607" end="92618" title="Time Warner" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="92626" end="92638" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="92757" end="92760" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="92819" end="92830" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q158250" start="92835" end="92852" title="Peter Bogdanovich" label="Peter Bogdanovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715833" start="92920" end="92948" title="The Battle Over Citizen Kane" label="The Battle Over Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="93295" end="93304" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="93766" end="93773" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="93823" end="93846" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093425" start="94127" end="94134" title="RKO 281" label="RKO 281"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="94166" end="94174" title="TV movie" label="TV movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q238162" start="94431" end="94444" title="4K resolution" label="4K resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953724" start="94866" end="94877" title="Ultra HD Blu-ray" label="4K Ultra HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634411" start="95602" end="95614" title="film colorization" label="colorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q838368" start="95618" end="95633" title="black-and-white" label="black-and-white"/>
<link wikidata="Q193368" start="95680" end="95690" title="Ted Turner" label="Ted Turner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96703" end="96707" title="Reel#Motion picture terminology" label="reel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788867" start="96830" end="96835" title="Arena (UK TV series)" label="Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972664" start="96958" end="96988" title="National Film Preservation Act" label="National Film Preservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="97058" end="97066" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q354540" start="97074" end="97088" title="Peter Jennings" label="Peter Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q362544" start="97379" end="97391" title="André Bazin" label="Bazin, André"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786440" start="97732" end="97752" title="This is Orson Welles" label="This is Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186621" start="98383" end="98399" title="Critical Inquiry" label="Critical Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4038736" start="99911" end="99923" title="Film Comment" label="Film Comment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614871" start="100113" end="100131" title="List of cult films" label="List of cult films"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907703" start="100322" end="100333" title="Bilge Ebiri" label="Bilge Ebiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="100337" end="100361" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576398" start="100398" end="100414" title="Godfrey Cheshire" label="Godfrey Cheshire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5225" wikidata="Q188889" url="?curid=5225" title="Code">
<text>In communications and information processing, code is a system of rules to convert information—such as a letter, word, sound, image, or gesture—into another form, sometimes shortened or secret, for communication through a communication channel or storage in a storage medium. An early example is an invention of language, which enabled a person, through speech, to communicate what they thought, saw, heard, or felt to others. But speech limits the range of communication to the distance a voice can carry and limits the audience to those present when the speech is uttered. The invention of writing, which converted spoken language into visual symbols, extended the range of communication across space and time.

The process of encoding converts information from a source into symbols for communication or storage. Decoding is the reverse process, converting code symbols back into a form that the recipient understands, such as English or/and Spanish.

One reason for coding is to enable communication in places where ordinary plain language, spoken or written, is difficult or impossible. For example, semaphore, where the configuration of flags held by a signaler or the arms of a semaphore tower encodes parts of the message, typically individual letters, and numbers. Another person standing a great distance away can interpret the flags and reproduce the words sent.

== Theory ==

In information theory and computer science, a code is usually considered as an algorithm that uniquely represents symbols from some source alphabet, by &quot;encoded&quot; strings, which may be in some other target alphabet. An extension of the code for representing sequences of symbols over the source alphabet is obtained by concatenating the encoded strings.

Before giving a mathematically precise definition, this is a brief example. The mapping
:formula_1
is a code, whose source alphabet is the set formula_2 and whose target alphabet is the set formula_3. Using the extension of the code, the encoded string 0011001 can be grouped into codewords as 0 011 0 01, and these in turn can be decoded to the sequence of source symbols &quot;acab&quot;.

Using terms from formal language theory, the precise mathematical definition of this concept is as follows: let S and T be two finite sets, called the source and target alphabets, respectively. A code formula_4 is a total function mapping each symbol from S to a sequence of symbols over T. The extension formula_5 of formula_6, is a homomorphism of formula_7 into formula_8, which naturally maps each sequence of source symbols to a sequence of target symbols.

=== Variable-length codes ===

In this section, we consider codes that encode each source (clear text) character by a code word from some dictionary, and concatenation of such code words give us an encoded string. Variable-length codes are especially useful when clear text characters have different probabilities; see also entropy encoding.

A &quot;prefix code&quot; is a code with the &quot;prefix property&quot;: there is no valid code word in the system that is a prefix (start) of any other valid code word in the set. Huffman coding is the most known algorithm for deriving prefix codes. Prefix codes are widely referred to as &quot;Huffman codes&quot; even when the code was not produced by a Huffman algorithm. Other examples of prefix codes are country calling codes, the country and publisher parts of ISBNs, and the Secondary Synchronization Codes used in the UMTS WCDMA 3G Wireless Standard.

Kraft&#x27;s inequality characterizes the sets of codeword lengths that are possible in a prefix code. Virtually any uniquely decodable one-to-many code, not necessarily a prefix one, must satisfy Kraft&#x27;s inequality.

=== Error-correcting codes ===
Codes may also be used to represent data in a way more resistant to errors in transmission or storage. This so-called error-correcting code works by including carefully crafted redundancy with the stored (or transmitted) data. Examples include Hamming codes, Reed–Solomon, Reed–Muller, Walsh–Hadamard, Bose–Chaudhuri–Hochquenghem, Turbo, Golay, algebraic geometry codes, low-density parity-check codes, and space–time codes.
Error detecting codes can be optimised to detect &quot;burst errors&quot;, or &quot;random errors&quot;.

== Examples ==
=== Codes in communication used for brevity ===

A cable code replaces words (e.g. &quot;ship&quot; or &quot;invoice&quot;) with shorter words, allowing the same information to be sent with fewer characters, more quickly, and less expensively.

Codes can be used for brevity. When telegraph messages were the state of the art in rapid long-distance communication, elaborate systems of commercial codes that encoded complete phrases into single mouths (commonly five-minute groups) were developed, so that telegraphers became conversant with such &quot;words&quot; as &quot;BYOXO&quot; (&quot;Are you trying to weasel out of our deal?&quot;), &quot;LIOUY&quot; (&quot;Why do you not answer my question?&quot;), &quot;BMULD&quot; (&quot;You&#x27;re a skunk!&quot;), or &quot;AYYLU&quot; (&quot;Not clearly coded, repeat more clearly.&quot;). Code words were chosen for various reasons: length, pronounceability, etc. Meanings were chosen to fit perceived needs: commercial negotiations, military terms for military codes, diplomatic terms for diplomatic codes, any and all of the preceding for espionage codes. Codebooks and codebook publishers proliferated, including one run as a front for the American Black Chamber run by Herbert Yardley between the First and Second World Wars. The purpose of most of these codes was to save on cable costs. The use of data coding for data compression predates the computer era; an early example is the telegraph Morse code where more-frequently used characters have shorter representations. Techniques such as Huffman coding are now used by computer-based algorithms to compress large data files into a more compact form for storage or transmission.

=== Character encodings ===

Character encodings are representations of textual data. A given character encoding may be associated with a specific character set (the collection of characters which it can represent), though some character sets have multiple character encodings and vice versa. Character encodings may be broadly grouped according to the number of bytes required to represent a single character: there are single-byte encodings, multibyte (also called wide) encodings, and variable-width (also called variable-length) encodings. The earliest character encodings were single-byte, the best-known example of which is ASCII. ASCII remains in use today, for example in HTTP headers. However, single-byte encodings cannot model character sets with more than 256 characters. Scripts that require large character sets such as Chinese, Japanese and Korean must be represented with multibyte encodings. Early multibyte encodings were fixed-length, meaning that although each character was represented by more than one byte, all characters used the same number of bytes (&quot;word length&quot;), making them suitable for decoding with a lookup table. The final group, variable-width encodings, is a subset of multibyte encodings. These use more complex encoding and decoding logic to efficiently represent large character sets while keeping the representations of more commonly used characters shorter or maintaining backward compatibility properties. This group includes UTF-8, an encoding of the Unicode character set; UTF-8 is the most common encoding of text media on the Internet.

=== Genetic code ===

Biological organisms contain genetic material that is used to control their function and development. This is DNA, which contains units named genes from which messenger RNA is derived. This in turn produces proteins through a genetic code in which a series of triplets (codons) of four possible nucleotides can be translated into one of twenty possible amino acids. A sequence of codons results in a corresponding sequence of amino acids that form a protein molecule; a type of codon called a stop codon signals the end of the sequence.

=== Gödel code ===
In mathematics, a Gödel code is the basis for the proof of Gödel&#x27;s incompleteness theorem. Here, the idea is to map mathematical notation to a natural number (using a Gödel numbering).

=== Other ===
There are codes using colors, like traffic lights, the color code employed to mark the nominal value of the electrical resistors or that of the trashcans devoted to specific types of garbage (paper, glass, organic, etc.).

In marketing, coupon codes can be used for a financial discount or rebate when purchasing a product from a (usual internet) retailer.

In military environments, specific sounds with the cornet are used for different uses: to mark some moments of the day, to command the infantry on the battlefield, etc.

Communication systems for sensory impairments, such as sign language for deaf people and braille for blind people, are based on movement or tactile codes.

Musical scores are the most common way to encode music.

Specific games have their own code systems to record the matches, e.g. chess notation.

=== Cryptography ===
In the history of cryptography, codes were once common for ensuring the confidentiality of communications, although ciphers are now used instead.

Secret codes intended to obscure the real messages, ranging from serious (mainly espionage in military, diplomacy, business, etc.) to trivial (romance, games) can be any kind of imaginative encoding: flowers, game cards, clothes, fans, hats, melodies, birds, etc., in which the sole requirement is the pre-agreement on the meaning by both the sender and the receiver.

== Other examples ==
Other examples of encoding include:
*Encoding (in cognition) - a basic perceptual process of interpreting incoming stimuli; technically speaking, it is a complex, multi-stage process of converting relatively objective sensory input (e.g., light, sound) into a subjectively meaningful experience.
*A content format - a specific encoding format for converting a specific type of data to information.
*Text encoding uses a markup language to tag the structure and other features of a text to facilitate processing by computers. (See also Text Encoding Initiative.)
*Semantics encoding of formal language A informal language B is a method of representing all terms (e.g. programs or descriptions) of language A using language B.
*Data compression transforms a signal into a code optimized for transmission or storage, generally done with a codec.
*Neural encoding - the way in which information is represented in neurons.
*Memory encoding - the process of converting sensations into memories.
*Television encoding: NTSC, PAL and SECAM

Other examples of decoding include:
* Decoding (computer science)
* Decoding methods, methods in communication theory for decoding codewords sent over a noisy channel
* Digital signal processing, the study of signals in a digital representation and the processing methods of these signals
* Digital-to-analog converter, the use of analog circuit for decoding operations
* Word decoding, the use of phonics to decipher print patterns and translate them into the sounds of language

==Codes and acronyms==
Acronyms and abbreviations can be considered codes, and in a sense, all languages and writing systems are codes for human thought.

International Air Transport Association airport codes are three-letter codes used to designate airports and used for bag tags. Station codes are similarly used on railways but are usually national, so the same code can be used for different stations if they are in different countries.

Occasionally, a code word achieves an independent existence (and meaning) while the original equivalent phrase is forgotten or at least no longer has the precise meaning attributed to the code word. For example, &#x27;30&#x27; was widely used in journalism to mean &quot;end of story&quot;, and has been used in other contexts to signify &quot;the end&quot;.
== See also ==

* ADDML
* Asemic writing
* Cipher
* Code (semiotics)
* Cultural code
* Equipment codes
* Quantum error correction
* Semiotics
* Universal language

== References ==

==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="3" end="16" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661985" start="22" end="44" title="Data processing" label="information processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188889" start="46" end="50" title="Code" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="83" end="94" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q9788" start="105" end="111" title="letter (alphabet)" label="letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8171" start="113" end="117" title="word" label="word"/>
<link wikidata="Q371174" start="136" end="143" title="gesture" label="gesture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="173" end="182" title="data compression" label="shortened"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503443" start="186" end="192" title="secrecy" label="secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q733553" start="222" end="243" title="communication channel" label="communication channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q57515336" start="260" end="274" title="storage medium" label="storage medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="312" end="320" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="354" end="360" title="speech" label="speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q37260" start="592" end="599" title="writing" label="writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q558363" start="638" end="644" title="visual system" label="visual"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="645" end="651" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="707" end="711" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q188889" start="729" end="737" title="Code" label="encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q974688" start="766" end="772" title="communication source" label="source"/>
<link wikidata="Q188889" start="816" end="824" title="Code" label="Decoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814648" start="1029" end="1043" title="plain language" label="plain language"/>
<link wikidata="Q104476225" start="1105" end="1114" title="semaphore" label="semaphore"/>
<link wikidata="Q250796" start="1143" end="1148" title="Flag semaphore" label="flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q378499" start="1185" end="1200" title="semaphore line" label="semaphore tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="1392" end="1410" title="information theory" label="information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="1415" end="1431" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="1468" end="1477" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="1503" end="1510" title="symbols" label="symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q837518" start="1528" end="1536" title="alphabet (computer science)" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="2162" end="2184" title="formal language theory" label="formal language theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q837518" start="2314" end="2323" title="alphabet (computer science)" label="alphabets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756942" start="2361" end="2375" title="total function" label="total function"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="2408" end="2427" title="String (computer science)" label="sequence of symbols"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2479" end="2491" title="Homomorphism#Formal language theory" label="homomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140114" start="2726" end="2735" title="Code word (figure of speech)" label="code word"/>
<link wikidata="Q126002" start="2762" end="2775" title="concatenation" label="concatenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345239" start="2932" end="2948" title="entropy encoding" label="entropy encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626534" start="3077" end="3083" title="prefix (computer science)" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647" start="3133" end="3147" title="Huffman coding" label="Huffman coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="3363" end="3384" title="country calling codes" label="country calling codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33057" start="3421" end="3425" title="ISBN" label="ISBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="3480" end="3484" title="UMTS" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="3485" end="3490" title="W-CDMA" label="WCDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q371685" start="3514" end="3537" title="Kraft&amp;#x27;s inequality" label="Kraft&amp;#x27;s inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="3886" end="3907" title="Error detection and correction" label="error-correcting code"/>
<link wikidata="Q853922" start="4012" end="4024" title="Hamming code" label="Hamming code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061598" start="4027" end="4039" title="Reed–Solomon" label="Reed–Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q201972" start="4041" end="4052" title="Reed–Muller code" label="Reed–Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567339" start="4054" end="4068" title="Walsh–Hadamard code" label="Walsh–Hadamard"/>
<link wikidata="Q795705" start="4070" end="4097" title="BCH code" label="Bose–Chaudhuri–Hochquenghem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164281" start="4099" end="4104" title="Turbo code" label="Turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534522" start="4106" end="4111" title="Binary Golay code" label="Golay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981471" start="4113" end="4137" title="Algebraic geometry code" label="algebraic geometry codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187444" start="4139" end="4168" title="low-density parity-check code" label="low-density parity-check code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572753" start="4175" end="4190" title="space–time code" label="space–time code"/>
<link wikidata="Q32483" start="4510" end="4520" title="character (computing)" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="4595" end="4604" title="Telegraphy" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152551" start="4699" end="4715" title="commercial code (communications)" label="commercial codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140114" start="5154" end="5163" title="Code word (figure of speech)" label="Code word"/>
<link wikidata="Q36253" start="5198" end="5204" title="length" label="length"/>
<link wikidata="Q184377" start="5206" end="5222" title="pronounceability" label="pronounceability"/>
<link wikidata="Q423081" start="5517" end="5530" title="Black Chamber" label="Black Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269275" start="5538" end="5553" title="Herbert Yardley" label="Herbert Yardley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="5685" end="5701" title="data compression" label="data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="5763" end="5773" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647" start="5861" end="5875" title="Huffman coding" label="Huffman coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="5907" end="5916" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049908" start="6446" end="6455" title="Wide character" label="multibyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q386787" start="6490" end="6504" title="Variable-width encoding" label="variable-width"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="6632" end="6637" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428315" start="6682" end="6694" title="HTTP headers" label="HTTP headers"/>
<link wikidata="Q53764732" start="6836" end="6864" title="CJK characters" label="Chinese, Japanese and Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="7480" end="7485" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="7506" end="7513" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="7617" end="7627" title="Biology" label="Biological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="7727" end="7730" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="7759" end="7763" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="7776" end="7789" title="messenger RNA" label="messenger RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="7824" end="7831" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="7843" end="7855" title="genetic code" label="genetic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="7887" end="7892" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="7912" end="7923" title="nucleotides" label="nucleotides"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="7970" end="7980" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q28354" start="8110" end="8120" title="stop codon" label="stop codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="8177" end="8188" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451046" start="8192" end="8202" title="Gödel code" label="Gödel code"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="8233" end="8238" title="Gödel" label="Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="8246" end="8268" title="incompleteness theorem" label="incompleteness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140046" start="8295" end="8316" title="mathematical notation" label="mathematical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="8322" end="8336" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451046" start="8346" end="8361" title="Gödel numbering" label="Gödel numbering"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="8414" end="8428" title="traffic lights" label="traffic lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988919" start="8434" end="8444" title="Electronic color code" label="color code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321" start="8487" end="8506" title="Resistor" label="electrical resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="8605" end="8614" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034548" start="8616" end="8622" title="coupon" label="coupon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202027" start="8788" end="8794" title="cornet" label="cornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="8962" end="8975" title="sign language" label="sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="8996" end="9003" title="braille" label="braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="9063" end="9077" title="Sheet music" label="Musical scores"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="9112" end="9117" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q625114" start="9191" end="9205" title="chess notation" label="chess notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q467928" start="9236" end="9259" title="history of cryptography" label="history of cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994879" start="9261" end="9266" title="Code (cryptography)" label="codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="9345" end="9351" title="cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="9457" end="9466" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q862550" start="9576" end="9583" title="Language of flowers" label="flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="9816" end="9825" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165081" start="10065" end="10079" title="content format" label="content format"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="10143" end="10147" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="10151" end="10162" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q37045" start="10186" end="10201" title="markup language" label="markup language"/>
<link wikidata="Q780920" start="10301" end="10325" title="Text Encoding Initiative" label="Text Encoding Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449104" start="10329" end="10347" title="Semantics encoding" label="Semantics encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="10492" end="10508" title="Data compression" label="Data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q118093" start="10555" end="10567" title="Transmission (telecommunications)" label="transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q57515336" start="10571" end="10578" title="data storage device" label="storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q184748" start="10602" end="10607" title="codec" label="codec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002051" start="10610" end="10625" title="Neural encoding" label="Neural encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="10675" end="10681" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q18653" start="10685" end="10700" title="Memory encoding" label="Memory encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q258137" start="10756" end="10775" title="Television encoding" label="Television encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="10777" end="10781" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="10783" end="10786" title="PAL" label="PAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q223765" start="10791" end="10796" title="SECAM" label="SECAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q194152" start="10836" end="10863" title="Parsing" label="Decoding (computer science)"/>
<link wikidata="Q576722" start="10866" end="10882" title="Decoding methods" label="Decoding methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="10967" end="10992" title="Digital signal processing" label="Digital signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q210863" start="11089" end="11116" title="Digital-to-analog converter" label="Digital-to-analog converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364762" start="11196" end="11203" title="phonics" label="phonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="11302" end="11309" title="Acronym" label="Acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="11374" end="11382" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="11388" end="11402" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q192824" start="11434" end="11486" title="International Air Transport Association airport code" label="International Air Transport Association airport code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841378" start="11551" end="11558" title="bag tag" label="bag tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q14565734" start="11561" end="11573" title="Station code" label="Station code"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="11967" end="11977" title="journalism" label="journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084029" start="12033" end="12047" title="-30-" label="other contexts"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110588" start="12098" end="12103" title="ADDML" label="ADDML"/>
<link wikidata="Q15073717" start="12106" end="12120" title="Asemic writing" label="Asemic writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="12123" end="12129" title="Cipher" label="Cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105566" start="12132" end="12148" title="Code (semiotics)" label="Code (semiotics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246741" start="12151" end="12164" title="Cultural code" label="Cultural code"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384559" start="12167" end="12182" title="Equipment codes" label="Equipment codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536431" start="12185" end="12209" title="Quantum error correction" label="Quantum error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="12212" end="12221" title="Semiotics" label="Semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41511" start="12224" end="12242" title="Universal language" label="Universal language"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5228" wikidata="Q271785" url="?curid=5228" title="Cheirogaleidae">
<text>The Cheirogaleidae are the family of strepsirrhine primates containing the various dwarf and mouse lemurs. Like all other lemurs, cheirogaleids live exclusively on the island of Madagascar.

==Characteristics==
Cheirogaleids are smaller than the other lemurs and, in fact, they are the smallest primates. They have soft, long fur, colored grey-brown to reddish on top, with a generally brighter underbelly. Typically, they have small ears, large, close-set eyes, and long hind legs. Like all strepsirrhines, they have fine claws at the second toe of the hind legs. They grow to a size of only 13 to 28 cm, with a tail that is very long, sometimes up to one and a half times as long as the body. They weigh no more than 500 grams, with some species weighing as little as 60 grams.

Dwarf and mouse lemurs are nocturnal and arboreal. They are excellent climbers and can also jump far, using their long tails for balance. When on the ground (a rare occurrence), they move by hopping on their hind legs. They spend the day in tree hollows or leaf nests. Cheirogaleids are typically solitary, but sometimes live together in pairs.

Their eyes possess a tapetum lucidum, a light-reflecting layer that improves their night vision. Some species, such as the lesser dwarf lemur, store fat at the hind legs and the base of the tail, and hibernate. Unlike lemurids, they have long upper incisors, although they do have the comb-like teeth typical of all strepsirhines. They have the dental formula: 

Cheirogaleids are omnivores, eating fruits, flowers and leaves (and sometimes nectar), as well as insects, spiders, and small vertebrates.

The females usually have three pairs of nipples. After a meager 60-day gestation, they will bear two to four (usually two or three) young. After five to six weeks, the young are weaned and become fully mature near the end of their first year or sometime in their second year, depending on the species. In human care, they can live for up to 15 years, although their life expectancy in the wild is probably significantly shorter.

==Classification==
The five genera of cheirogaleids contain 42 species.

* Infraorder Lemuriformes
** Family Cheirogaleidae
*** Genus &quot;Cheirogaleus&quot;: dwarf lemurs
**** Montagne d&#x27;Ambre dwarf lemur, &quot;Cheirogaleus andysabini&quot;
**** Furry-eared dwarf lemur, &quot;Cheirogaleus crossleyi&quot;
**** Groves&#x27; dwarf lemur, &quot;Cheirogaleus grovesi&quot;
**** Lavasoa dwarf lemur, &quot;Cheirogaleus lavasoensis&quot;
**** Greater dwarf lemur, &quot;Cheirogaleus major&quot;
**** Fat-tailed dwarf lemur, &quot;Cheirogaleus medius&quot;
**** Lesser iron-gray dwarf lemur, &quot;Cheirogaleus minusculus&quot;
**** Ankarana dwarf lemur, &quot;Cheirogaleus shethi&quot;
**** Sibree&#x27;s dwarf lemur, &quot;Cheirogaleus sibreei&quot;
**** Thomas&#x27; dwarf lemur, &quot;Cheirogaleus thomasi&quot;
*** Genus &quot;Microcebus&quot;: mouse lemurs
****Arnhold&#x27;s mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus arnholdi&quot;
**** Madame Berthe&#x27;s mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus berthae&quot;
**** Bongolava mouse lemur &quot;Microcebus bongolavensis&quot;
**** Boraha mouse lemur &quot;Microcebus boraha&quot;
**** Danfoss&#x27; mouse lemur &quot;Microcebus danfossi&quot;
**** Ganzhorn&#x27;s mouse lemur. &quot;Microcebus ganzhorni&quot;
**** Gerp&#x27;s mouse lemur. &quot;Microcebus gerpi&quot;
**** Reddish-gray mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus griseorufus&quot;
**** Jolly&#x27;s mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus jollyae&quot;
**** Jonah&#x27;s mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus jonahi&quot;
**** Goodman&#x27;s mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus lehilahytsara&quot;
**** MacArthur&#x27;s mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus macarthurii&quot;
**** Claire&#x27;s mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus mamiratra&quot;, synonymous to &quot;M. lokobensis&quot;
**** Bemanasy mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus manitatra&quot;
**** Margot Marsh&#x27;s mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus margotmarshae&quot;
**** Marohita mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus marohita&quot;
**** Mittermeier&#x27;s mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus mittermeieri&quot;
**** Gray mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus murinus&quot;
**** Pygmy mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus myoxinus&quot;
**** Golden-brown mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus ravelobensis&quot;
**** Brown mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus rufus&quot;
**** Sambirano mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus sambiranensis&quot;
**** Simmons&#x27; mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus simmonsi&quot;
**** Anosy mouse lemur. &quot;Microcebus tanosi&quot;
**** Northern rufous mouse lemur, &quot;Microcebus tavaratra&quot;
*** Genus &quot;Mirza&quot;: giant mouse lemurs
**** Coquerel&#x27;s giant mouse lemur or Coquerel&#x27;s dwarf lemur, &quot;Mirza coquereli&quot;
**** Northern giant mouse lemur, &quot;Mirza zaza&quot;
*** Genus &quot;Allocebus&quot;
**** Hairy-eared dwarf lemur, &quot;Allocebus trichotis&quot;
*** Genus &quot;Phaner&quot;: fork-marked lemurs
**** Masoala fork-marked lemur, &quot;Phaner furcifer&quot;
**** Pale fork-marked lemur, &quot;Phaner pallescens&quot;
**** Pariente&#x27;s fork-marked lemur, &quot;Phaner parienti&quot;
**** Amber Mountain fork-marked lemur, &quot;Phaner electromontis&quot;

==Footnotes==
*According to the letter of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature, the correct name for this family should be Microcebidae, but the name Cheirogaleidae has been retained for stability.
*In 2008, 7 new species of &quot;Microcebus&quot; were formally recognized, but &quot;Microcebus lokobensis&quot; (Lokobe mouse lemur) was not among the additions, even though it was described in 2006. Therefore, its status as a species is still questionable.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q271785" start="4" end="18" title="Cheirogaleidae" label="Cheirogaleidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q82265" start="37" end="50" title="strepsirrhine" label="strepsirrhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="51" end="58" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192405" start="122" end="127" title="lemur" label="lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q271785" start="130" end="143" title="Cheirogaleidae" label="cheirogaleids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="178" end="188" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q309179" start="808" end="817" title="nocturnal" label="nocturnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q767024" start="822" end="830" title="arboreal" label="arboreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045562" start="1148" end="1163" title="tapetum lucidum" label="tapetum lucidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q205837" start="1250" end="1268" title="lesser dwarf lemur" label="lesser dwarf lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q186462" start="1345" end="1352" title="Lemuridae" label="lemurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q273543" start="1376" end="1383" title="incisor" label="incisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q641973" start="1472" end="1486" title="dentition" label="dental formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="1508" end="1516" title="omnivore" label="omnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="2088" end="2094" title="genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="2123" end="2130" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q608001" start="2200" end="2212" title="Cheirogaleus" label="Cheirogaleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20965799" start="2238" end="2271" title="Montagne d&amp;#x27;Ambre dwarf lemur" label="Montagne d&amp;#x27;Ambre dwarf lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q20965799" start="2279" end="2302" title="Cheirogaleus andysabini" label="Cheirogaleus andysabini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365590" start="2314" end="2337" title="Furry-eared dwarf lemur" label="Furry-eared dwarf lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365590" start="2345" end="2367" title="Cheirogaleus crossleyi" label="Cheirogaleus crossleyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47463260" start="2379" end="2403" title="Groves&amp;#x27; dwarf lemur" label="Groves&amp;#x27; dwarf lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q47463260" start="2411" end="2431" title="Cheirogaleus grovesi" label="Cheirogaleus grovesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14376067" start="2443" end="2462" title="Lavasoa dwarf lemur" label="Lavasoa dwarf lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q14376067" start="2470" end="2494" title="Cheirogaleus lavasoensis" label="Cheirogaleus lavasoensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q900992" start="2506" end="2525" title="Greater dwarf lemur" label="Greater dwarf lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q900992" start="2533" end="2551" title="Cheirogaleus major" label="Cheirogaleus major"/>
<link wikidata="Q205837" start="2563" end="2585" title="Fat-tailed dwarf lemur" label="Fat-tailed dwarf lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q205837" start="2593" end="2612" title="Cheirogaleus medius" label="Cheirogaleus medius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354692" start="2624" end="2652" title="Lesser iron-gray dwarf lemur" label="Lesser iron-gray dwarf lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354692" start="2660" end="2683" title="Cheirogaleus minusculus" label="Cheirogaleus minusculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28104026" start="2695" end="2715" title="Ankarana dwarf lemur" label="Ankarana dwarf lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q28104026" start="2723" end="2742" title="Cheirogaleus shethi" label="Cheirogaleus shethi"/>
<link wikidata="Q368515" start="2754" end="2779" title="Sibree&amp;#x27;s dwarf lemur" label="Sibree&amp;#x27;s dwarf lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q368515" start="2787" end="2807" title="Cheirogaleus sibreei" label="Cheirogaleus sibreei"/>
<link wikidata="Q28476855" start="2819" end="2843" title="Thomas&amp;#x27; dwarf lemur" label="Thomas&amp;#x27; dwarf lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q28476855" start="2851" end="2871" title="Cheirogaleus thomasi" label="Cheirogaleus thomasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4377" start="2894" end="2904" title="Microcebus" label="Microcebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134080" start="2929" end="2955" title="Arnhold&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur" label="Arnhold&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134080" start="2963" end="2982" title="Microcebus arnholdi" label="Microcebus arnholdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q827793" start="2994" end="3026" title="Madame Berthe&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur" label="Madame Berthe&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q827793" start="3034" end="3052" title="Microcebus berthae" label="Microcebus berthae"/>
<link wikidata="Q892436" start="3064" end="3085" title="Bongolava mouse lemur" label="Bongolava mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q892436" start="3092" end="3116" title="Microcebus bongolavensis" label="Microcebus bongolavensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23938095" start="3128" end="3146" title="Boraha mouse lemur" label="Boraha mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q23938095" start="3153" end="3170" title="Microcebus boraha" label="Microcebus boraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q687598" start="3182" end="3207" title="Danfoss&amp;#x27; mouse lemur" label="Danfoss&amp;#x27; mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q687598" start="3214" end="3233" title="Microcebus danfossi" label="Microcebus danfossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23938124" start="3245" end="3272" title="Ganzhorn&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur" label="Ganzhorn&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q23938124" start="3280" end="3300" title="Microcebus ganzhorni" label="Microcebus ganzhorni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514699" start="3312" end="3335" title="Gerp&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur" label="Gerp&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514699" start="3343" end="3359" title="Microcebus gerpi" label="Microcebus gerpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543709" start="3371" end="3395" title="Reddish-gray mouse lemur" label="Reddish-gray mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543709" start="3403" end="3425" title="Microcebus griseorufus" label="Microcebus griseorufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206248" start="3437" end="3461" title="Jolly&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur" label="Jolly&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206248" start="3469" end="3487" title="Microcebus jollyae" label="Microcebus jollyae"/>
<link wikidata="Q97961729" start="3499" end="3523" title="Jonah&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur" label="Jonah&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q97961729" start="3531" end="3548" title="Microcebus jonahi" label="Microcebus jonahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194860" start="3560" end="3586" title="Goodman&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur" label="Goodman&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194860" start="3594" end="3618" title="Microcebus lehilahytsara" label="Microcebus lehilahytsara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185234" start="3630" end="3658" title="MacArthur&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur" label="MacArthur&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185234" start="3666" end="3688" title="Microcebus macarthurii" label="Microcebus macarthurii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094764" start="3700" end="3725" title="Claire&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur" label="Claire&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094764" start="3733" end="3753" title="Microcebus mamiratra" label="Microcebus mamiratra"/>
<link wikidata="Q23938105" start="3806" end="3826" title="Bemanasy mouse lemur" label="Bemanasy mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q23938105" start="3834" end="3854" title="Microcebus manitatra" label="Microcebus manitatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q865539" start="3866" end="3897" title="Margot Marsh&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur" label="Margot Marsh&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q865539" start="3905" end="3929" title="Microcebus margotmarshae" label="Microcebus margotmarshae"/>
<link wikidata="Q13481572" start="3941" end="3961" title="Marohita mouse lemur" label="Marohita mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q13481572" start="3969" end="3988" title="Microcebus marohita" label="Microcebus marohita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350668" start="4000" end="4030" title="Mittermeier&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur" label="Mittermeier&amp;#x27;s mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350668" start="4038" end="4061" title="Microcebus mittermeieri" label="Microcebus mittermeieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q876491" start="4073" end="4089" title="Gray mouse lemur" label="Gray mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q876491" start="4097" end="4115" title="Microcebus murinus" label="Microcebus murinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q243990" start="4127" end="4144" title="Pygmy mouse lemur" label="Pygmy mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q243990" start="4152" end="4171" title="Microcebus myoxinus" label="Microcebus myoxinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q673062" start="4183" end="4207" title="Golden-brown mouse lemur" label="Golden-brown mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q673062" start="4215" end="4238" title="Microcebus ravelobensis" label="Microcebus ravelobensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q901158" start="4250" end="4267" title="Brown mouse lemur" label="Brown mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q901158" start="4275" end="4291" title="Microcebus rufus" label="Microcebus rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202748" start="4303" end="4324" title="Sambirano mouse lemur" label="Sambirano mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202748" start="4332" end="4356" title="Microcebus sambiranensis" label="Microcebus sambiranensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351736" start="4368" end="4393" title="Simmons&amp;#x27; mouse lemur" label="Simmons&amp;#x27; mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351736" start="4401" end="4420" title="Microcebus simmonsi" label="Microcebus simmonsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13440247" start="4432" end="4449" title="Anosy mouse lemur" label="Anosy mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q13440247" start="4457" end="4474" title="Microcebus tanosi" label="Microcebus tanosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202760" start="4486" end="4513" title="Northern rufous mouse lemur" label="Northern rufous mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202760" start="4521" end="4541" title="Microcebus tavaratra" label="Microcebus tavaratra"/>
<link wikidata="Q166416" start="4564" end="4569" title="Giant mouse lemur" label="Mirza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194199" start="4601" end="4634" title="Coquerel&amp;#x27;s giant mouse lemur" label="Coquerel&amp;#x27;s giant mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194199" start="4673" end="4688" title="Mirza coquereli" label="Mirza coquereli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270064" start="4700" end="4726" title="Northern giant mouse lemur" label="Northern giant mouse lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270064" start="4734" end="4744" title="Mirza zaza" label="Mirza zaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q907863" start="4767" end="4776" title="Hairy-eared dwarf lemur" label="Allocebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q907863" start="4788" end="4811" title="Hairy-eared dwarf lemur" label="Hairy-eared dwarf lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q907863" start="4819" end="4838" title="Allocebus trichotis" label="Allocebus trichotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078082" start="4861" end="4867" title="Phaner" label="Phaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150927" start="4899" end="4924" title="Masoala fork-marked lemur" label="Masoala fork-marked lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150927" start="4932" end="4947" title="Phaner furcifer" label="Phaner furcifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q737953" start="4959" end="4981" title="Pale fork-marked lemur" label="Pale fork-marked lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q737953" start="4989" end="5006" title="Phaner pallescens" label="Phaner pallescens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209242" start="5018" end="5051" title="Pariente&amp;#x27;s fork-marked lemur" label="Pariente&amp;#x27;s fork-marked lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209242" start="5059" end="5074" title="Phaner parienti" label="Phaner parienti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202656" start="5086" end="5118" title="Amber Mountain fork-marked lemur" label="Amber Mountain fork-marked lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202656" start="5126" end="5146" title="Phaner electromontis" label="Phaner electromontis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13011" start="5200" end="5245" title="International Code of Zoological Nomenclature" label="International Code of Zoological Nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094764" start="5480" end="5498" title="Lokobe mouse lemur" label="Lokobe mouse lemur"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5229" wikidata="Q574338" url="?curid=5229" title="Callitrichidae">
<text>The Callitrichidae (also called Arctopitheci or Hapalidae) are a family of New World monkeys, including marmosets, tamarins, and lion tamarins. At times, this group of animals has been regarded as a subfamily, called the Callitrichinae, of the family Cebidae.

This taxon was traditionally thought to be a primitive lineage, from which all the larger-bodied platyrrhines evolved. However, some works argue that callitrichids are actually a dwarfed lineage.

Ancestral stem-callitrichids likely were &quot;normal-sized&quot; ceboids that were dwarfed through evolutionary time. This may exemplify a rare example of insular dwarfing in a mainland context, with the &quot;islands&quot; being formed by biogeographic barriers during arid climatic periods when forest distribution became patchy, and/or by the extensive river networks in the Amazon Basin.

All callitrichids are arboreal. They are the smallest of the simian primates. They eat insects, fruit, and the sap or gum from trees; occasionally, they take small vertebrates. The marmosets rely quite heavily on tree exudates, with some species (e.g. &quot;Callithrix jacchus&quot; and &quot;Cebuella pygmaea&quot;) considered obligate exudativores.

Callitrichids typically live in small, territorial groups of about five or six animals. Their social organization is unique among primates, and is called a &quot;cooperative polyandrous group&quot;. This communal breeding system involves groups of multiple males and females, but only one female is reproductively active. Females mate with more than one male and each shares the responsibility of carrying the offspring.

They are the only primate group that regularly produces twins, which constitute over 80% of births in species that have been studied. Unlike other male primates, male callitrichids generally provide as much parental care as females. Parental duties may include carrying, protecting, feeding, comforting, and even engaging in play behavior with offspring. In some cases, such as in the cotton-top tamarin (&quot;Saguinus oedipus&quot;), males, particularly those that are paternal, even show a greater involvement in caregiving than females. The typical social structure seems to constitute a breeding group, with several of their previous offspring living in the group and providing significant help in rearing the young.

==Species and subspecies list==
Taxa included in the Callitrichidae are:

*Family Callitrichidae
** Genus &quot;Saguinus&quot;
*** Subgenus &quot;Saguinus&quot;
**** Red-handed tamarin, &quot;Saguinus midas&quot;
**** Western black tamarin, &quot;Saguinus niger&quot;
**** Eastern black-handed tamarin, &quot;Saguinus ursulus&quot;
**** Pied tamarin, &quot;Saguinus bicolor&quot;
**** Martins&#x27;s tamarin, &quot;Saguinus martinsi&quot;
***** &quot;Saguinus martinsi martinsi&quot;
***** &quot;Saguinus martinsi ochraceus&quot;
**** White-footed tamarin, &quot;Saguinus leucopus&quot;
**** Cottontop tamarin, &quot;Saguinus oedipus&quot;
**** Geoffroy&#x27;s tamarin, &quot;Saguinus geoffroyi&quot;
*** Subgenus &quot;Tamarinus&quot;
**** Moustached tamarin, &quot;Saguinus mystax&quot;
***** Spix&#x27;s moustached tamarin, &quot;Saguinus mystax mystax&quot;
***** Red-capped moustached tamarin, &quot;Saguinus mystax pileatus&quot;
***** White-rump moustached tamarin, &quot;Saguinus mystax pluto&quot;
**** White-lipped tamarin, &quot;Saguinus labiatus&quot;
***** Geoffroy&#x27;s red-bellied tamarin, &quot;Saguinus labiatus labiatus&quot;
***** Gray&#x27;s red-bellied tamarin, &quot;Saguinus labiatus rufiventer&quot;
***** Thomas&#x27;s red-bellied tamarin, &quot;Saguinus labiatus thomasi&quot;
**** Emperor tamarin, &quot;Saguinus imperator&quot;
***** Black-chinned emperor tamarin, &quot;Saguinus imperator imperator&quot;
***** Bearded emperor tamarin, &quot;Saguinus imperator subgrisescens&quot;
**** Mottle-faced tamarin, &quot;Saguinus inustus&quot;
** Genus &quot;Leontocebus&quot;
*** Black-mantled tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus nigricollis&quot;
**** Spix&#x27;s black-mantle tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus nigricollis nigricollis&quot;
**** Graells&#x27;s tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus nigricollis graellsi&quot;
**** Hernández-Camacho&#x27;s black-mantle tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus nigricollis hernandezi&quot;
*** Brown-mantled tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus fuscicollis&quot;
**** Avila Pires&#x27; saddle-back tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus fuscicollis avilapiresi&quot;
**** Spix&#x27;s saddle-back tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus fuscicollis fuscicollis&quot;
**** Mura&#x27;s saddleback tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus fuscicollis mura&quot;
**** Lako&#x27;s saddleback tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus fuscicollis primitivus&quot;
*** Andean saddle-back tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus leucogenys&quot;
*** Lesson&#x27;s saddle-back tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus fuscus&quot;
*** Cruz Lima&#x27;s saddle-back tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus cruzlimai&quot;
*** Weddell&#x27;s saddle-back tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus weddelli&quot;
**** Weddell&#x27;s tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus weddelli weddelli&quot;
**** Crandall&#x27;s saddle-back tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus weddelli crandalli&quot;
**** White-mantled tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus weddelli melanoleucus&quot;
*** Golden-mantled tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus tripartitus&quot;
*** Illiger&#x27;s saddle-back tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus illigeri&quot;
*** Red-mantled saddle-back tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus lagonotus&quot;
*** Geoffroy&#x27;s saddle-back tamarin, &quot;Leontocebus nigrifrons&quot;
** Genus &quot;Leontopithecus&quot;
*** Golden lion tamarin, &quot;Leontopithecus rosalia&quot;
*** Golden-headed lion tamarin, &quot;Leontopithecus chrysomelas&quot;
*** Black lion tamarin, &quot;Leontopithecus chrysopygus&quot;
*** Superagui lion tamarin, &quot;Leontopithecus caissara&quot;
** Genus &quot;Patasola&quot;
*** &quot;Patasola magdalenae&quot;
** Genus &quot;Micodon&quot;
*** &quot;Micodon kiotensis&quot;
** Genus &quot;Callimico&quot;
*** Goeldi&#x27;s marmoset, &quot;Callimico goeldii&quot;
** Genus &quot;Mico&quot;
*** Silvery marmoset, &quot;Mico argentatus&quot;
*** Roosmalens&#x27; dwarf marmoset, &quot;Mico humilis&quot;
*** White marmoset, &quot;Mico leucippe&quot;
*** Black-tailed marmoset, &quot;Mico melanurus&quot;
*** Schneider&#x27;s marmoset, &quot;Mico schneideri&quot;
*** Hershkovitz&#x27;s marmoset, &quot;Mico intermedia&quot;
*** Emilia&#x27;s marmoset, &quot;Mico emiliae&quot;
*** Black-headed marmoset, &quot;Mico nigriceps&quot;
*** Marca&#x27;s marmoset, &quot;Mico marcai&quot;
*** Santarem marmoset, &quot;Mico humeralifer&quot;
*** Gold-and-white marmoset, &quot;Mico chrysoleucos&quot;
*** Maués marmoset, &quot;Mico mauesi&quot;
*** Sateré marmoset, &quot;Mico saterei&quot;
*** Rio Acarí marmoset, &quot;Mico acariensis&quot;
*** Rondon&#x27;s marmoset, &quot;Mico rondoni&quot;
*** Munduruku marmoset, &quot;Mico munduruku&quot;
** Genus &quot;Cebuella&quot;
*** Western pygmy marmoset, &quot;Cebuella pygmaea&quot;
*** Eastern pygmy marmoset, &quot;Cebuella niveiventris&quot;
** Genus &quot;Callithrix&quot;
*** Common marmoset, &quot;Callithrix jacchus&quot;
*** Black-tufted marmoset, &quot;Callithrix penicillata&quot;
*** Wied&#x27;s marmoset, &quot;Callithrix kuhlii&quot;
*** White-headed marmoset, &quot;Callithrix geoffroyi&quot;
*** Buffy-tufted marmoset, &quot;Callithrix aurita&quot;
*** Buffy-headed marmoset, &quot;Callithrix flaviceps&quot;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q574338" start="4" end="18" title="Callitrichidae" label="Callitrichidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q574338" start="32" end="44" title="Callitrichidae" label="Arctopitheci"/>
<link wikidata="Q574338" start="48" end="57" title="Callitrichidae" label="Hapalidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="65" end="71" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q237157" start="75" end="92" title="New World monkeys" label="New World monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q19829485" start="104" end="112" title="marmoset" label="marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q240034" start="115" end="122" title="tamarin" label="tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q857486" start="129" end="141" title="lion tamarin" label="lion tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q574338" start="221" end="235" title="Callitrichidae" label="Callitrichinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q425707" start="251" end="258" title="Cebidae" label="Cebidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="468" end="473" title="stem group" label="stem-"/>
<link wikidata="Q237157" start="524" end="531" title="Ceboidea" label="ceboids"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="837" end="849" title="Amazon Basin" label="Amazon Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q767024" start="874" end="882" title="arboreal" label="arboreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452918" start="913" end="919" title="simian" label="simian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="920" end="927" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139400" start="1070" end="1077" title="exudate" label="exudate"/>
<link wikidata="Q838947" start="1110" end="1128" title="Callithrix jacchus" label="Callithrix jacchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q244361" start="1145" end="1161" title="Cebuella pygmaea" label="Cebuella pygmaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075144" start="1180" end="1188" title="obligate" label="obligate"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="1243" end="1254" title="territory (animal)" label="territorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430243" start="1298" end="1317" title="Social organisation" label="social organization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2011" end="2029" title="cotton-top tamarin#Cooperation" label="cotton-top tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q240034" start="2461" end="2469" title="Saguinus" label="Saguinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q240034" start="2495" end="2503" title="Tamarin" label="Saguinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q775569" start="2515" end="2533" title="Red-handed tamarin" label="Red-handed tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q672895" start="2567" end="2588" title="Black tamarin" label="Western black tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15843769" start="2622" end="2650" title="Eastern black-handed tamarin" label="Eastern black-handed tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q232625" start="2686" end="2698" title="Pied tamarin" label="Pied tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q932541" start="2734" end="2756" title="Martins&amp;#x27;s tamarin" label="Martins&amp;#x27;s tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151198" start="2884" end="2904" title="White-footed tamarin" label="White-footed tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q137528" start="2941" end="2958" title="Cottontop tamarin" label="Cottontop tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q934586" start="2994" end="3017" title="Geoffroy&amp;#x27;s tamarin" label="Geoffroy&amp;#x27;s tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q240034" start="3069" end="3076" title="Tamarin" label="Tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q592510" start="3090" end="3108" title="Moustached tamarin" label="Moustached tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q592510" start="3144" end="3174" title="Spix&amp;#x27;s moustached tamarin" label="Spix&amp;#x27;s moustached tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q934692" start="3361" end="3381" title="White-lipped tamarin" label="White-lipped tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q114937" start="3659" end="3674" title="Emperor tamarin" label="Emperor tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920089" start="3713" end="3742" title="Black-chinned emperor tamarin" label="Black-chinned emperor tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876656" start="3791" end="3814" title="Bearded emperor tamarin" label="Bearded emperor tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352436" start="3866" end="3886" title="Mottle-faced tamarin" label="Mottle-faced tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25384537" start="3932" end="3943" title="Leontocebus" label="Leontocebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q94697916" start="3954" end="3975" title="Black-mantled tamarin" label="Black-mantled tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156948" start="4105" end="4127" title="Graells&amp;#x27;s tamarin" label="Graells&amp;#x27;s tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q94697702" start="4277" end="4298" title="Brown-mantled tamarin" label="Brown-mantled tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q94697702" start="4341" end="4378" title="Avila Pires&amp;#x27; saddle-back tamarin" label="Avila Pires&amp;#x27; saddle-back tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q94697702" start="4433" end="4464" title="Spix&amp;#x27;s saddle-back tamarin" label="Spix&amp;#x27;s saddle-back tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937158" start="4519" end="4549" title="Mura&amp;#x27;s saddleback tamarin" label="Mura&amp;#x27;s saddleback tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q94697702" start="4597" end="4627" title="Lako&amp;#x27;s saddleback tamarin" label="Lako&amp;#x27;s saddleback tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20181720" start="4680" end="4706" title="Andean saddle-back tamarin" label="Andean saddle-back tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q94760754" start="4747" end="4780" title="Lesson&amp;#x27;s saddle-back tamarin" label="Lesson&amp;#x27;s saddle-back tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25384553" start="4817" end="4853" title="Cruz Lima&amp;#x27;s saddle-back tamarin" label="Cruz Lima&amp;#x27;s saddle-back tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22675245" start="4893" end="4927" title="Weddell&amp;#x27;s saddle-back tamarin" label="Weddell&amp;#x27;s saddle-back tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22675245" start="4967" end="4989" title="Weddell&amp;#x27;s tamarin" label="Weddell&amp;#x27;s tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205801" start="5123" end="5144" title="White-mantled tamarin" label="White-mantled tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q94699046" start="5196" end="5218" title="Golden-mantled tamarin" label="Golden-mantled tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q92275767" start="5260" end="5294" title="Illiger&amp;#x27;s saddle-back tamarin" label="Illiger&amp;#x27;s saddle-back tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q94969241" start="5333" end="5364" title="Red-mantled saddle-back tamarin" label="Red-mantled saddle-back tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q92285687" start="5404" end="5439" title="Geoffroy&amp;#x27;s saddle-back tamarin" label="Geoffroy&amp;#x27;s saddle-back tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q857486" start="5491" end="5505" title="Leontopithecus" label="Leontopithecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208486" start="5516" end="5535" title="Golden lion tamarin" label="Golden lion tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q775442" start="5576" end="5602" title="Golden-headed lion tamarin" label="Golden-headed lion tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q290591" start="5647" end="5665" title="Black lion tamarin" label="Black lion tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065007" start="5710" end="5732" title="Superagui lion tamarin" label="Superagui lion tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583299" start="5785" end="5793" title="Patasola (monkey)" label="Patasola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583299" start="5810" end="5829" title="Patasola magdalenae" label="Patasola magdalenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q20859347" start="5851" end="5858" title="Micodon" label="Micodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20859347" start="5875" end="5892" title="Micodon kiotensis" label="Micodon kiotensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q206273" start="5914" end="5923" title="Callimico" label="Callimico"/>
<link wikidata="Q206273" start="5934" end="5956" title="Goeldi&amp;#x27;s marmoset" label="Goeldi&amp;#x27;s marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340206" start="6003" end="6007" title="Mico (genus)" label="Mico"/>
<link wikidata="Q20873581" start="6018" end="6034" title="Silvery marmoset" label="Silvery marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q20888571" start="6068" end="6099" title="Roosmalens&amp;#x27; dwarf marmoset" label="Roosmalens&amp;#x27; dwarf marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q20890512" start="6130" end="6144" title="White marmoset" label="White marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q16718009" start="6176" end="6197" title="Black-tailed marmoset" label="Black-tailed marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q107862543" start="6230" end="6255" title="Schneider&amp;#x27;s marmoset" label="Schneider&amp;#x27;s marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154771" start="6289" end="6316" title="Hershkovitz&amp;#x27;s marmoset" label="Hershkovitz&amp;#x27;s marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21073205" start="6350" end="6372" title="Emilia&amp;#x27;s marmoset" label="Emilia&amp;#x27;s marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q20873070" start="6403" end="6424" title="Black-headed marmoset" label="Black-headed marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q20891170" start="6457" end="6478" title="Marca&amp;#x27;s marmoset" label="Marca&amp;#x27;s marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q20890524" start="6508" end="6525" title="Santarem marmoset" label="Santarem marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206327" start="6560" end="6583" title="Gold-and-white marmoset" label="Gold-and-white marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q20888577" start="6619" end="6633" title="Maués marmoset" label="Maués marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q20890485" start="6663" end="6678" title="Satéré marmoset" label="Sateré marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q20873589" start="6709" end="6727" title="Rio Acari marmoset" label="Rio Acarí marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187101" start="6761" end="6783" title="Rondon&amp;#x27;s marmoset" label="Rondon&amp;#x27;s marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q66087868" start="6814" end="6832" title="Munduruku marmoset" label="Munduruku marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q19826010" start="6876" end="6884" title="Cebuella" label="Cebuella"/>
<link wikidata="Q244361" start="6895" end="6917" title="Western pygmy marmoset" label="Western pygmy marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q95573837" start="6952" end="6974" title="Eastern pygmy marmoset" label="Eastern pygmy marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064620" start="7025" end="7035" title="Callithrix" label="Callithrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q838947" start="7046" end="7061" title="Common marmoset" label="Common marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q998685" start="7098" end="7119" title="Black-tufted marmoset" label="Black-tufted marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q588728" start="7160" end="7180" title="Wied&amp;#x27;s marmoset" label="Wied&amp;#x27;s marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q934635" start="7216" end="7237" title="White-headed marmoset" label="White-headed marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150912" start="7276" end="7297" title="Buffy-tufted marmoset" label="Buffy-tufted marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152335" start="7333" end="7354" title="Buffy-headed marmoset" label="Buffy-headed marmoset"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5230" wikidata="Q425707" url="?curid=5230" title="Cebidae">
<text>The Cebidae are one of the five families of New World monkeys now recognised. Extant members are the capuchin and squirrel monkeys. These species are found throughout tropical and subtropical South and Central America.

==Characteristics==
Cebid monkeys are arboreal animals that only rarely travel on the ground. They are generally small monkeys, ranging in size up to that of the brown capuchin, with a body length of 33 to 56 cm, and a weight of 2.5 to 3.9 kilograms. They are somewhat variable in form and coloration, but all have the wide, flat, noses typical of New World monkeys.

They are omnivorous, mostly eating fruit and insects, although the proportions of these foods vary greatly between species. They have the dental formula:

Females give birth to one or two young after a gestation period of between 130 and 170 days, depending on species. They are social animals, living in groups of between five and forty individuals, with the smaller species typically forming larger groups. They are generally diurnal in habit.

==Classification==

Previously, New World monkeys were divided between Callitrichidae and this family. For a few recent years, marmosets, tamarins, and lion tamarins were placed as a subfamily (Callitrichinae) in Cebidae, while moving other genera from Cebidae into the families Aotidae, Pitheciidae and Atelidae. The most recent classification of New World monkeys again splits the callitrichids off, leaving only the capuchins and squirrel monkeys in this family.
;
* Subfamily Cebinae (capuchin monkeys)
** Genus &quot;Cebus&quot; (gracile capuchin monkeys)
*** Colombian white-faced capuchin or Colombian white-headed capuchin, &quot;Cebus capucinus&quot;
*** Panamanian white-faced capuchin or Panamanian white-headed capuchin, &quot;Cebus imitator&quot;
*** Marañón white-fronted capuchin, &quot;Cebus yuracus&quot;
*** Shock-headed capuchin, &quot;Cebus cuscinus&quot;
*** Spix&#x27;s white-fronted capuchin, &quot;Cebus unicolor&quot;
*** Humboldt&#x27;s white-fronted capuchin, &quot;Cebus albifrons&quot;
*** Guianan weeper capuchin, &quot;Cebus olivaceus&quot;
*** Chestnut capuchin, &quot;Cebus castaneus&quot;
*** Ka&#x27;apor capuchin, &quot;Cebus kaapori&quot;
*** Venezuelan brown capuchin, &quot;Cebus brunneus&quot;
*** Sierra de Perijá white-fronted capuchin, &quot;Cebus leucocephalus&quot;
*** Río Cesar white-fronted capuchin, &quot;Cebus cesare&quot;
*** Varied white-fronted capuchin, &quot;Cebus versicolor&quot;
*** Santa Marta white-fronted capuchin, &quot;Cebus malitiosus&quot;
*** Ecuadorian white-fronted capuchin, &quot;Cebus aequatorialis&quot;
** Genus &quot;Sapajus&quot; (robust capuchin monkeys)
*** Tufted capuchin, &quot;Sapajus apella&quot;
*** Blond capuchin, &quot;Sapajus flavius&quot;
*** Black-striped capuchin, &quot;Sapajus libidinosus&quot;
*** Azaras&#x27;s capuchin, &quot;Sapajus cay&quot;
*** Black capuchin, &quot;Sapajus nigritus&quot;
*** Crested capuchin, &quot;Sapajus robustus&quot;
*** Golden-bellied capuchin, &quot;Sapajus xanthosternos&quot;
* Subfamily Saimiriinae (squirrel monkeys)
** Genus &quot;Saimiri&quot;
*** Bare-eared squirrel monkey, &quot;Saimiri ustus&quot;
*** Black squirrel monkey, &quot;Saimiri vanzolinii&quot;
*** Black-capped squirrel monkey, &quot;Saimiri boliviensis&quot;
*** Central American squirrel monkey, &quot;Saimiri oerstedi&quot;
*** Guianan squirrel monkey, &quot;Saimiri sciureus&quot;
*** Humboldt&#x27;s squirrel monkey, &quot;Saimiri cassiquiarensis&quot;
*** Collins&#x27; squirrel monkey, &quot;Saimiri collinsi&quot;

==Extinct taxa==
*Genus &quot;Panamacebus&quot;
**&quot;Panamacebus transitus&quot;
*Subfamily Cebinae
**Genus &quot;Acrecebus&quot;
***&quot;Acrecebus fraileyi&quot;
**Genus &quot;Killikaike&quot;
***&quot;Killikaike blakei&quot;
**Genus &quot;Dolichocebus&quot;
***&quot;Dolichocebus gaimanensis&quot;
*Subfamily Saimiriinae
**Genus &quot;Saimiri&quot;
***&quot;Saimiri fieldsi&quot;
***&quot;Saimiri annectens&quot;
**Genus &quot;Patasola&quot;
***&quot;Patasola magdalenae&quot;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q425707" start="4" end="11" title="Cebidae" label="Cebidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="32" end="40" title="family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q237157" start="44" end="61" title="New World monkeys" label="New World monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q326260" start="101" end="109" title="capuchin monkey" label="capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q309200" start="114" end="129" title="squirrel monkey" label="squirrel monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="192" end="197" title="South America" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="202" end="217" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q767024" start="258" end="266" title="arboreal" label="arboreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18324712" start="382" end="396" title="brown capuchin" label="brown capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="597" end="607" title="omnivore" label="omnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q641973" start="726" end="740" title="dentition" label="dental formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="790" end="799" title="gestation" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284186" start="1016" end="1023" title="Diurnality" label="diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q574338" start="1106" end="1120" title="Callitrichidae" label="Callitrichidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q19829485" start="1162" end="1170" title="marmoset" label="marmoset"/>
<link wikidata="Q240034" start="1173" end="1180" title="tamarin" label="tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q857486" start="1187" end="1199" title="lion tamarin" label="lion tamarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q469636" start="1314" end="1321" title="Aotidae" label="Aotidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860343" start="1323" end="1334" title="Pitheciidae" label="Pitheciidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q463395" start="1339" end="1347" title="Atelidae" label="Atelidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q326260" start="1515" end="1522" title="Cebinae" label="Cebinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8447051" start="1557" end="1562" title="Cebus" label="Cebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q585189" start="1600" end="1630" title="Colombian white-faced capuchin" label="Colombian white-faced capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q31836365" start="1699" end="1730" title="Panamanian white-faced capuchin" label="Panamanian white-faced capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20224949" start="1799" end="1829" title="Marañón white-fronted capuchin" label="Marañón white-fronted capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34270937" start="1861" end="1882" title="Shock-headed capuchin" label="Shock-headed capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60789225" start="1915" end="1949" title="Spix&amp;#x27;s white-fronted capuchin" label="Spix&amp;#x27;s white-fronted capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195979" start="1982" end="2020" title="Humboldt&amp;#x27;s white-fronted capuchin" label="Humboldt&amp;#x27;s white-fronted capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169682" start="2054" end="2077" title="Guianan weeper capuchin" label="Guianan weeper capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81849002" start="2111" end="2128" title="Chestnut capuchin" label="Chestnut capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365676" start="2162" end="2183" title="Ka&amp;#x27;apor capuchin" label="Ka&amp;#x27;apor capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q113865570" start="2215" end="2240" title="Venezuelan brown capuchin" label="Venezuelan brown capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22675351" start="2273" end="2312" title="Sierra de Perijá white-fronted capuchin" label="Sierra de Perijá white-fronted capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768671" start="2350" end="2382" title="Río Cesar white-fronted capuchin" label="Río Cesar white-fronted capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768700" start="2413" end="2442" title="Varied white-fronted capuchin" label="Varied white-fronted capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81655062" start="2477" end="2511" title="Santa Marta white-fronted capuchin" label="Santa Marta white-fronted capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q124088882" start="2546" end="2579" title="Ecuadorian white-fronted capuchin" label="Ecuadorian white-fronted capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703605" start="2628" end="2635" title="Sapajus" label="Sapajus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18324712" start="2672" end="2687" title="Tufted capuchin" label="Tufted capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154779" start="2720" end="2734" title="Blond capuchin" label="Blond capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154786" start="2768" end="2790" title="Black-striped capuchin" label="Black-striped capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977262" start="2828" end="2850" title="Azaras&amp;#x27;s capuchin" label="Azaras&amp;#x27;s capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24170509" start="2880" end="2894" title="Black capuchin" label="Black capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6121681" start="2929" end="2945" title="Crested capuchin" label="Crested capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154803" start="2980" end="3003" title="Golden-bellied capuchin" label="Golden-bellied capuchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q309200" start="3051" end="3062" title="Saimiriinae" label="Saimiriinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q309200" start="3097" end="3104" title="Saimiri" label="Saimiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q281736" start="3115" end="3141" title="Bare-eared squirrel monkey" label="Bare-eared squirrel monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266116" start="3173" end="3194" title="Black squirrel monkey" label="Black squirrel monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q834329" start="3231" end="3259" title="Black-capped squirrel monkey" label="Black-capped squirrel monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150922" start="3297" end="3329" title="Central American squirrel monkey" label="Central American squirrel monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q476930" start="3364" end="3387" title="Guianan squirrel monkey" label="Guianan squirrel monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q60607308" start="3422" end="3453" title="Humboldt&amp;#x27;s squirrel monkey" label="Humboldt&amp;#x27;s squirrel monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18650090" start="3495" end="3524" title="Collins&amp;#x27; squirrel monkey" label="Collins&amp;#x27; squirrel monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23958964" start="3586" end="3597" title="Panamacebus" label="Panamacebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23958964" start="3612" end="3633" title="Panamacebus transitus" label="Panamacebus transitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q326260" start="3651" end="3658" title="Cebinae" label="Cebinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q256859" start="3673" end="3682" title="Acrecebus" label="Acrecebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q256859" start="3698" end="3716" title="Acrecebus fraileyi" label="Acrecebus fraileyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779764" start="3737" end="3747" title="Killikaike" label="Killikaike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4779764" start="3763" end="3780" title="Killikaike blakei" label="Killikaike blakei"/>
<link wikidata="Q425647" start="3801" end="3813" title="Dolichocebus" label="Dolichocebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q425647" start="3829" end="3853" title="Dolichocebus gaimanensis" label="Dolichocebus gaimanensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q309200" start="3871" end="3882" title="Saimiriinae" label="Saimiriinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q309200" start="3897" end="3904" title="Saimiri" label="Saimiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632351" start="3920" end="3935" title="Saimiri fieldsi" label="Saimiri fieldsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632350" start="3951" end="3968" title="Saimiri annectens" label="Saimiri annectens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583299" start="3989" end="3997" title="Patasola (monkey)" label="Patasola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583299" start="4013" end="4032" title="Patasola magdalenae" label="Patasola magdalenae"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5232" wikidata="Q25371" url="?curid=5232" title="Chondrichthyes">
<text>Chondrichthyes (; ) is a class of jawed fish that contains the cartilaginous fish or chondrichthyans, which all have skeletons primarily composed of cartilage. They can be contrasted with the Osteichthyes or &quot;bony fish&quot;, which have skeletons primarily composed of bone tissue. Chondrichthyes are aquatic vertebrates with paired fins, paired nares, placoid scales, conus arteriosus in the heart, and a lack of opercula and swim bladders. Within the infraphylum Gnathostomata, cartilaginous fishes are distinct from all other jawed vertebrates.

The class is divided into two subclasses: Elasmobranchii (sharks, rays, skates and sawfish) and Holocephali (chimaeras, sometimes called ghost sharks, which are sometimes separated into their own class). Extant chondrichthyans range in size from the finless sleeper ray to the over whale shark.

==Anatomy==
===Skeleton===
The skeleton is cartilaginous. The notochord is gradually replaced by a vertebral column during development, except in Holocephali, where the notochord stays intact. In some deepwater sharks, the column is reduced.

As they do not have bone marrow, red blood cells are produced in the spleen and the epigonal organ (special tissue around the gonads, which is also thought to play a role in the immune system). They are also produced in the Leydig&#x27;s organ, which is only found in certain cartilaginous fishes. The subclass Holocephali, which is a very specialized group, lacks both the Leydig&#x27;s and epigonal organs.

===Appendages===
Apart from electric rays, which have a thick and flabby body, with soft, loose skin, chondrichthyans have tough skin covered with dermal teeth (again, Holocephali is an exception, as the teeth are lost in adults, only kept on the clasping organ seen on the caudal ventral surface of the male), also called placoid scales (or &quot;dermal denticles&quot;), making it feel like sandpaper. In most species, all dermal denticles are oriented in one direction, making the skin feel very smooth if rubbed in one direction and very rough if rubbed in the other.

Originally, the pectoral and pelvic girdles, which do not contain any dermal elements, did not connect. In later forms, each pair of fins became ventrally connected in the middle when scapulocoracoid and puboischiadic bars evolved. In rays, the pectoral fins are connected to the head and are very flexible.

One of the primary characteristics present in most sharks is the heterocercal tail, which aids in locomotion.

===Body covering===
Chondrichthyans have tooth-like scales called dermal denticles or placoid scales. Denticles usually provide protection, and in most cases, streamlining. Mucous glands exist in some species, as well.

It is assumed that their oral teeth evolved from dermal denticles that migrated into the mouth, but it could be the other way around, as the teleost bony fish &quot;Denticeps clupeoides&quot; has most of its head covered by dermal teeth (as does, probably, &quot;Atherion elymus&quot;, another bony fish). This is most likely a secondary evolved characteristic, which means there is not necessarily a connection between the teeth and the original dermal scales.

The old placoderms did not have teeth at all, but had sharp bony plates in their mouth. Thus, it is unknown whether the dermal or oral teeth evolved first. It has even been suggested that the original bony plates of &quot;all&quot; vertebrates are now gone and that the present scales are just modified teeth, even if both the teeth and body armor had a common origin a long time ago. However, there is currently no evidence of this.

===Respiratory system===
All chondrichthyans breathe through five to seven pairs of gills, depending on the species. In general, pelagic species must keep swimming to keep oxygenated water moving through their gills, whilst demersal species can actively pump water in through their spiracles and out through their gills. However, this is only a general rule and many species differ.

A spiracle is a small hole found behind each eye. These can be tiny and circular, such as found on the nurse shark (&quot;Ginglymostoma cirratum&quot;), to extended and slit-like, such as found on the wobbegongs (Orectolobidae). Many larger, pelagic species, such as the mackerel sharks (Lamnidae) and the thresher sharks (Alopiidae), no longer possess them.

===Nervous system===

In chondrichthyans, the nervous system is composed of a small brain, 8–10 pairs of cranial nerves, and a spinal cord with spinal nerves. They have several sensory organs which provide information to be processed. Ampullae of Lorenzini are a network of small jelly filled pores called electroreceptors which help the fish sense electric fields in water. This aids in finding prey, navigation, and sensing temperature. The lateral line system has modified epithelial cells located externally which sense motion, vibration, and pressure in the water around them. Most species have large well-developed eyes. Also, they have very powerful nostrils and olfactory organs. Their inner ears consist of 3 large semicircular canals which aid in balance and orientation. Their sound detecting apparatus has limited range and is typically more powerful at lower frequencies. Some species have electric organs which can be used for defense and predation. They have relatively simple brains with the forebrain not greatly enlarged. The structure and formation of myelin in their nervous systems are nearly identical to that of tetrapods, which has led evolutionary biologists to believe that Chondrichthyes were a cornerstone group in the evolutionary timeline of myelin development.

===Immune system===
Like all other jawed vertebrates, members of Chondrichthyes have an adaptive immune system.

==Reproduction==

Fertilization is internal. Development is usually live birth (ovoviviparous species) but can be through eggs (oviparous). Some rare species are viviparous. There is no parental care after birth; however, some chondrichthyans do guard their eggs.

Capture-induced premature birth and abortion (collectively called capture-induced parturition) occurs frequently in sharks/rays when fished. Capture-induced parturition is often mistaken for natural birth by recreational fishers and is rarely considered in commercial fisheries management despite being shown to occur in at least 12% of live bearing sharks and rays (88 species to date).

==Classification==
The class Chondrichthyes has two subclasses: the subclass Elasmobranchii (sharks, rays, skates, and sawfish) and the subclass Holocephali (chimaeras). To see the full list of the species, click here.



==Evolution==

Cartilaginous fish are considered to have evolved from acanthodians. The discovery of &quot;Entelognathus&quot; and several examinations of acanthodian characteristics indicate that bony fish evolved directly from placoderm like ancestors, while acanthodians represent a paraphyletic assemblage leading to Chondrichthyes. Some characteristics previously thought to be exclusive to acanthodians are also present in basal cartilaginous fish. In particular, new phylogenetic studies find cartilaginous fish to be well nested among acanthodians, with &quot;Doliodus&quot; and &quot;Tamiobatis&quot; being the closest relatives to Chondrichthyes. Recent studies vindicate this, as &quot;Doliodus&quot; had a mosaic of chondrichthyan and acanthodian traits. Dating back to the Middle and Late Ordovician Period, many isolated scales, made of dentine and bone, have a structure and growth form that is chondrichthyan-like. They may be the remains of stem-chondrichthyans, but their classification remains uncertain.

The earliest unequivocal fossils of acanthodian-grade cartilaginous fishes are &quot;Qianodus&quot; and &quot;Fanjingshania&quot; from the early Silurian (Aeronian) of Guizhou, China around 439 million years ago, which are also the oldest unambiguous remains of any jawed vertebrates. &quot;Shenacanthus vermiformis&quot;, which lived 436 million years ago, had thoracic armour plates resembling those of placoderms.

By the start of the Early Devonian, 419 million years ago, jawed fishes had divided into three distinct groups: the now extinct placoderms (a paraphyletic assemblage of ancient armoured fishes), the bony fishes, and the clade that includes spiny sharks and early cartilaginous fish. The modern bony fishes, class Osteichthyes, appeared in the late Silurian or early Devonian, about 416 million years ago. The first abundant genus of shark, &quot;Cladoselache&quot;, appeared in the oceans during the Devonian Period. The first cartilaginous fishes evolved from &quot;Doliodus&quot;-like spiny shark ancestors.

==Taxonomy==
 Subphylum Vertebrata
 └─Infraphylum Gnathostomata
 ├─Placodermi — &quot;extinct&quot; (armored gnathostomes)
 └Eugnathostomata (true jawed vertebrates)
 ├─Acanthodii (stem cartilaginous fish)
 └─Chondrichthyes (true cartilaginous fish)
 ├─Holocephali (chimaeras + several extinct clades)
 └Elasmobranchii (shark and rays)
 ├─Selachii (true sharks)
 └─Batoidea (rays and relatives)
*Note: Lines show evolutionary relationships.

==See also==
* List of cartilaginous fish
* Cartilaginous versus bony fishes
* Largest cartilaginous fishes
* Important Shark and Ray Areas (ISRA)
* Threatened rays
* Threatened sharks
* Placodermi

==References==

==Further reading==
* Taxonomy of Chondrichthyes
* Images of many sharks, skates and rays on Morphbank</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25371" start="0" end="14" title="Chondrichthyes" label="Chondrichthyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37517" start="25" end="30" title="class (biology)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q26214" start="34" end="44" title="jawed fish" label="jawed fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25371" start="63" end="81" title="Chondrichthyes" label="cartilaginous fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25371" start="85" end="100" title="Chondrichthyes" label="chondrichthyans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881" start="117" end="125" title="skeleton" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q502730" start="149" end="158" title="cartilage" label="cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q27207" start="192" end="204" title="Osteichthyes" label="Osteichthyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="274" end="285" title="bone tissue" label="bone tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756633" start="306" end="313" title="aquatic animal" label="aquatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="314" end="324" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162555" start="331" end="342" title="paired fins" label="paired fins"/>
<link wikidata="Q858590" start="351" end="355" title="nare" label="nare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454665" start="358" end="371" title="placoid scale" label="placoid scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307505" start="374" end="390" title="conus arteriosus" label="conus arteriosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="398" end="403" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575967" start="419" end="427" title="operculum (fish)" label="opercula"/>
<link wikidata="Q206732" start="432" end="444" title="swim bladder" label="swim bladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q26214" start="470" end="483" title="Gnathostomata" label="Gnathostomata"/>
<link wikidata="Q194257" start="596" end="610" title="Elasmobranchii" label="Elasmobranchii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="612" end="617" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495741" start="620" end="623" title="Batoidea" label="ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q837104" start="626" end="631" title="skate (fish)" label="skate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190736" start="637" end="644" title="sawfish" label="sawfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q149104" start="650" end="661" title="Holocephali" label="Holocephali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290058" start="663" end="671" title="chimaera" label="chimaera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015748" start="804" end="823" title="finless sleeper ray" label="finless sleeper ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q80378" start="836" end="847" title="whale shark" label="whale shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q243469" start="912" end="921" title="notochord" label="notochord"/>
<link wikidata="Q149104" start="996" end="1007" title="Holocephali" label="Holocephali"/>
<link wikidata="Q546523" start="1113" end="1124" title="bone marrow" label="bone marrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="1126" end="1140" title="red blood cell" label="red blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9371" start="1162" end="1168" title="spleen" label="spleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q213456" start="1219" end="1224" title="gonad" label="gonad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4257432" start="1317" end="1336" title="Leydig&amp;#x27;s organ" label="Leydig&amp;#x27;s organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q149104" start="1404" end="1415" title="Holocephali" label="Holocephali"/>
<link wikidata="Q41317" start="1531" end="1543" title="electric ray" label="electric ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454665" start="1826" end="1839" title="placoid scale" label="placoid scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495741" start="2311" end="2315" title="Batoidea" label="rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454665" start="2562" end="2577" title="dermal denticle" label="dermal denticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q204861" start="2857" end="2864" title="Teleostei" label="teleost"/>
<link wikidata="Q904038" start="2881" end="2901" title="Denticeps clupeoides" label="Denticeps clupeoides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976771" start="2979" end="2994" title="Atherion elymus" label="Atherion elymus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130932" start="3187" end="3197" title="placoderms" label="placoderms"/>
<link wikidata="Q132390" start="3698" end="3702" title="gill" label="gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q20755118" start="3896" end="3905" title="Spiracle (vertebrates)" label="spiracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q63387" start="4593" end="4614" title="Ampullae of Lorenzini" label="Ampullae of Lorenzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326528" start="4664" end="4680" title="Electroreception" label="electroreceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q280969" start="4801" end="4813" title="lateral line" label="lateral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q644945" start="5028" end="5037" title="Olfactory bulb" label="olfactory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064403" start="5082" end="5101" title="semicircular canals" label="semicircular canals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327533" start="5261" end="5276" title="Electric organ (biology)" label="electric organs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5739" end="5761" title="adaptive immune system#Evolution" label="adaptive immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q192805" start="5844" end="5857" title="ovoviviparous" label="ovoviviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="5892" end="5901" title="oviparous" label="oviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q120446" start="5926" end="5936" title="viviparous" label="viviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q194257" start="6495" end="6509" title="Elasmobranchii" label="Elasmobranchii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="6511" end="6516" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495741" start="6519" end="6544" title="Batoidea" label="rays, skates, and sawfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q149104" start="6563" end="6574" title="Holocephali" label="Holocephali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290058" start="6576" end="6584" title="chimaera" label="chimaera"/>
<link wikidata="Q20817868" start="6599" end="6623" title="full list of cartilaginous fish" label="full list of the species"/>
<link wikidata="Q20817868" start="6631" end="6635" title="full list of cartilaginous fish" label="here"/>
<link wikidata="Q130955" start="6710" end="6722" title="acanthodians" label="acanthodians"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947364" start="6747" end="6760" title="Entelognathus" label="Entelognathus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7208" end="7216" title="Doliodus" label="Doliodus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7233" end="7243" title="Tamiobatis" label="Tamiobatis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7337" end="7345" title="Doliodus" label="Doliodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="7442" end="7452" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q189637" start="7491" end="7498" title="dentine" label="dentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="7598" end="7602" title="stem group" label="stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q116222911" start="7750" end="7758" title="Qianodus" label="Qianodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q115766467" start="7775" end="7788" title="Fanjingshania" label="Fanjingshania"/>
<link wikidata="Q381595" start="7820" end="7828" title="Aeronian" label="Aeronian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="7833" end="7840" title="Guizhou" label="Guizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q26214" start="8142" end="8152" title="jawed fish" label="jawed fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q130932" start="8211" end="8220" title="placoderm" label="placoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q27207" start="8282" end="8291" title="bony fish" label="bony fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q130955" start="8323" end="8335" title="spiny sharks" label="spiny sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25371" start="8346" end="8364" title="cartilaginous fish" label="cartilaginous fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q27207" start="8396" end="8408" title="Osteichthyes" label="Osteichthyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="8431" end="8439" title="Silurian" label="Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q139096" start="8529" end="8541" title="Cladoselache" label="Cladoselache"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8650" end="8658" title="Doliodus" label="Doliodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130955" start="8670" end="8681" title="spiny shark" label="spiny shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="8718" end="8728" title="Vertebrata" label="Vertebrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q130932" start="8761" end="8771" title="Placodermi" label="Placodermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q26214" start="8819" end="8834" title="Eugnathostomata" label="Eugnathostomata"/>
<link wikidata="Q130955" start="8863" end="8873" title="Acanthodii" label="Acanthodii"/>
<link wikidata="Q149104" start="8947" end="8958" title="Holocephali" label="Holocephali"/>
<link wikidata="Q194257" start="8998" end="9012" title="Elasmobranchii" label="Elasmobranchii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="9033" end="9041" title="Selachii" label="Selachii"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495741" start="9059" end="9067" title="Batoidea" label="Batoidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q20817868" start="9151" end="9177" title="List of cartilaginous fish" label="List of cartilaginous fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q27207" start="9180" end="9212" title="Cartilaginous versus bony fishes" label="Cartilaginous versus bony fishes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9215" end="9243" title="Largest organisms#Cartilaginous fish (Chondrichthyes)" label="Largest cartilaginous fishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q126736449" start="9246" end="9275" title="Important Shark and Ray Areas" label="Important Shark and Ray Areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119246" start="9285" end="9300" title="Threatened rays" label="Threatened rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119249" start="9303" end="9320" title="Threatened sharks" label="Threatened sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q130932" start="9323" end="9333" title="Placodermi" label="Placodermi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5233" wikidata="Q1043" url="?curid=5233" title="Carl Linnaeus">
<text>Carl Linnaeus (23 May 1707 – 10 January 1778), also known after ennoblement in 1761 as Carl von Linné, was a Swedish biologist and physician who formalised binomial nomenclature, the modern system of naming organisms. He is known as the &quot;father of modern taxonomy&quot;. Many of his writings were in Latin; his name is rendered in Latin as &#x27; and, after his 1761 ennoblement, as &#x27;.

Linnaeus was the son of a curate and was born in Råshult, in the countryside of Småland, southern Sweden. He received most of his higher education at Uppsala University and began giving lectures in botany there in 1730. He lived abroad between 1735 and 1738, where he studied and also published the first edition of his &quot;&quot; in the Netherlands. He then returned to Sweden where he became professor of medicine and botany at Uppsala. In the 1740s, he was sent on several journeys through Sweden to find and classify plants and animals. In the 1750s and 1760s, he continued to collect and classify animals, plants, and minerals, while publishing several volumes. By the time of his death in 1778, he was one of the most acclaimed scientists in Europe.

Philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau sent him the message: &quot;Tell him I know no greater man on Earth.&quot; Johann Wolfgang von Goethe wrote: &quot;With the exception of William Shakespeare and Baruch Spinoza, I know no one among the no longer living who has influenced me more strongly.&quot; Swedish author August Strindberg wrote: &quot;Linnaeus was in reality a poet who happened to become a naturalist.&quot; Linnaeus has been called &quot;&quot; (Prince of Botanists) and &quot;The Pliny of the North&quot;. He is also considered one of the founders of modern ecology.

In botany, the abbreviation L. is used to indicate Linnaeus as the authority for a species&#x27; name. In zoology, the abbreviation Linnaeus is generally used; the abbreviations L., Linnæus, and Linné are also used. In older publications, the abbreviation &quot;Linn.&quot; is found. Linnaeus&#x27;s remains constitute the type specimen for the species &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; following the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature, since the sole specimen that he is known to have examined was himself.

==Early life==
===Childhood===
Linnaeus was born in the village of Råshult in Småland, Sweden, on 23 May 1707. He was the first child of Nicolaus (Nils) Ingemarsson (who later adopted the family name Linnaeus) and Christina Brodersonia. His siblings were Anna Maria Linnæa, Sofia Juliana Linnæa, Samuel Linnæus (who would eventually succeed their father as rector of Stenbrohult and write a manual on beekeeping), and Emerentia Linnæa. His father taught him Latin as a small child.

One of a long line of peasants and priests, Nils was an amateur botanist, a Lutheran minister, and the curate of the small village of Stenbrohult in Småland. Christina was the daughter of the rector of Stenbrohult, Samuel Brodersonius.

A year after Linnaeus&#x27;s birth, his grandfather Samuel Brodersonius died, and his father Nils became the rector of Stenbrohult. The family moved into the rectory from the curate&#x27;s house.

Even in his early years, Linnaeus seemed to have a liking for plants, flowers in particular. Whenever he was upset, he was given a flower, which immediately calmed him. Nils spent much time in his garden and often showed flowers to Linnaeus and told him their names. Soon Linnaeus was given his own patch of earth where he could grow plants.

Carl&#x27;s father was the first in his ancestry to adopt a permanent surname. Before that, ancestors had used the patronymic naming system of Scandinavian countries: his father was named Ingemarsson after his father Ingemar Bengtsson. When Nils was admitted to the Lund University, he had to take on a family name. He adopted the Latinate name Linnæus after a giant linden tree (or lime tree), &quot;&quot; in Swedish, that grew on the family homestead. This name was spelled with the æ ligature. When Carl was born, he was named Carl Linnæus, with his father&#x27;s family name. The son also always spelled it with the æ ligature, both in handwritten documents and in publications. Carl&#x27;s patronymic would have been Nilsson, as in Carl Nilsson Linnæus.

===Early education===

Linnaeus&#x27;s father began teaching him basic Latin, religion, and geography at an early age. When Linnaeus was seven, Nils decided to hire a tutor for him. The parents picked Johan Telander, a son of a local yeoman. Linnaeus did not like him, writing in his autobiography that Telander &quot;was better calculated to extinguish a child&#x27;s talents than develop them&quot;.

Two years after his tutoring had begun, he was sent to the Lower Grammar School at Växjö in 1717. Linnaeus rarely studied, often going to the countryside to look for plants. At some point, his father went to visit him and, after hearing critical assessments by his preceptors, he decided to put the youth as an apprentice to some honest cobbler. He reached the last year of the Lower School when he was fifteen, which was taught by the headmaster, Daniel Lannerus, who was interested in botany. Lannerus noticed Linnaeus&#x27;s interest in botany and gave him the run of his garden.

He also introduced him to Johan Rothman, the state doctor of Småland and a teacher at Katedralskolan (a gymnasium) in Växjö. Also a botanist, Rothman broadened Linnaeus&#x27;s interest in botany and helped him develop an interest in medicine. By the age of 17, Linnaeus had become well acquainted with the existing botanical literature. He remarks in his journal that he &quot;read day and night, knowing like the back of my hand, Arvidh Månsson&#x27;s &quot;Rydaholm Book of Herbs&quot;, Tillandz&#x27;s &quot;Flora Åboensis&quot;, Palmberg&#x27;s &quot;Serta Florea Suecana&quot;, Bromelii&#x27;s &quot;Chloros Gothica&quot; and Rudbeckii&#x27;s &quot;Hortus Upsaliensis&quot;&quot;.

Linnaeus entered the Växjö Katedralskola in 1724, where he studied mainly Greek, Hebrew, theology, and mathematics, a curriculum designed for boys preparing for the priesthood. In the last year at the gymnasium, Linnaeus&#x27;s father visited to ask the professors how his son&#x27;s studies were progressing; to his dismay, most said that the boy would never become a scholar. Rothman believed otherwise, suggesting Linnaeus could have a future in medicine. The doctor offered to have Linnaeus live with his family in Växjö and to teach him physiology and botany. Nils accepted this offer.

==University studies==
=== Lund ===
Rothman showed Linnaeus that botany was a serious subject. He taught Linnaeus to classify plants according to Tournefort&#x27;s system. Linnaeus was also taught about the sexual reproduction of plants, according to Sébastien Vaillant. In 1727, Linnaeus, age 21, enrolled in Lund University in Skåne. He was registered as &quot;&quot;, the Latin form of his full name, which he also used later for his Latin publications.

Professor Kilian Stobæus, natural scientist, physician and historian, offered Linnaeus tutoring and lodging, as well as the use of his library, which included many books about botany. He also gave the student free admission to his lectures. In his spare time, Linnaeus explored the flora of Skåne, together with students sharing the same interests.

===Uppsala===

In August 1728, Linnaeus decided to attend Uppsala University on the advice of Rothman, who believed it would be a better choice if Linnaeus wanted to study both medicine and botany. Rothman based this recommendation on the two professors who taught at the medical faculty at Uppsala: Olof Rudbeck the Younger and Lars Roberg. Although Rudbeck and Roberg had undoubtedly been good professors, by then they were older and not so interested in teaching. Rudbeck no longer gave public lectures, and had others stand in for him. The botany, zoology, pharmacology and anatomy lectures were not in their best state. In Uppsala, Linnaeus met a new benefactor, Olof Celsius, who was a professor of theology and an amateur botanist. He received Linnaeus into his home and allowed him use of his library, which was one of the richest botanical libraries in Sweden.

In 1729, Linnaeus wrote a thesis, &#x27; on plant sexual reproduction. This attracted the attention of Rudbeck; in May 1730, he selected Linnaeus to give lectures at the University although the young man was only a second-year student. His lectures were popular, and Linnaeus often addressed an audience of 300 people. In June, Linnaeus moved from Celsius&#x27;s house to Rudbeck&#x27;s to become the tutor of the three youngest of his 24 children. His friendship with Celsius did not wane and they continued their botanical expeditions. Over that winter, Linnaeus began to doubt Tournefort&#x27;s system of classification and decided to create one of his own. His plan was to divide the plants by the number of stamens and pistils. He began writing several books, which would later result in, for example, &#x27; and &#x27;. He also produced a book on the plants grown in the Uppsala Botanical Garden, &#x27;.

Rudbeck&#x27;s former assistant, Nils Rosén, returned to the University in March 1731 with a degree in medicine. Rosén started giving anatomy lectures and tried to take over Linnaeus&#x27;s botany lectures, but Rudbeck prevented that. Until December, Rosén tutored Linnaeus privately in medicine. In December, Linnaeus had a &quot;disagreement&quot; with Rudbeck&#x27;s wife and had to move out of his mentor&#x27;s house; his relationship with Rudbeck did not appear to suffer. That Christmas, Linnaeus returned home to Stenbrohult to visit his parents for the first time in about three years. His mother had disapproved of his failing to become a priest, but she was pleased to learn he was teaching at the University.

==Expedition to Lapland==
During a visit with his parents, Linnaeus told them about his plan to travel to Lapland; Rudbeck had made the journey in 1695, but the detailed results of his exploration were lost in a fire seven years afterwards. Linnaeus&#x27;s hope was to find new plants, animals and possibly valuable minerals. He was also curious about the customs of the native Sami people, reindeer-herding nomads who wandered Scandinavia&#x27;s vast tundras. In April 1732, Linnaeus was awarded a grant from the Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala for his journey.
Linnaeus began his expedition from Uppsala on 12 May 1732, just before he turned 25. He travelled on foot and horse, bringing with him his journal, botanical and ornithological manuscripts and sheets of paper for pressing plants. Near Gävle he found great quantities of &quot;Campanula serpyllifolia&quot;, later known as &quot;Linnaea borealis&quot;, the twinflower that would become his favourite. He sometimes dismounted on the way to examine a flower or rock and was particularly interested in mosses and lichens, the latter a main part of the diet of the reindeer, a common and economically important animal in Lapland.

Linnaeus travelled clockwise around the coast of the Gulf of Bothnia, making major inland incursions from Umeå, Luleå and Tornio. He returned from his six-month-long, over expedition in October, having gathered and observed many plants, birds and rocks. Although Lapland was a region with limited biodiversity, Linnaeus described about 100 previously unidentified plants. These became the basis of his book &quot;&quot;. However, on the expedition to Lapland, Linnaeus used Latin names to describe organisms because he had not yet developed the binomial system.

In &#x27; Linnaeus&#x27;s ideas about nomenclature and classification were first used in a practical way, making this the first proto-modern Flora. The account covered 534 species, used the Linnaean classification system and included, for the described species, geographical distribution and taxonomic notes. It was Augustin Pyramus de Candolle who attributed Linnaeus with &#x27; as the first example in the botanical genre of Flora writing. Botanical historian E. L. Greene described &quot;&quot; as &quot;the most classic and delightful&quot; of Linnaeus&#x27;s works.

It was during this expedition that Linnaeus had a flash of insight regarding the classification of mammals. Upon observing the lower jawbone of a horse at the side of a road he was travelling, Linnaeus remarked: &quot;If I only knew how many teeth and of what kind every animal had, how many teats and where they were placed, I should perhaps be able to work out a perfectly natural system for the arrangement of all quadrupeds.&quot;

In 1734, Linnaeus led a small group of students to Dalarna. Funded by the Governor of Dalarna, the expedition was to catalogue known natural resources and discover new ones, but also to gather intelligence on Norwegian mining activities at Røros.

==Years in the Dutch Republic (1735–38)==

===Doctorate===

His relations with Nils Rosén having worsened, Linnaeus accepted an invitation from Claes Sohlberg, son of a mining inspector, to spend the Christmas holiday in Falun, where Linnaeus was permitted to visit the mines.

In April 1735, at the suggestion of Sohlberg&#x27;s father, Linnaeus and Sohlberg set out for the Dutch Republic, where Linnaeus intended to study medicine at the University of Harderwijk while tutoring Sohlberg in exchange for an annual salary. At the time, it was common for Swedes to pursue doctoral degrees in the Netherlands, then a highly revered place to study natural history.

On the way, the pair stopped in Hamburg, where they met the mayor, who proudly showed them a supposed wonder of nature in his possession: the taxidermied remains of a seven-headed hydra. Linnaeus quickly discovered the specimen was a fake, cobbled together from the jaws and paws of weasels and the skins of snakes. The provenance of the hydra suggested to Linnaeus that it had been manufactured by monks to represent the Beast of Revelation. Even at the risk of incurring the mayor&#x27;s wrath, Linnaeus made his observations public, dashing the mayor&#x27;s dreams of selling the hydra for an enormous sum. Linnaeus and Sohlberg were forced to flee from Hamburg.

Linnaeus began working towards his degree as soon as he reached Harderwijk, a university known for awarding degrees in as little as a week. He submitted a dissertation, written back in Sweden, entitled &quot;Dissertatio medica inauguralis in qua exhibetur hypothesis nova de febrium intermittentium causa&quot;, in which he laid out his hypothesis that malaria arose only in areas with clay-rich soils. Although he failed to identify the true source of disease transmission, (i.e., the &quot;Anopheles&quot; mosquito), he did correctly predict that &quot;Artemisia annua&quot; (wormwood) would become a source of antimalarial medications.

Within two weeks he had completed his oral and practical examinations and was awarded a doctoral degree.

That summer Linnaeus reunited with Peter Artedi, a friend from Uppsala with whom he had once made a pact that should either of the two predecease the other, the survivor would finish the decedent&#x27;s work. Ten weeks later, Artedi drowned in the canals of Amsterdam, leaving behind an unfinished manuscript on the classification of fish.

===Publishing of &quot;===
One of the first scientists Linnaeus met in the Netherlands was Johan Frederik Gronovius, to whom Linnaeus showed one of the several manuscripts he had brought with him from Sweden. The manuscript described a new system for classifying plants. When Gronovius saw it, he was very impressed, and offered to help pay for the printing. With an additional monetary contribution by the Scottish doctor Isaac Lawson, the manuscript was published as &quot; (1735).

Linnaeus became acquainted with one of the most respected physicians and botanists in the Netherlands, Herman Boerhaave, who tried to convince Linnaeus to make a career there. Boerhaave offered him a journey to South Africa and America, but Linnaeus declined, stating he would not stand the heat. Instead, Boerhaave convinced Linnaeus that he should visit the botanist Johannes Burman. After his visit, Burman, impressed with his guest&#x27;s knowledge, decided Linnaeus should stay with him during the winter. During his stay, Linnaeus helped Burman with his &#x27;. Burman also helped Linnaeus with the books on which he was working: &#x27; and &quot;&quot;.

===George Clifford, Philip Miller, and Johann Jacob Dillenius===
In August 1735, during Linnaeus&#x27;s stay with Burman, he met George Clifford III, a director of the Dutch East India Company and the owner of a rich botanical garden at the estate of Hartekamp in Heemstede. Clifford was very impressed with Linnaeus&#x27;s ability to classify plants, and invited him to become his physician and superintendent of his garden. Linnaeus had already agreed to stay with Burman over the winter, and could thus not accept immediately. However, Clifford offered to compensate Burman by offering him a copy of Sir Hans Sloane&#x27;s &quot;Natural History of Jamaica&quot;, a rare book, if he let Linnaeus stay with him, and Burman accepted. On 24 September 1735, Linnaeus moved to Hartekamp to become personal physician to Clifford, and curator of Clifford&#x27;s herbarium. He was paid 1,000 florins a year, with free board and lodging. Though the agreement was only for a winter of that year, Linnaeus practically stayed there until 1738. It was here that he wrote a book &quot;Hortus Cliffortianus&quot;, in the preface of which he described his experience as &quot;the happiest time of my life&quot;. (A portion of Hartekamp was declared as public garden in April 1956 by the Heemstede local authority, and was named &quot;Linnaeushof&quot;. It eventually became, as it is claimed, the biggest playground in Europe.)

In July 1736, Linnaeus travelled to England, at Clifford&#x27;s expense. He went to London to visit Sir Hans Sloane, a collector of natural history, and to see his cabinet, as well as to visit the Chelsea Physic Garden and its keeper, Philip Miller. He taught Miller about his new system of subdividing plants, as described in &quot;&quot;. At first, Miller was reluctant to use the new binomial nomenclature, preferring instead the classifications of Joseph Pitton de Tournefort and John Ray. Nevertheless, Linnaeus applauded Miller&#x27;s &quot;Gardeners Dictionary&quot;. The conservative Miller actually retained in his dictionary a number of pre-Linnaean binomial signifiers discarded by Linnaeus but which have been retained by modern botanists. He only fully changed to the Linnaean system in the edition of &quot;The Gardeners Dictionary&quot; of 1768. Miller ultimately was impressed, and from then on started to arrange the garden according to Linnaeus&#x27;s system.

Linnaeus also travelled to Oxford University to visit the botanist Johann Jacob Dillenius. He failed to make Dillenius publicly fully accept his new classification system, though the two men remained in correspondence for many years afterwards. Linnaeus dedicated his &quot;Critica Botanica&quot; to him, as &quot;opus botanicum quo absolutius mundus non-vidit&quot;. Linnaeus would later name a genus of tropical tree Dillenia in his honour. He then returned to Hartekamp, bringing with him many specimens of rare plants. The next year, 1737, he published &#x27;, in which he described 935 genera of plants, and shortly thereafter he supplemented it with &#x27;, with another sixty (&quot;sexaginta&quot;) genera.

His work at Hartekamp led to another book, &quot;&quot;, a catalogue of the botanical holdings in the herbarium and botanical garden of Hartekamp. He wrote it in nine months (completed in July 1737), but it was not published until 1738. It contains the first use of the name &quot;Nepenthes&quot;, which Linnaeus used to describe a genus of pitcher plants.

Linnaeus stayed with Clifford at Hartekamp until 18 October 1737 (new style), when he left the house to return to Sweden. Illness and the kindness of Dutch friends obliged him to stay some months longer in Holland. In May 1738, he set out for Sweden again. On the way home, he stayed in Paris for about a month, visiting botanists such as Antoine de Jussieu. After his return, Linnaeus never again left Sweden.

==Return to Sweden==
When Linnaeus returned to Sweden on 28 June 1738, he went to Falun, where he entered into an engagement to Sara Elisabeth Moræa. Three months later, he moved to Stockholm to find employment as a physician, and thus to make it possible to support a family. Once again, Linnaeus found a patron; he became acquainted with Count Carl Gustav Tessin, who helped him get work as a physician at the Admiralty. During this time in Stockholm, Linnaeus helped found the Royal Swedish Academy of Science; he became the first Praeses of the academy by drawing of lots.

Because his finances had improved and were now sufficient to support a family, he received permission to marry his fiancée, Sara Elisabeth Moræa. Their wedding was held 26 June 1739. Seventeen months later, Sara gave birth to their first son, Carl. Two years later, a daughter, Elisabeth Christina, was born, and the subsequent year Sara gave birth to Sara Magdalena, who died when 15 days old. Sara and Linnaeus would later have four other children: Lovisa, Sara Christina, Johannes and Sophia.
In May 1741, Linnaeus was appointed Professor of Medicine at Uppsala University, first with responsibility for medicine-related matters. Soon, he changed place with the other Professor of Medicine, Nils Rosén, and thus was responsible for the Botanical Garden (which he would thoroughly reconstruct and expand), botany and natural history, instead. In October that same year, his wife and nine-month-old son followed him to live in Uppsala.

=== Öland and Gotland ===
Ten days after he was appointed professor, he undertook an expedition to the island provinces of Öland and Gotland with six students from the university to look for plants useful in medicine. They stayed on Öland until 21 June, then sailed to Visby in Gotland. Linnaeus and the students stayed on Gotland for about a month, and then returned to Uppsala. During this expedition, they found 100 previously unrecorded plants. The observations from the expedition were later published in &#x27;, written in Swedish. Like &#x27;, it contained both zoological and botanical observations, as well as observations concerning the culture in Öland and Gotland.

During the summer of 1745, Linnaeus published two more books: &#x27; and &#x27;. &#x27; was a strictly botanical book, while &#x27; was zoological. Anders Celsius had created the temperature scale named after him in 1742. Celsius&#x27;s scale was originally inverted compared to the way it is used today, with water boiling at 0 °C and freezing at 100 °C. Linnaeus was the one who inverted the scale to its present usage, in 1745.

===Västergötland===
In the summer of 1746, Linnaeus was once again commissioned by the Government to carry out an expedition, this time to the Swedish province of Västergötland. He set out from Uppsala on 12 June and returned on 11 August. On the expedition his primary companion was Erik Gustaf Lidbeck, a student who had accompanied him on his previous journey. Linnaeus described his findings from the expedition in the book &quot;&quot;, published the next year. After he returned from the journey, the Government decided Linnaeus should take on another expedition to the southernmost province Scania. This journey was postponed, as Linnaeus felt too busy.

In 1747, Linnaeus was given the title archiater, or chief physician, by the Swedish king Adolf Frederick—a mark of great respect. The same year he was elected member of the Academy of Sciences in Berlin.

===Scania===
In the spring of 1749, Linnaeus could finally journey to Scania, again commissioned by the government. With him he brought his student Olof Söderberg. On the way to Scania, he made his last visit to his brothers and sisters in Stenbrohult since his father had died the previous year. The expedition was similar to the previous journeys in most aspects, but this time he was also ordered to find the best place to grow walnut and Swedish whitebeam trees; these trees were used by the military to make rifles. While there, they also visited the Ramlösa mineral spa, where he remarked on the quality of its ferruginous water. The journey was successful, and Linnaeus&#x27;s observations were published the next year in &quot;&quot;.

===Rector of Uppsala University===

In 1750, Linnaeus became rector of Uppsala University, starting a period where natural sciences were esteemed. Perhaps the most important contribution he made during his time at Uppsala was to teach; many of his students travelled to various places in the world to collect botanical samples. Linnaeus called the best of these students his &quot;apostles&quot;. His lectures were normally very popular and were often held in the Botanical Garden. He tried to teach the students to think for themselves and not trust anybody, not even him. Even more popular than the lectures were the botanical excursions made every Saturday during summer, where Linnaeus and his students explored the flora and fauna in the vicinity of Uppsala.

=== &quot;Philosophia Botanica&quot; ===
Linnaeus published &quot;Philosophia Botanica&quot; in 1751. The book contained a complete survey of the taxonomy system he had been using in his earlier works. It also contained information of how to keep a journal on travels and how to maintain a botanical garden.

=== &quot;Nutrix Noverca&quot; ===

During Linnaeus&#x27;s time it was normal for upper class women to have wet nurses for their babies. Linnaeus joined an ongoing campaign to end this practice in Sweden and promote breast-feeding by mothers. In 1752 Linnaeus published a thesis along with Frederick Lindberg, a physician student, based on their experiences. In the tradition of the period, this dissertation was essentially an idea of the presiding reviewer (&quot;prases&quot;) expounded upon by the student. Linnaeus&#x27;s dissertation was translated into French by J. E. Gilibert in 1770 as . Linnaeus suggested that children might absorb the personality of their wet nurse through the milk. He admired the child care practices of the Lapps and pointed out how healthy their babies were compared to those of Europeans who employed wet nurses. He compared the behaviour of wild animals and pointed out how none of them denied their newborns their breastmilk. It is thought that his activism played a role in his choice of the term &quot;Mammalia&quot; for the class of organisms.

=== &quot;Species Plantarum&quot; ===

Linnaeus published &quot;Species Plantarum&quot;, the work which is now internationally accepted as the starting point of modern botanical nomenclature, in 1753. The first volume was issued on 24 May, the second volume followed on 16 August of the same year. The book contained 1,200 pages and was published in two volumes; it described over 7,300 species. The same year the king dubbed him knight of the Order of the Polar Star, the first civilian in Sweden to become a knight in this order. He was then seldom seen not wearing the order&#x27;s insignia.

===Ennoblement===

Linnaeus felt Uppsala was too noisy and unhealthy, so he bought two farms in 1758: Hammarby and Sävja. The next year, he bought a neighbouring farm, Edeby. He spent the summers with his family at Hammarby; initially it only had a small one-storey house, but in 1762 a new, larger main building was added. In Hammarby, Linnaeus made a garden where he could grow plants that could not be grown in the Botanical Garden in Uppsala. He began constructing a museum on a hill behind Hammarby in 1766, where he moved his library and collection of plants. A fire that destroyed about one third of Uppsala and had threatened his residence there necessitated the move.

Since the initial release of &#x27; in 1735, the book had been expanded and reprinted several times; the tenth edition was released in 1758. This edition established itself as the starting point for zoological nomenclature, the equivalent of &#x27;.

The Swedish King Adolf Frederick granted Linnaeus nobility in 1757, but he was not ennobled until 1761. With his ennoblement, he took the name Carl von Linné (Latinised as &quot;&quot;), &#x27;Linné&#x27; being a shortened and gallicised version of &#x27;Linnæus&#x27;, and the German nobiliary particle &#x27;von&#x27; signifying his ennoblement. The noble family&#x27;s coat of arms prominently features a twinflower, one of Linnaeus&#x27;s favourite plants; it was given the scientific name &quot;Linnaea borealis&quot; in his honour by Gronovius. The shield in the coat of arms is divided into thirds: red, black and green for the three kingdoms of nature (animal, mineral and vegetable) in Linnaean classification; in the centre is an egg &quot;to denote Nature, which is continued and perpetuated &quot;in ovo&quot;. At the bottom is a phrase in Latin, borrowed from the Aeneid, which reads &quot;Famam extendere factis&quot;&quot;: we extend our fame by our deeds. Linnaeus inscribed this personal motto in books that were given to him by friends.

After his ennoblement, Linnaeus continued teaching and writing. In total, he presided at 186 PhD ceremonies, with many of the dissertations written by himself. His reputation had spread over the world, and he corresponded with many different people. For example, Catherine II of Russia sent him seeds from her country. He also corresponded with Giovanni Antonio Scopoli, &quot;the Linnaeus of the Austrian Empire&quot;, who was a doctor and a botanist in Idrija, Duchy of Carniola (nowadays Slovenia). Scopoli communicated all of his research, findings, and descriptions (for example of the olm and the dormouse, two little animals hitherto unknown to Linnaeus). Linnaeus greatly respected Scopoli and showed great interest in his work. He named a solanaceous genus, &quot;Scopolia&quot;, the source of scopolamine, after him, but because of the great distance between them, they never met.

==Final years==
Linnaeus was relieved of his duties in the Royal Swedish Academy of Science in 1763, but continued his work there as usual for more than ten years after. In 1769 he was elected to the American Philosophical Society for his work. He stepped down as rector at Uppsala University in December 1772, mostly due to his declining health.

Linnaeus&#x27;s last years were troubled by illness. He had had a disease called the Uppsala fever in 1764, but survived due to the care of Rosén. He developed sciatica in 1773, and the next year, he had a stroke which partially paralysed him. He had a second stroke in 1776, losing the use of his right side and leaving him bereft of his memory; while still able to admire his own writings, he could not recognise himself as their author.

In December 1777, he had another stroke which greatly weakened him, and eventually led to his death on 10 January 1778 in Hammarby. Despite his desire to be buried in Hammarby, he was buried in Uppsala Cathedral on 22 January.

His library and collections were left to his widow Sara and their children. Joseph Banks, an eminent botanist, wished to purchase the collection, but his son Carl refused the offer and instead moved the collection to Uppsala. In 1783 Carl died and Sara inherited the collection, having outlived both her husband and son. She tried to sell it to Banks, but he was no longer interested; instead an acquaintance of his agreed to buy the collection. The acquaintance was a 24-year-old medical student, James Edward Smith, who bought the whole collection: 14,000 plants, 3,198 insects, 1,564 shells, about 3,000 letters and 1,600 books. Smith founded the Linnean Society of London five years later.

The von Linné name ended with his son Carl, who never married. His other son, Johannes, had died aged 3. There are over two hundred descendants of Linnaeus through two of his daughters.

==Apostles==


During Linnaeus&#x27;s time as Professor and Rector of Uppsala University, he taught many devoted students, 17 of whom he called &quot;apostles&quot;. They were the most promising, most committed students, and all of them made botanical expeditions to various places in the world, often with his help. The amount of this help varied; sometimes he used his influence as Rector to grant his apostles a scholarship or a place on an expedition. To most of the apostles he gave instructions of what to look for on their journeys. Abroad, the apostles collected and organised new plants, animals and minerals according to Linnaeus&#x27;s system. Most of them also gave some of their collection to Linnaeus when their journey was finished. Thanks to these students, the Linnaean system of taxonomy spread through the world without Linnaeus ever having to travel outside Sweden after his return from Holland. The British botanist William T. Stearn notes, without Linnaeus&#x27;s new system, it would not have been possible for the apostles to collect and organise so many new specimens. Many of the apostles died during their expeditions.

===Early expeditions===
Christopher Tärnström, the first apostle and a 43-year-old pastor with a wife and children, made his journey in 1746. He boarded a Swedish East India Company ship headed for China. Tärnström never reached his destination, dying of a tropical fever on Côn Sơn Island the same year. Tärnström&#x27;s widow blamed Linnaeus for making her children fatherless, causing Linnaeus to prefer sending out younger, unmarried students after Tärnström. Six other apostles later died on their expeditions, including Pehr Forsskål and Pehr Löfling.

Two years after Tärnström&#x27;s expedition, Finnish-born Pehr Kalm set out as the second apostle to North America. There he spent two-and-a-half years studying the flora and fauna of Pennsylvania, New York, New Jersey and Canada. Linnaeus was overjoyed when Kalm returned, bringing back with him many pressed flowers and seeds. At least 90 of the 700 North American species described in &quot;Species Plantarum&quot; had been brought back by Kalm.

===Cook expeditions and Japan===

Daniel Solander was living in Linnaeus&#x27;s house during his time as a student in Uppsala. Linnaeus was very fond of him, promising Solander his eldest daughter&#x27;s hand in marriage. On Linnaeus&#x27;s recommendation, Solander travelled to England in 1760, where he met the English botanist Joseph Banks. With Banks, Solander joined James Cook on his expedition to Oceania on the &quot;Endeavour&quot; in 1768–71. Solander was not the only apostle to journey with James Cook; Anders Sparrman followed on the &quot;Resolution&quot; in 1772–75 bound for, among other places, Oceania and South America. Sparrman made many other expeditions, one of them to South Africa.

Perhaps the most famous and successful apostle was Carl Peter Thunberg, who embarked on a nine-year expedition in 1770. He stayed in South Africa for three years, then travelled to Japan. All foreigners in Japan were forced to stay on the island of Dejima outside Nagasaki, so it was thus hard for Thunberg to study the flora. He did, however, manage to persuade some of the translators to bring him different plants, and he also found plants in the gardens of Dejima. He returned to Sweden in 1779, one year after Linnaeus&#x27;s death.

==Major publications==
===&quot;Systema Naturae&quot;===


The first edition of &quot;&quot; was printed in the Netherlands in 1735. It was a twelve-page work. By the time it reached its 10th edition in 1758, it classified 4,400 species of animals and 7,700 species of plants. People from all over the world sent their specimens to Linnaeus to be included. By the time he started work on the 12th edition, Linnaeus needed a new invention—the index card—to track classifications.

In &quot;Systema Naturae&quot;, the unwieldy names mostly used at the time, such as &quot;&quot;, were supplemented with concise and now familiar &quot;binomials&quot;, composed of the generic name, followed by a specific epithet—in the case given, &quot;Physalis angulata&quot;. These binomials could serve as a label to refer to the species. Higher taxa were constructed and arranged in a simple and orderly manner. Although the system, now known as binomial nomenclature, was partially developed by the Bauhin brothers (see Gaspard Bauhin and Johann Bauhin) almost 200 years earlier, Linnaeus was the first to use it consistently throughout the work, including in monospecific genera, and may be said to have popularised it within the scientific community.

After the decline in Linnaeus&#x27;s health in the early 1770s, publication of editions of &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; went in two different directions. Another Swedish scientist, Johan Andreas Murray, issued the &quot;Regnum Vegetabile&quot; section separately in 1774 as the &quot;Systema Vegetabilium&quot;, rather confusingly labelled the 13th edition. Meanwhile, a 13th edition of the entire &quot;Systema&quot; appeared in parts between 1788 and 1793 under the editorship of Johann Friedrich Gmelin. It was through the &quot;Systema Vegetabilium&quot; that Linnaeus&#x27;s work became widely known in England, following its translation from the Latin by the Lichfield Botanical Society as &quot;A System of Vegetables&quot; (1783–1785).

===&quot;Orbis eruditi judicium de Caroli Linnaei MD scriptis&quot;===

(&#x27;Opinion of the learned world on the writings of Carl Linnaeus, Doctor&#x27;) Published in 1740, this small octavo-sized pamphlet was presented to the State Library of New South Wales by the Linnean Society of NSW in 2018. This is considered among the rarest of all the writings of Linnaeus, and crucial to his career, securing him his appointment to a professorship of medicine at Uppsala University. From this position he laid the groundwork for his radical new theory of classifying and naming organisms for which he was considered the founder of modern taxonomy.


&#x27; (or, more fully, &#x27;) was first published in 1753, as a two-volume work. Its prime importance is perhaps that it is the primary starting point of plant nomenclature as it exists today.


&quot; was first published in 1737, delineating plant genera. Around 10 editions were published, not all of them by Linnaeus himself; the most important is the 1754 fifth edition. In it Linnaeus divided the plant Kingdom into 24 classes. One, Cryptogamia, included all the plants with concealed reproductive parts (algae, fungi, mosses and liverworts and ferns).


&#x27; (1751) was a summary of Linnaeus&#x27;s thinking on plant classification and nomenclature, and an elaboration of the work he had previously published in &#x27; (1736) and &#x27; (1737). Other publications forming part of his plan to reform the foundations of botany include his &#x27; and &#x27;: all were printed in Holland (as were &#x27; (1737) and &quot; (1735)), the &quot;Philosophia&quot; being simultaneously released in Stockholm.

==Collections==

At the end of his lifetime the Linnean collection in Uppsala was considered one of the finest collections of natural history objects in Sweden. Next to his own collection he had also built up a museum for the university of Uppsala, which was supplied by material donated by Carl Gyllenborg (in 1744–1745), crown-prince Adolf Fredrik (in 1745), Erik Petreus (in 1746), Claes Grill (in 1746), Magnus Lagerström (in 1748 and 1750) and Jonas Alströmer (in 1749). The relation between the museum and the private collection was not formalised and the steady flow of material from Linnean pupils were incorporated to the private collection rather than to the museum. Linnaeus felt his work was reflecting the harmony of nature and he said in 1754 &quot;the earth is then nothing else but a museum of the all-wise creator&#x27;s masterpieces, divided into three chambers&quot;. He had turned his own estate into a microcosm of that &#x27;world museum&#x27;.

In April 1766 parts of the town were destroyed by a fire and the Linnean private collection was subsequently moved to a barn outside the town, and shortly afterwards to a single-room stone building close to his country house at Hammarby near Uppsala. This resulted in a physical separation between the two collections; the museum collection remained in the botanical garden of the university. Some material which needed special care (alcohol specimens) or ample storage space was moved from the private collection to the museum.

In Hammarby the Linnean private collections suffered seriously from damp and the depredations by mice and insects. Carl von Linné&#x27;s son (Carl Linnaeus) inherited the collections in 1778 and retained them until his own death in 1783. Shortly after Carl von Linné&#x27;s death his son confirmed that mice had caused &quot;horrible damage&quot; to the plants and that also moths and mould had caused considerable damage. He tried to rescue them from the neglect they had suffered during his father&#x27;s later years, and also added further specimens. This last activity however reduced rather than augmented the scientific value of the original material.

In 1784 the young medical student James Edward Smith purchased the entire specimen collection, library, manuscripts, and correspondence of Carl Linnaeus from his widow and daughter and transferred the collections to London. Not all material in Linné&#x27;s private collection was transported to England. Thirty-three fish specimens preserved in alcohol were not sent and were later lost.

In London Smith tended to neglect the zoological parts of the collection; he added some specimens and also gave some specimens away. Over the following centuries the Linnean collection in London suffered enormously at the hands of scientists who studied the collection, and in the process disturbed the original arrangement and labels, added specimens that did not belong to the original series and withdrew precious original type material.

Much material which had been intensively studied by Linné in his scientific career belonged to the collection of Queen Lovisa Ulrika (1720–1782) (in the Linnean publications referred to as &quot;Museum Ludovicae Ulricae&quot; or &quot;M. L. U.&quot;). This collection was donated by her grandson King Gustav IV Adolf (1778–1837) to the museum in Uppsala in 1804. Another important collection in this respect was that of her husband King Adolf Fredrik (1710–1771) (in the Linnean sources known as &quot;Museum Adolphi Friderici&quot; or &quot;Mus. Ad. Fr.&quot;), the wet parts (alcohol collection) of which were later donated to the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, and is today housed in the Swedish Museum of Natural History at Stockholm. The dry material was transferred to Uppsala.

==System of taxonomy==


The establishment of universally accepted conventions for the naming of organisms was Linnaeus&#x27;s main contribution to taxonomy—his work marks the starting point of consistent use of binomial nomenclature. During the 18th century expansion of natural history knowledge, Linnaeus also developed what became known as the &quot;Linnaean taxonomy&quot;; the system of scientific classification now widely used in the biological sciences. A previous zoologist Rumphius (1627–1702) had more or less approximated the Linnaean system and his material contributed to the later development of the binomial scientific classification by Linnaeus.

The Linnaean system classified nature within a nested hierarchy, starting with three kingdoms. Kingdoms were divided into classes and they, in turn, into orders, and thence into genera (&quot;singular:&quot; genus), which were divided into species (&quot;singular:&quot; species). Below the rank of species he sometimes recognised taxa of a lower (unnamed) rank; these have since acquired standardised names such as &quot;variety&quot; in botany and &quot;subspecies&quot; in zoology. Modern taxonomy includes a rank of family between order and genus and a rank of phylum between kingdom and class that were not present in Linnaeus&#x27;s original system.

Linnaeus&#x27;s groupings were based upon shared physical characteristics, and not based upon differences. Of his higher groupings, only those for animals are still in use, and the groupings themselves have been significantly changed since their conception, as have the principles behind them. Nevertheless, Linnaeus is credited with establishing the idea of a hierarchical structure of classification which is based upon observable characteristics and intended to reflect natural relationships. While the underlying details concerning what are considered to be scientifically valid &quot;observable characteristics&quot; have changed with expanding knowledge (for example, DNA sequencing, unavailable in Linnaeus&#x27;s time, has proven to be a tool of considerable utility for classifying living organisms and establishing their evolutionary relationships), the fundamental principle remains sound.

=== Human taxonomy ===

Linnaeus&#x27;s system of taxonomy was especially noted as the first to include humans (&quot;Homo&quot;) taxonomically grouped with apes (&quot;Simia&quot;), under the header of &quot;Anthropomorpha&quot;.
German biologist Ernst Haeckel speaking in 1907 noted this as the &quot;most important sign of Linnaeus&#x27;s genius&quot;.
Linnaeus classified humans among the primates beginning with the first edition of &quot;&quot;. During his time at Hartekamp, he had the opportunity to examine several monkeys and noted similarities between them and man. He pointed out both species basically have the same anatomy; except for speech, he found no other differences. Thus he placed man and monkeys under the same category, &quot;Anthropomorpha&quot;, meaning &quot;manlike&quot;. This classification received criticism from other biologists such as Johan Gottschalk Wallerius, Jacob Theodor Klein and Johann Georg Gmelin on the ground that it is illogical to describe man as human-like. In a letter to Gmelin from 1747, Linnaeus replied:

Detail from the sixth edition of &quot;&quot; (1748) describing &quot;[[Anthropomorpha|Ant[h]ropomorpha]]&quot; with a division between &quot;Homo&quot; and &quot;Simia&quot;

The theological concerns were twofold: first, putting man at the same level as monkeys or apes would lower the spiritually higher position that man was assumed to have in the great chain of being, and second, because the Bible says man was created in the image of God (theomorphism), if monkeys/apes and humans were not distinctly and separately designed, that would mean monkeys and apes were created in the image of God as well. This was something many could not accept. The conflict between world views that was caused by asserting man was a type of animal would simmer for a century until the much greater, and still ongoing, creation–evolution controversy began in earnest with the publication of &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot; by Charles Darwin in 1859.

After such criticism, Linnaeus felt he needed to explain himself more clearly. The 10th edition of &#x27; introduced new terms, including &quot;Mammalia&quot; and &quot;Primates&quot;, the latter of which would replace &quot;Anthropomorpha&quot; as well as giving humans the full binomial &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;. The new classification received less criticism, but many natural historians still believed he had demoted humans from their former place of ruling over nature and not being a part of it. Linnaeus believed that man biologically belongs to the animal kingdom and had to be included in it. In his book &#x27;, he said, &quot;One should not vent one&#x27;s wrath on animals, Theology decree that man has a soul and that the animals are mere &#x27;automata mechanica&#x27;, but I believe they would be better advised that animals have a soul and that the difference is of nobility.&quot;


Linnaeus added a second species to the genus &quot;Homo&quot; in &quot;&quot; based on a figure and description by Jacobus Bontius from a 1658 publication: &quot;Homo troglodytes&quot; (&quot;caveman&quot;) and published a third in 1771: &quot;Homo lar&quot;. Swedish historian Gunnar Broberg states that the new human species Linnaeus described were actually simians or native people clad in skins to frighten colonial settlers, whose appearance had been exaggerated in accounts to Linnaeus. For &quot;Homo troglodytes&quot; Linnaeus asked the Swedish East India Company to search for one, but they did not find any signs of its existence. &quot;Homo lar&quot; has since been reclassified as &quot;Hylobates lar&quot;, the lar gibbon.

In the first edition of &quot;&quot;, Linnaeus subdivided the human species into four varieties: &quot;Europæus albesc[ens]&quot; (whitish European), &quot;Americanus rubesc[ens]&quot; (reddish American), &quot;Asiaticus fuscus&quot; (tawny Asian) and &quot;Africanus nigr[iculus]&quot; (blackish African).
In the tenth edition of Systema Naturae he further detailed phenotypical characteristics for each variety, based on the concept of the four temperaments from classical antiquity, and changed the description of Asians&#x27; skin tone to &quot;luridus&quot; (yellow). While Linnaeus believed that these varieties resulted from environmental differences between the four known continents, the Linnean Society acknowledges that his categorization&#x27;s focus on skin color and later inclusion of cultural and behavioral traits cemented colonial stereotypes and provided the foundations for scientific racism. Additionally, Linnaeus created a wastebasket taxon &quot;monstrosus&quot; for &quot;wild and monstrous humans, unknown groups, and more or less abnormal people&quot;.

In 1959, W. T. Stearn designated Linnaeus to be the lectotype of &quot;H. sapiens&quot;.

==Influences and economic beliefs==
Linnaeus&#x27;s applied science was inspired not only by the instrumental utilitarianism general to the early Enlightenment, but also by his adherence to the older economic doctrine of Cameralism. Additionally, Linnaeus was a state interventionist. He supported tariffs, levies, export bounties, quotas, embargoes, navigation acts, subsidised investment capital, ceilings on wages, cash grants, state-licensed producer monopolies, and cartels.

==Commemoration==

Anniversaries of Linnaeus&#x27;s birth, especially in centennial years, have been marked by major celebrations. Linnaeus has appeared on numerous Swedish postage stamps and banknotes. There are numerous statues of Linnaeus in countries around the world. The Linnean Society of London has awarded the Linnean Medal for excellence in botany or zoology since 1888. Following approval by the Riksdag of Sweden, Växjö University and Kalmar College merged on 1 January 2010 to become Linnaeus University. Other things named after Linnaeus include the twinflower genus &quot;Linnaea&quot;, &quot;Linnaeosicyos&quot; (a monotypic genus in the family Cucurbitaceae), the crater Linné on the Earth&#x27;s moon, a street in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and the cobalt sulfide mineral Linnaeite.
==Commentary==
Linnaeus wrote a description of himself in his autobiography &quot;Egenhändiga anteckningar af Carl Linnæus om sig sjelf: med anmärkningar och tillägg&quot;, which was published by his student Adam Afzelius in 1823:

Andrew Dickson White wrote in &quot;A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom&quot; (1896):

The mathematical PageRank algorithm, applied to 24 multilingual Wikipedia editions in 2014, published in &quot;PLOS ONE&quot; in 2015, placed Carl Linnaeus at the top historical figure, above Jesus, Aristotle, Napoleon, and Adolf Hitler (in that order).

In the 21st century, Linnæus&#x27;s taxonomy of human &quot;races&quot; has been criticized. Some claim that Linnæus was one of the forebears of the modern pseudoscientific notion of scientific racism, while others hold the view that while his classification was stereotyped, it did not imply that certain human &quot;races&quot; were superior to others.
==Standard author abbreviation==
== Selected publications by Linnaeus ==
* 
* 
* Linnaeus, Carl 1846 &quot;Fauna svecica. Sistens Animalia Sveciae Regni: Quadrupedia, Aves, Amphibia, Pisces, Insecta, Vermes, distributae per classes &amp; ordines, genera &amp; species&quot;. C. Wishoff &amp; G.J. Wishoff, Lugdnuni Batavorum.
* &quot;see also Species Plantarum&quot;
* 
* 


==See also==
* Linnaeus&#x27;s flower clock
* Johann Bartsch, colleague
* &quot;Centuria Insectorum&quot;
==References==
===Notes===

===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==

* 512 pages. Original book: 516 pages.&lt;br&gt;Review: 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==


Biographies
* Biography at the Department of Systematic Botany, University of Uppsala
* Biography at The Linnean Society of London
* Biography from the University of California Museum of Paleontology
* A four-minute biographical video from the London Natural History Museum on YouTube
* Biography from Taxonomic Literature, 2nd Edition. 1976–2009.

Resources
* 
* The Linnean Society of London
* The Linnaeus Apostles
* The Linnean Collections
* The Linnean Correspondence
* Linnaeus&#x27;s Disciples and Apostles
* The Linnaean Dissertations
* Linnean Herbarium
* The Linnaeus Tercentenary
* Works by Carl von Linné at the Biodiversity Heritage Library
* Digital edition: &quot;Critica Botanica&quot; by the University and State Library Düsseldorf
* Digital edition: &quot;Classes plantarum seu systemata plantarum&quot; by the University and State Library Düsseldorf
* &quot;Oratio de telluris habitabilis incremento&quot; (1744) – full digital facsimile from Linda Hall Library
* The 15 March 2007 issue of &quot;Nature&quot; featured a picture of Linnaeus on the cover with the heading &quot;Linnaeus&#x27;s Legacy&quot; and devoted a substantial portion to items related to Linnaeus and Linnaean taxonomy.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="0" end="13" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975665" start="64" end="75" title="ennoblement" label="ennoblement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="87" end="101" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl von Linné"/>
<link wikidata="Q864503" start="117" end="126" title="biologist" label="biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="131" end="140" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="156" end="177" title="binomial nomenclature" label="binomial nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="260" end="268" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753370" start="423" end="429" title="curate" label="curate"/>
<link wikidata="Q927776" start="446" end="453" title="Råshult" label="Råshult"/>
<link wikidata="Q199957" start="477" end="484" title="Småland" label="Småland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="495" end="501" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="547" end="565" title="Uppsala University" label="Uppsala University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="1168" end="1189" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="1265" end="1291" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1327" end="1346" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="1351" end="1365" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Baruch Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7724" start="1466" end="1483" title="August Strindberg" label="August Strindberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="1645" end="1650" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="1723" end="1730" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1761" end="1763" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="L."/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1865" end="1873" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1915" end="1922" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Linnæus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1928" end="1933" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Linné"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="1995" end="2000" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Linn."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2056" end="2069" title="type (biology)#Lectotype" label="type specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="2092" end="2104" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q13011" start="2125" end="2170" title="International Code of Zoological Nomenclature" label="International Code of Zoological Nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q927776" start="2311" end="2318" title="Råshult" label="Råshult"/>
<link wikidata="Q199957" start="2322" end="2329" title="Småland" label="Småland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147441" start="2601" end="2607" title="Rector (ecclesiastical)" label="rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q176353" start="2645" end="2655" title="beekeeping" label="beekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="2791" end="2799" title="botanist" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="2803" end="2811" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753370" start="2830" end="2836" title="curate" label="curate"/>
<link wikidata="Q607241" start="3122" end="3129" title="Clergy house" label="rectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q110874" start="3619" end="3629" title="patronymic" label="patronymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="3770" end="3785" title="Lund University" label="Lund University"/>
<link wikidata="Q127849" start="3871" end="3882" title="linden tree" label="linden tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q9990" start="3990" end="3991" title="æ" label="æ"/>
<link wikidata="Q188725" start="3992" end="4000" title="Typographic ligature" label="ligature"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="4499" end="4505" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="4733" end="4747" title="Grammar School" label="Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q26152" start="4751" end="4756" title="Växjö" label="Växjö"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375893" start="5338" end="5352" title="Katedralskolan, Växjö" label="Katedralskolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="5356" end="5365" title="Gymnasieskola" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6033388" start="5785" end="5800" title="Johannes Palmberg" label="Palmberg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="6013" end="6018" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="6020" end="6026" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="6028" end="6036" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="6042" end="6053" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="6481" end="6491" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q312959" start="6677" end="6694" title="Joseph Pitton de Tournefort" label="Tournefort&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q737706" start="6782" end="6800" title="Sébastien Vaillant" label="Sébastien Vaillant"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="6841" end="6856" title="Lund University" label="Lund University"/>
<link wikidata="Q180756" start="6860" end="6865" title="Skåne" label="Skåne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385985" start="6999" end="7013" title="Kilian Stobæus" label="Kilian Stobæus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="7397" end="7415" title="Uppsala University" label="Uppsala University"/>
<link wikidata="Q740096" start="7639" end="7663" title="Olof Rudbeck the Younger" label="Olof Rudbeck the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q55071968" start="7668" end="7679" title="Lars Roberg" label="Lars Roberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q954771" start="8007" end="8019" title="Olof Celsius" label="Olof Celsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608538" start="8254" end="8279" title="Plant reproductive morphology" label="plant sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="8922" end="8928" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="8934" end="8940" title="pistil" label="pistil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515798" start="9087" end="9111" title="Linnaean Garden" label="Uppsala Botanical Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371153" start="9155" end="9165" title="Nils Rosén von Rosenstein" label="Nils Rosén"/>
<link wikidata="Q212640" start="9950" end="9957" title="Lapland (Sweden)" label="Lapland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48199" start="10222" end="10233" title="Sami people" label="Sami people"/>
<link wikidata="Q537736" start="10358" end="10394" title="Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala" label="Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q44703" start="10574" end="10588" title="ornithological" label="ornithological"/>
<link wikidata="Q25748" start="10647" end="10652" title="Gävle" label="Gävle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114721" start="10740" end="10756" title="Linnaea borealis" label="Linnaea borealis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="10910" end="10914" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="10921" end="10927" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="10972" end="10980" title="reindeer" label="reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q122574" start="11091" end="11106" title="Gulf of Bothnia" label="Gulf of Bothnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25579" start="11144" end="11148" title="Umeå" label="Umeå"/>
<link wikidata="Q26268" start="11150" end="11155" title="Luleå" label="Luleå"/>
<link wikidata="Q214021" start="11160" end="11166" title="Tornio" label="Tornio"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="11335" end="11347" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q863247" start="11639" end="11651" title="nomenclature" label="nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="11656" end="11670" title="Biological classification" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429277" start="11742" end="11747" title="Flora (publication)" label="Flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q123057" start="11917" end="11945" title="Augustin Pyramus de Candolle" label="Augustin Pyramus de Candolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661665" start="12064" end="12076" title="Edward Lee Greene" label="E. L. Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q399754" start="12224" end="12240" title="Eureka effect" label="flash of insight"/>
<link wikidata="Q205218" start="12661" end="12668" title="Dalarna" label="Dalarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q10428572" start="12850" end="12855" title="Røros (town)" label="Røros"/>
<link wikidata="Q26509" start="13079" end="13084" title="Falun" label="Falun"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="13234" end="13248" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816221" start="13299" end="13323" title="University of Harderwijk" label="University of Harderwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="13454" end="13465" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="13554" end="13561" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q243237" start="13664" end="13675" title="taxidermy" label="taxidermied"/>
<link wikidata="Q170379" start="13702" end="13707" title="Lernaean Hydra" label="hydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q190084" start="13756" end="13760" title="hoax" label="fake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191044" start="13944" end="13963" title="The Beast (Bible)" label="Beast of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q58931" start="14253" end="14263" title="Harderwijk" label="Harderwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="14542" end="14549" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q158597" start="14681" end="14690" title="Anopheles" label="Anopheles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367" start="14697" end="14705" title="mosquito" label="mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308044" start="14744" end="14759" title="Artemisia annua" label="Artemisia annua"/>
<link wikidata="Q426921" start="14767" end="14775" title="artemisinins" label="wormwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q521616" start="14802" end="14814" title="antimalarial" label="antimalarial"/>
<link wikidata="Q524071" start="14970" end="14982" title="Peter Artedi" label="Peter Artedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q340013" start="15183" end="15202" title="canals of Amsterdam" label="canals of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q724270" start="15367" end="15391" title="Jan Frederik Gronovius" label="Johan Frederik Gronovius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419361" start="15699" end="15711" title="Isaac Lawson" label="Isaac Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313093" start="15864" end="15880" title="Herman Boerhaave" label="Herman Boerhaave"/>
<link wikidata="Q957115" start="16130" end="16145" title="Johannes Burman" label="Johannes Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q556591" start="16552" end="16571" title="George Clifford III" label="George Clifford III"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="16591" end="16615" title="Dutch East India Company" label="Dutch East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18771183" start="16674" end="16683" title="Hartekamp" label="Hartekamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q9928" start="16687" end="16696" title="Heemstede" label="Heemstede"/>
<link wikidata="Q310326" start="17026" end="17048" title="Hans Sloane" label="Sir Hans Sloane&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q650702" start="17309" end="17315" title="florin" label="florin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146002" start="18002" end="18009" title="cabinet of curiosities" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069148" start="18035" end="18056" title="Chelsea Physic Garden" label="Chelsea Physic Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q312678" start="18073" end="18086" title="Philip Miller" label="Philip Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="18225" end="18246" title="binomial nomenclature" label="binomial nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q312959" start="18290" end="18317" title="Joseph Pitton de Tournefort" label="Joseph Pitton de Tournefort"/>
<link wikidata="Q316949" start="18322" end="18330" title="John Ray" label="John Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735861" start="18659" end="18683" title="The Gardeners Dictionary" label="The Gardeners Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q61031" start="18884" end="18906" title="Johann Jacob Dillenius" label="Johann Jacob Dillenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="19408" end="19414" title="Genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q217530" start="19814" end="19823" title="Nepenthes" label="Nepenthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956533" start="19874" end="19887" title="pitcher plant" label="pitcher plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q435674" start="20230" end="20248" title="Antoine de Jussieu" label="Antoine de Jussieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q26509" start="20385" end="20390" title="Falun" label="Falun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473264" start="20431" end="20451" title="Sara Elisabeth Moræa" label="Sara Elisabeth Moræa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038496" start="20643" end="20667" title="Carl Gustav Tessin" label="Count Carl Gustav Tessin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="20783" end="20815" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Science" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20837" end="20844" title="Praeses#Modern uses" label="Praeses"/>
<link wikidata="Q178823" start="21124" end="21128" title="Carl Linnaeus the Younger" label="Carl"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360126" start="21159" end="21178" title="Elisabeth Christina von Linné" label="Elisabeth Christina"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="21700" end="21715" title="natural history" label="natural history"/>
<link wikidata="Q239276" start="21942" end="21947" title="Öland" label="Öland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027830" start="21952" end="21959" title="Gotland" label="Gotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54757" start="22088" end="22093" title="Visby" label="Visby"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="22633" end="22643" title="zoology" label="zoological"/>
<link wikidata="Q81130" start="22645" end="22659" title="Anders Celsius" label="Anders Celsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q25267" start="22694" end="22709" title="Celsius" label="named after him"/>
<link wikidata="Q213551" start="23092" end="23105" title="Västergötland" label="Västergötland"/>
<link wikidata="Q180756" start="23527" end="23533" title="Scania" label="Scania"/>
<link wikidata="Q567971" start="23629" end="23638" title="archiater" label="archiater"/>
<link wikidata="Q52931" start="23680" end="23695" title="Adolf Frederick of Sweden" label="Adolf Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="23764" end="23793" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Academy of Sciences in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180756" start="23866" end="23872" title="Scania" label="Scania"/>
<link wikidata="Q208021" start="24227" end="24233" title="walnut" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q27980" start="24238" end="24255" title="Sorbus intermedia" label="Swedish whitebeam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9361026" start="24352" end="24371" title="Ramlösa Hälsobrunn" label="Ramlösa mineral spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010244" start="25371" end="25391" title="Philosophia Botanica" label="Philosophia Botanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q472898" start="25722" end="25731" title="wet nurse" label="wet nurse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621687" start="26184" end="26198" title="Jean-Emmanuel Gilibert" label="J. E. Gilibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310776" start="26867" end="26889" title="botanical nomenclature" label="botanical nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q961142" start="27143" end="27166" title="Order of the Polar Star" label="Order of the Polar Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547210" start="28078" end="28091" title="10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="tenth edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q13011" start="28172" end="28195" title="zoological nomenclature" label="zoological nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="28274" end="28282" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="28307" end="28315" title="ennobled" label="ennobled"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="28451" end="28461" title="French language" label="gallicised"/>
<link wikidata="Q355505" start="28509" end="28527" title="nobiliary particle" label="nobiliary particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q300942" start="28534" end="28537" title="von" label="von"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="28596" end="28608" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114721" start="28632" end="28642" title="Linnaea borealis" label="twinflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q724270" start="28764" end="28773" title="Jan Frederik Gronovius" label="Gronovius"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="29101" end="29107" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="29543" end="29565" title="Catherine II of Russia" label="Catherine II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q84181" start="29625" end="29649" title="Giovanni Antonio Scopoli" label="Giovanni Antonio Scopoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q15875" start="29735" end="29741" title="Idrija" label="Idrija"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360973" start="29743" end="29760" title="Duchy of Carniola" label="Duchy of Carniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="29771" end="29779" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15856" start="29871" end="29874" title="olm" label="olm"/>
<link wikidata="Q108235" start="29883" end="29891" title="dormouse" label="dormouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431469" start="30053" end="30061" title="Scopolia" label="Scopolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q337188" start="30083" end="30094" title="scopolamine" label="scopolamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="30372" end="30402" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q565276" start="30680" end="30688" title="sciatica" label="sciatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q850042" start="31155" end="31172" title="Uppsala Cathedral" label="Uppsala Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q153408" start="31265" end="31277" title="Joseph Banks" label="Joseph Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q458004" start="31687" end="31705" title="James Edward Smith (botanist)" label="James Edward Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q867447" start="31839" end="31864" title="Linnean Society of London" label="Linnean Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641602" start="32171" end="32192" title="List of students of Linnaeus" label="many devoted students"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484289" start="33008" end="33025" title="William T. Stearn" label="William T. Stearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q605901" start="33373" end="33399" title="Swedish East India Company" label="Swedish East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866965" start="33493" end="33507" title="Côn Sơn Island" label="Côn Sơn Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q27684" start="33744" end="33757" title="Pehr Forsskål" label="Pehr Forsskål"/>
<link wikidata="Q714748" start="33762" end="33774" title="Pehr Löfling" label="Pehr Löfling"/>
<link wikidata="Q719204" start="33835" end="33844" title="Pehr Kalm" label="Pehr Kalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q39789" start="34261" end="34276" title="Daniel Solander" label="Daniel Solander"/>
<link wikidata="Q153408" start="34557" end="34569" title="Joseph Banks" label="Joseph Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="34599" end="34609" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q312224" start="34652" end="34661" title="HM Bark Endeavour" label="Endeavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q433984" start="34742" end="34757" title="Anders Sparrman" label="Anders Sparrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898494" start="34780" end="34790" title="HMS Resolution (1771)" label="Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q39658" start="34985" end="35004" title="Carl Peter Thunberg" label="Carl Peter Thunberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="35115" end="35120" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q640267" start="35183" end="35189" title="Dejima" label="Dejima"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="35198" end="35206" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547210" start="35660" end="35672" title="10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="10th edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553001" start="35915" end="35925" title="index card" label="index card"/>
<link wikidata="Q311677" start="36208" end="36225" title="Physalis angulata" label="Physalis angulata"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="36405" end="36426" title="binomial nomenclature" label="binomial nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q123612" start="36480" end="36494" title="Gaspard Bauhin" label="Gaspard Bauhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q123660" start="36499" end="36512" title="Johann Bauhin" label="Johann Bauhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q761545" start="36894" end="36914" title="Johan Andreas Murray" label="Johan Andreas Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q57230" start="37195" end="37218" title="Johann Friedrich Gmelin" label="Johann Friedrich Gmelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q234050" start="37378" end="37405" title="Lichfield Botanical Society" label="Lichfield Botanical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310776" start="38261" end="38279" title="botanical nomenclature" label="plant nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q333458" start="38545" end="38556" title="Cryptogamia" label="Cryptogamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25286" start="39185" end="39192" title="Uppsala" label="Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q647392" start="39406" end="39421" title="Carl Gyllenborg" label="Carl Gyllenborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q52931" start="39451" end="39464" title="Adolf Frederick, King of Sweden" label="Adolf Fredrik"/>
<link wikidata="Q5771745" start="39500" end="39511" title="Claes Grill" label="Claes Grill"/>
<link wikidata="Q632219" start="39564" end="39579" title="Jonas Alströmer" label="Jonas Alströmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669062" start="40294" end="40319" title="Linnaeus&amp;#x27;s Hammarby" label="country house at Hammarby"/>
<link wikidata="Q458004" start="41306" end="41324" title="James Edward Smith (botanist)" label="James Edward Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q234251" start="42216" end="42235" title="Louisa Ulrika of Prussia" label="Queen Lovisa Ulrika"/>
<link wikidata="Q52929" start="42399" end="42419" title="Gustav IV Adolf of Sweden" label="King Gustav IV Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q52931" start="42535" end="42553" title="Adolf Frederick, King of Sweden" label="King Adolf Fredrik"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="42736" end="42769" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420103" start="42798" end="42831" title="Swedish Museum of Natural History" label="Swedish Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="42835" end="42844" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211" start="43285" end="43310" title="scientific classification" label="scientific classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="43334" end="43353" title="biology" label="biological sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q61439" start="43376" end="43384" title="Rumphius" label="Rumphius"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="43604" end="43620" title="nested hierarchy" label="nested hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36732" start="43642" end="43650" title="kingdom (biology)" label="kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="43914" end="43918" title="taxonomic rank" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="44077" end="44083" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="44122" end="44128" title="phylum" label="phylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="44888" end="44902" title="DNA sequencing" label="DNA sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="45045" end="45071" title="Phylogenetics" label="evolutionary relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="45234" end="45238" title="Homo" label="Homo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427112" start="45285" end="45290" title="Simia" label="Simia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773914" start="45325" end="45339" title="Anthropomorpha" label="Anthropomorpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q48246" start="45364" end="45377" title="Ernst Haeckel" label="Ernst Haeckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="45509" end="45516" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367" start="45640" end="45646" title="monkey" label="monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q902797" start="45986" end="46012" title="Johan Gottschalk Wallerius" label="Johan Gottschalk Wallerius"/>
<link wikidata="Q65219" start="46014" end="46033" title="Jacob Theodor Klein" label="Jacob Theodor Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q58068" start="46038" end="46057" title="Johann Georg Gmelin" label="Johann Georg Gmelin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46176" end="46350" title="File:Antropomorpha12c.png" label="Detail from the sixth edition of &amp;quot;&amp;quot; (1748) describing &amp;quot;[[Anthropomorpha|Ant[h]ropomorpha]]&amp;quot; with a division between &amp;quot;Homo&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Simia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049050" start="46527" end="46547" title="great chain of being" label="great chain of being"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538955" start="46607" end="46619" title="image of God" label="image of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782250" start="46621" end="46633" title="theomorphism" label="theomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49447" start="46846" end="46856" title="world view" label="world view"/>
<link wikidata="Q338729" start="46982" end="47012" title="creation–evolution controversy" label="creation–evolution controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="47060" end="47084" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="47094" end="47108" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="47836" end="47840" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q726381" start="48134" end="48149" title="Jacobus Bontius" label="Jacobus Bontius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097122" start="48297" end="48311" title="Gunnar Broberg" label="Gunnar Broberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q605901" start="48564" end="48590" title="Swedish East India Company" label="Swedish East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q208043" start="48743" end="48753" title="lar gibbon" label="lar gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q918036" start="48842" end="48851" title="Race (biology)" label="varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q638210" start="49198" end="49215" title="four temperaments" label="four temperaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="49221" end="49240" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="49437" end="49447" title="Continent" label="continents"/>
<link wikidata="Q867447" start="49453" end="49468" title="The Linnean Society of London" label="Linnean Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q853516" start="49522" end="49532" title="Human skin color" label="skin color"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="49556" end="49564" title="culture" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="49596" end="49604" title="colonialism" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="49650" end="49667" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q962530" start="49702" end="49719" title="wastebasket taxon" label="wastebasket taxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484289" start="49846" end="49858" title="W. T. Stearn" label="W. T. Stearn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="49889" end="49898" title="lectotype" label="lectotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q616481" start="50148" end="50158" title="Cameralism" label="Cameralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47433" start="50600" end="50608" title="banknote" label="banknote"/>
<link wikidata="Q867447" start="50685" end="50710" title="Linnean Society of London" label="Linnean Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635542" start="50727" end="50740" title="Linnean Medal" label="Linnean Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="50759" end="50765" title="botany" label="botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="50769" end="50776" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="50815" end="50832" title="Riksdag of Sweden" label="Riksdag of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751928" start="50834" end="50850" title="Växjö University" label="Växjö University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751928" start="50855" end="50869" title="Kalmar College" label="Kalmar College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751928" start="50905" end="50924" title="Linnaeus University" label="Linnaeus University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114721" start="50995" end="51002" title="Linnaea" label="Linnaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16787380" start="51016" end="51029" title="Linnaeosicyos" label="Linnaeosicyos"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="51039" end="51054" title="monotypic genus" label="monotypic genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8314" start="51069" end="51082" title="Cucurbitaceae" label="Cucurbitaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826950" start="51096" end="51101" title="Linné (crater)" label="Linné"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="51140" end="51164" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q424132" start="51197" end="51206" title="Linnaeite" label="Linnaeite"/>
<link wikidata="Q347903" start="51416" end="51429" title="Adam Afzelius" label="Adam Afzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q504489" start="51440" end="51460" title="Andrew Dickson White" label="Andrew Dickson White"/>
<link wikidata="Q16514362" start="51476" end="51540" title="A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom" label="A History of the Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q184316" start="51573" end="51581" title="PageRank" label="PageRank"/>
<link wikidata="Q564954" start="51667" end="51675" title="PLOS ONE" label="PLOS ONE"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="51748" end="51753" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="51755" end="51764" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="51766" end="51774" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="51780" end="51792" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="51994" end="52011" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q849308" start="52509" end="52526" title="Species Plantarum" label="Species Plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q886314" start="52556" end="52584" title="Linnaeus&amp;#x27;s flower clock" label="Linnaeus&amp;#x27;s flower clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q100222" start="52587" end="52601" title="Johann Bartsch" label="Johann Bartsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5063067" start="52621" end="52640" title="Centuria Insectorum" label="Centuria Insectorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="52932" end="52953" title="Uppsala University" label="University of Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312268" start="53020" end="53067" title="University of California Museum of Paleontology" label="University of California Museum of Paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="53119" end="53141" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q172266" start="53492" end="53521" title="Biodiversity Heritage Library" label="Biodiversity Heritage Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496254" start="53577" end="53616" title="University and State Library Düsseldorf" label="University and State Library Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496254" start="53697" end="53736" title="University and State Library Düsseldorf" label="University and State Library Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551622" start="53830" end="53848" title="Linda Hall Library" label="Linda Hall Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="53884" end="53890" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5236" wikidata="Q93352" url="?curid=5236" title="Coast">
<text>A coastalso called the coastline, shoreline, or seashoreis the land next to the sea or the line that forms the boundary between the land and the ocean or a lake. Coasts are influenced by the topography of the surrounding landscape, as well as by water induced erosion, such as waves. The geological composition of rock and soil dictates the type of shore that is created. Earth contains roughly of coastline.

Coasts are important zones in natural ecosystems, often home to a wide range of biodiversity. On land, they harbor important ecosystems such as freshwater or estuarine wetlands, which are important for bird populations and other terrestrial animals. In wave-protected areas, they harbor salt marshes, mangroves or seagrasses, all of which can provide nursery habitat for finfish, shellfish, and other aquatic animals. Rocky shores are usually found along exposed coasts and provide habitat for a wide range of sessile animals (e.g. mussels, starfish, barnacles) and various kinds of seaweeds.

In physical oceanography, a shore is the wider fringe that is geologically modified by the action of the body of water past and present, while the beach is at the edge of the shore, representing the intertidal zone where there is one. Along tropical coasts with clear, nutrient-poor water, coral reefs can often be found between depths of .

According to an atlas prepared by the United Nations, about 44% of the human population lives within of the sea . Due to its importance in society and its high population concentrations, the coast is important for major parts of the global food and economic system, and they provide many ecosystem services to humankind. For example, important human activities happen in port cities. Coastal fisheries (commercial, recreational, and subsistence) and aquaculture are major economic activities and create jobs, livelihoods, and protein for the majority of coastal human populations. Other coastal spaces like beaches and seaside resorts generate large revenues through tourism.

Marine coastal ecosystems can also provide protection against sea level rise and tsunamis. In many countries, mangroves are the primary source of wood for fuel (e.g. charcoal) and building material. Coastal ecosystems like mangroves and seagrasses have a much higher capacity for carbon sequestration than many terrestrial ecosystems, and as such can play a critical role in the near-future to help mitigate climate change effects by uptake of atmospheric anthropogenic carbon dioxide. 

However, the economic importance of coasts makes many of these communities vulnerable to climate change, which causes increases in extreme weather and sea level rise, as well as related issues like coastal erosion, saltwater intrusion, and coastal flooding. Other coastal issues, such as marine pollution, marine debris, coastal development, and marine ecosystem destruction, further complicate the human uses of the coast and threaten coastal ecosystems.

The interactive effects of climate change, habitat destruction, overfishing, and water pollution (especially eutrophication) have led to the demise of coastal ecosystem around the globe. This has resulted in population collapse of fisheries stocks, loss of biodiversity, increased invasion of alien species, and loss of healthy habitats. International attention to these issues has been captured in Sustainable Development Goal 14 &quot;Life Below Water&quot;, which sets goals for international policy focused on preserving marine coastal ecosystems and supporting more sustainable economic practices for coastal communities. Likewise, the United Nations has declared 2021–2030 the UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration, but restoration of coastal ecosystems has received insufficient attention.

Since coasts are constantly changing, a coastline&#x27;s exact perimeter cannot be determined; this measurement challenge is called the coastline paradox. The term &quot;coastal zone&quot; is used to refer to a region where interactions of sea and land processes occur. Both the terms &quot;coast&quot; and &quot;coastal&quot; are often used to describe a geographic location or region located on a coastline (e.g., New Zealand&#x27;s West Coast, or the East, West, and Gulf Coast of the United States.) Coasts with a narrow continental shelf that are close to the open ocean are called &quot;pelagic&quot; &quot;coast&quot;, while other coasts are more sheltered coast in a gulf or bay. A shore, on the other hand, may refer to parts of land adjoining any large body of water, including oceans (sea shore) and lakes (lake shore). 

==Size==

The Earth has approximately of coastline. Coastal habitats, which extend to the margins of the continental shelves, make up about 7 percent of the Earth&#x27;s oceans, but at least 85% of commercially harvested fish depend on coastal environments during at least part of their life cycle. about 2.86% of exclusive economic zones were part of marine protected areas.

The definition of coasts varies. Marine scientists think of the &quot;wet&quot; (aquatic or intertidal) vegetated habitats as being coastal ecosystems (including seagrass, salt marsh etc.) whilst some terrestrial scientists might only think of coastal ecosystems as purely terrestrial plants that live close to the seashore (see also estuaries and coastal ecosystems).

While there is general agreement in the scientific community regarding the definition of coast, in the political sphere, the delineation of the extents of a coast differ according to jurisdiction. Government authorities in various countries may define coast differently for economic and social policy reasons. 

===Challenges of precisely measuring the coastline===
==Formation ==

Tides often determine the range over which sediment is deposited or eroded. Areas with high tidal ranges allow waves to reach farther up the shore, and areas with lower tidal ranges produce deposition at a smaller elevation interval. The tidal range is influenced by the size and shape of the coastline. Tides do not typically cause erosion by themselves; however, tidal bores can erode as the waves surge up the river estuaries from the ocean.

Geologists classify coasts on the basis of tidal range into &quot;macrotidal coasts&quot; with a tidal range greater than ; &quot;mesotidal coasts&quot; with a tidal range of ; and &quot;microtidal coasts&quot; with a tidal range of less than . The distinction between macrotidal and mesotidal coasts is more important. Macrotidal coasts lack barrier islands and lagoons, and are characterized by funnel-shaped estuaries containing sand ridges aligned with tidal currents. Wave action is much more important for determining bedforms of sediments deposited along mesotidal and microtidal coasts than in macrotidal coasts.

Waves erode coastline as they break on shore releasing their energy; the larger the wave the more energy it releases and the more sediment it moves. Coastlines with longer shores have more room for the waves to disperse their energy, while coasts with cliffs and short shore faces give little room for the wave energy to be dispersed. In these areas, the wave energy breaking against the cliffs is higher, and air and water are compressed into cracks in the rock, forcing the rock apart, breaking it down. Sediment deposited by waves comes from eroded cliff faces and is moved along the coastline by the waves. This forms an abrasion or cliffed coast.

Sediment deposited by rivers is the dominant influence on the amount of sediment located in the case of coastlines that have estuaries. Today, riverine deposition at the coast is often blocked by dams and other human regulatory devices, which remove the sediment from the stream by causing it to be deposited inland. Coral reefs are a provider of sediment for coastlines of tropical islands.

Like the ocean which shapes them, coasts are a dynamic environment with constant change. The Earth&#x27;s natural processes, particularly sea level rises, waves and various weather phenomena, have resulted in the erosion, accretion and reshaping of coasts as well as flooding and creation of continental shelves and drowned river valleys (rias).

==Importance for humans and ecosystems==

=== Human settlements ===
More and more of the world&#x27;s people live in coastal regions. According to a United Nations atlas, 44% of all people live within 150 km (93 mi) of the sea. Many major cities are on or near good harbors and have port facilities. Some landlocked places have achieved port status by building canals.

Nations defend their coasts against military invaders, smugglers and illegal migrants. Fixed coastal defenses have long been erected in many nations, and coastal countries typically have a navy and some form of coast guard.

==== Tourism ====
Coasts, especially those with beaches and warm water, attract tourists often leading to the development of seaside resort communities. In many island nations such as those of the Mediterranean, South Pacific Ocean and Caribbean, tourism is central to the economy. Coasts offer recreational activities such as swimming, fishing, surfing, boating, and sunbathing. 

Growth management and coastal management can be a challenge for coastal local authorities who often struggle to provide the infrastructure required by new residents, and poor management practices of construction often leave these communities and infrastructure vulnerable to processes like coastal erosion and sea level rise. In many of these communities, management practices such as beach nourishment or when the coastal infrastructure is no longer financially sustainable, managed retreat to remove communities from the coast.

=== Ecosystem services ===

== Types ==
===Emergent coastline===

According to one principle of classification, an emergent coastline is a coastline that has experienced a fall in sea level, because of either a global sea-level change, or local uplift. Emergent coastlines are identifiable by the coastal landforms, which are above the high tide mark, such as raised beaches. In contrast, a submergent coastline is one where the sea level has risen, due to a global sea-level change, local subsidence, or isostatic rebound. Submergent coastlines are identifiable by their submerged, or &quot;drowned&quot; landforms, such as rias (drowned valleys) and fjords

===Concordant coastline===

According to the second principle of classification, a concordant coastline is a coastline where bands of different rock types run parallel to the shore. These rock types are usually of varying resistance, so the coastline forms distinctive landforms, such as coves. Discordant coastlines feature distinctive landforms because the rocks are eroded by the ocean waves. The less resistant rocks erode faster, creating inlets or bay; the more resistant rocks erode more slowly, remaining as headlands or outcroppings.

===High and low energy coasts===

Parts of a coastline can be categorised as high energy coast or low energy coast. The distinguishing characteristics of a high energy coast are that the average wave energy is relatively high so that erosion of small grained material tends to exceed deposition, and consequently landforms like cliffs, headlands and wave-cut terraces develop. Low energy coasts are generally sheltered from waves, or in regions where the average wind wave and swell conditions are relatively mild. Low energy coasts typically change slowly, and tend to be depositional environments. 

High energy coasts are exposed to the direct impact of waves and storms, and are generally erosional environments. High energy storm events can make large changes to a coastline, and can move significant amounts of sediment over a short period, sometimes changing a shoreline configuration.

====Destructive and constructive waves====

Swash is the shoreward flow after the break, backwash is the water flow back down the beach. The relative strength of flow in the swash and backwash determines what size grains are deposited or eroded. This is dependent on how the wave breaks and the slope of the shore.
Depending on the form of the breaking wave, its energy can carry granular material up the beach and deposit it, or erode it by carrying more material down the slope than up it. Steep waves that are close together and break with the surf plunging down onto the shore slope expend much of their energy lifting the sediment. The weak swash does not carry it far up the slope, and the strong backwash carries it further down the slope, where it either settles in deeper water or is carried along the shore by a longshore current induced by an angled approach of the wave-front to the shore. These waves which erode the beach are called destructive waves.
Low waves that are further apart and break by spilling, expend more of their energy in the swash which carries particles up the beach, leaving less energy for the backwash to transport them downslope, with a net constrictive influence on the beach.

===Rivieras===
&quot;Riviera&quot; is an Italian word for &quot;shoreline&quot;, ultimately derived from Latin (&quot;riverbank&quot;). It came to be applied as a proper name to the coast of the Ligurian Sea, in the form &quot;riviera ligure&quot;, then shortened to &quot;riviera&quot;. Historically, the Ligurian Riviera extended from Capo Corvo (Punta Bianca) south of Genoa, north and west into what is now French territory past Monaco and sometimes as far as Marseille. Today, this coast is divided into the Italian Riviera and the French Riviera, although the French use the term &quot;Riviera&quot; to refer to the Italian Riviera and call the French portion the &quot;Côte d&#x27;Azur&quot;.

As a result of the fame of the Ligurian rivieras, the term came into English to refer to any shoreline, especially one that is sunny, topographically diverse and popular with tourists. Such places using the term include the Australian Riviera in Queensland and the Turkish Riviera along the Aegean Sea.

===Other coastal categories===
* A cliffed coast or abrasion coast is one where marine action has produced steep declivities known as cliffs.
* A flat coast is one where the land gradually descends into the sea.
* A graded shoreline is one where wind and water action has produced a flat and straight coastline.
* A primary coast isone which is mainly undergoing early stage development by major long-term processes such as tectonism and climate change A secondary coast is one where the primary processes have mostly stabilised, and more localised processes have become prominent.
* An erosional coast is on average undergoing erosion, while a depositional coast is accumulating material.
*An active coast is on the edge of a tectonic plate, while a passive coast is usually on a substantial continental shelf or away from a plate edge.

== Landforms ==
The following articles describe some coastal landforms:


* Barrier island
* Bay
* Cove
* Headland
* Peninsula
===Cliff erosion===
* Much of the sediment deposited along a coast is the result of erosion of a surrounding cliff, or bluff. Sea cliffs retreat landward because of the constant undercutting of slopes by waves. If the slope/cliff being undercut is made of unconsolidated sediment it will erode at a much faster rate than a cliff made of bedrock.
* A natural arch is formed when a headland is eroded through by waves.
* Sea caves are made when certain rock beds are more susceptible to erosion than the surrounding rock beds because of different areas of weakness. These areas are eroded at a faster pace creating a hole or crevice that, through time, by means of wave action and erosion, becomes a cave.
* A stack is formed when a headland is eroded away by wave and wind action or an arch collapses leaving an offshore remnant.
* A stump is a shortened sea stack that has been eroded away or fallen because of instability.
* Wave-cut notches are caused by the undercutting of overhanging slopes which leads to increased stress on cliff material and a greater probability that the slope material will fall. The fallen debris accumulates at the bottom of the cliff and is eventually removed by waves.
* A wave-cut platform forms after erosion and retreat of a sea cliff has been occurring for a long time. Gently sloping wave-cut platforms develop early on in the first stages of cliff retreat. Later, the length of the platform decreases because the waves lose their energy as they break further offshore.

===Coastal features formed by sediment===

* Beach
* Beach cusps
* Cuspate foreland
* Dune system
* Mudflat
* Raised beach
* Ria
* Shoal
* Spit
* Strand plain
* Surge channel
* Tombolo
===Coastal features formed by another feature===
* Estuary
* Lagoon
* Salt marsh
*Mangrove forests
*Kelp forests
*Coral reefs
*Oyster reefs

===Other features on the coast===

* Concordant coastline
* Discordant coastline
* Fjord
* Island
* Island arc
* Machair
==Coastal waters==
&quot;Coastal waters&quot; (or &quot;coastal seas&quot;) is a term that carries different meanings depending upon the context, ranging from a geographic reference to the waters within a few kilometers of the coast, to describing the entire continental shelf that may stretch for more than a hundred kilometers from land. The term is used in a different manner when describing legal and economic boundaries, such as territorial waters and international waters, or when describing the geography of coastal landforms or the ecological systems operating through the continental shelf (marine coastal ecosystems).

The dynamic fluid nature of the ocean means that all components of the whole ocean system are ultimately connected, although certain regional classifications are useful and relevant. The waters of the continental shelves represent such a region. The term &quot;coastal waters&quot; has been used in a wide variety of different ways in different contexts. In European Union environmental management it extends from the coast to just a few nautical miles while in the United States the US EPA considers this region to extend much further offshore. 

&quot;Coastal waters&quot; has specific meanings in the context of commercial coastal shipping, and somewhat different meanings in the context of naval littoral warfare. Oceanographers and marine biologists have yet other takes. Coastal waters have a wide range of marine habitats from enclosed estuaries to the open waters of the continental shelf. 

Similarly, the term littoral zone has no single definition. It is the part of a sea, lake, or river that is close to the shore. In coastal environments, the littoral zone extends from the high water mark, which is rarely inundated, to shoreline areas that are permanently submerged.

Coastal waters can be threatened by coastal eutrophication and harmful algal blooms.

== In geology ==
The identification of bodies of rock formed from sediments deposited in shoreline and nearshore environments (shoreline and nearshore &quot;facies&quot;) is extremely important to geologists. These provide vital clues for reconstructing the geography of ancient continents (&quot;paleogeography&quot;). The locations of these beds show the extent of ancient seas at particular points in geological time, and provide clues to the magnitudes of tides in the distant past.

Sediments deposited in the shoreface are preserved as lenses of sandstone in which the upper part of the sandstone is coarser than the lower part (a &quot;coarsening upwards sequence&quot;). Geologists refer to these are &quot;parasequences&quot;. Each records an episode of retreat of the ocean from the shoreline over a period of 10,000 to 1,000,000 years. These often show laminations reflecting various kinds of tidal cycles.

Some of the best-studied shoreline deposits in the world are found along the former western shore of the Western Interior Seaway, a shallow sea that flooded central North America during the late Cretaceous Period (about 100 to 66 million years ago). These are beautifully exposed along the Book Cliffs of Utah and Colorado.

===Geologic processes===
The following articles describe the various geologic processes that affect a coastal zone:

* Attrition
* Currents
* Denudation
* Deposition
* Erosion
* Flooding
* Longshore drift
* Marine sediments
* Saltation
* Sea level change
** eustatic
** isostatic
* Sedimentation
* Coastal sediment supply
** sediment transport
** solution
** subaerial processes
** suspension
* Tides
* Water waves
** diffraction
** refraction
** wave breaking
** wave shoaling
* Weathering
==Wildlife==
===Animals===
Larger animals that live in coastal areas include puffins, sea turtles and rockhopper penguins, among many others. Sea snails and various kinds of barnacles live on rocky coasts and scavenge on food deposited by the sea. Some coastal animals are used to humans in developed areas, such as dolphins and seagulls who eat food thrown for them by tourists. Since the coastal areas are all part of the littoral zone, there is a profusion of marine life found just off-coast, including sessile animals such as corals, sponges, starfish, mussels, seaweeds, fishes, and sea anemones.

There are many kinds of seabirds on various coasts. These include pelicans and cormorants, who join up with terns and oystercatchers to forage for fish and shellfish. There are sea lions on the coast of Wales and other countries.

====Coastal fish====
===Plants===
Many coastal areas are famous for their kelp beds. Kelp is a fast-growing seaweed that can grow up to half a meter a day in ideal conditions. Mangroves, seagrasses, macroalgal beds, and salt marsh are important coastal vegetation types in tropical and temperate environments respectively. Restinga is another type of coastal vegetation.

== Threats ==
Coasts also face many human-induced environmental impacts and coastal development hazards. The most important ones are: 
* Pollution which can be in the form of water pollution, nutrient pollution (leading to coastal eutrophication and harmful algal blooms), oil spills or marine debris that is contaminating coasts with plastic and other trash.
* Sea level rise, and associated issues like coastal erosion and saltwater intrusion.

=== Pollution ===


The pollution of coastlines is connected to marine pollution which can occur from a number of sources: Marine debris (garbage and industrial debris); the transportation of petroleum in tankers, increasing the probability of large oil spills; small oil spills created by large and small vessels, which flush bilge water into the ocean.

==== Marine pollution ====
==== Marine debris ====
==== Microplastics ====
=== Sea level rise due to climate change ===
== Global goals ==
International attention to address the threats of coasts has been captured in Sustainable Development Goal 14 &quot;Life Below Water&quot; which sets goals for international policy focused on preserving marine coastal ecosystems and supporting more sustainable economic practices for coastal communities. Likewise, the United Nations has declared 2021–2030 the UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration, but restoration of coastal ecosystems has received insufficient attention.

==See also==

* Bank (geography)
* Beach cleaning
* Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation
* European Atlas of the Seas
* Intertidal zone
* Land reclamation
* List of countries by length of coastline
* List of U.S. states by coastline
* Offshore or Intertidal zone
* Ballantine Scale
* Coastal path
* Shorezone

== References ==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution - organization dedicated to ocean research, exploration, and education</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="2" end="7" title="Coast" label="coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="23" end="32" title="Coast" label="coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="34" end="43" title="Coast" label="shoreline"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="48" end="56" title="Coast" label="seashore"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081619" start="63" end="67" title="land" label="land"/>
<link wikidata="Q165" start="80" end="83" title="sea" label="sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="145" end="150" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="156" end="160" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="191" end="201" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="260" end="267" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q165848" start="277" end="282" title="wind wave" label="waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="288" end="298" title="geology" label="geological"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="314" end="318" title="rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="323" end="327" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="372" end="377" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="448" end="457" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="490" end="502" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q31455" start="554" end="564" title="freshwater marsh" label="freshwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="568" end="577" title="estuary" label="estuarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="578" end="585" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248864" start="639" end="657" title="terrestrial animal" label="terrestrial animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="697" end="707" title="salt marsh" label="salt marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="711" end="719" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q25411280" start="724" end="734" title="seagrass meadow" label="seagrasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070230" start="761" end="776" title="nursery habitat" label="nursery habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="784" end="788" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="790" end="799" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756633" start="811" end="825" title="aquatic animal" label="aquatic animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119003" start="828" end="839" title="Rocky shore" label="Rocky shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759860" start="920" end="935" title="sessility (motility)" label="sessile animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="942" end="948" title="mussel" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349" start="951" end="959" title="starfish" label="starfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q220457" start="961" end="969" title="barnacle" label="barnacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="993" end="1000" title="seaweed" label="seaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337681" start="1007" end="1028" title="physical oceanography" label="physical oceanography"/>
<link wikidata="Q40080" start="1151" end="1156" title="beach" label="beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q421069" start="1203" end="1218" title="intertidal zone" label="intertidal zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="1245" end="1253" title="tropics" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="1294" end="1304" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1384" end="1398" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188" start="1417" end="1433" title="world population" label="human population"/>
<link wikidata="Q295865" start="1634" end="1651" title="ecosystem service" label="ecosystem service"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="1717" end="1721" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="1738" end="1747" title="fishery" label="fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q188989" start="1796" end="1807" title="aquaculture" label="aquaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="1872" end="1879" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q40080" start="1953" end="1958" title="beach" label="beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021711" start="1965" end="1979" title="seaside resort" label="seaside resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="2013" end="2020" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q109534959" start="2023" end="2047" title="Marine coastal ecosystem" label="Marine coastal ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="2085" end="2099" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="2104" end="2111" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="2133" end="2141" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="2189" end="2197" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q646660" start="2260" end="2268" title="seagrass" label="seagrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="2303" end="2323" title="carbon sequestration" label="carbon sequestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718755" start="2334" end="2355" title="terrestrial ecosystem" label="terrestrial ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q898653" start="2422" end="2445" title="climate change mitigation" label="mitigate climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468919" start="2467" end="2507" title="carbon dioxide in Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="atmospheric anthropogenic carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430548" start="2586" end="2614" title="effects of climate change" label="vulnerable to climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277161" start="2642" end="2657" title="extreme weather" label="extreme weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542312" start="2709" end="2724" title="coastal erosion" label="coastal erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002254" start="2726" end="2745" title="saltwater intrusion" label="saltwater intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138350" start="2751" end="2767" title="coastal flooding" label="coastal flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058325" start="2799" end="2815" title="marine pollution" label="marine pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q463960" start="2817" end="2830" title="marine debris" label="marine debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304561" start="2857" end="2873" title="marine ecosystem" label="marine ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="3011" end="3030" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q331828" start="3032" end="3043" title="overfishing" label="overfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="3049" end="3064" title="water pollution" label="water pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="3077" end="3091" title="eutrophication" label="eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466271" start="3217" end="3237" title="biodiversity loss" label="loss of biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="3249" end="3274" title="invasive species" label="invasion of alien species"/>
<link wikidata="Q53581239" start="3367" end="3398" title="Sustainable Development Goal 14" label="Sustainable Development Goal 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="3539" end="3569" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable economic practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q63440024" start="3651" end="3685" title="UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration" label="UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q28474" start="3826" end="3835" title="perimeter" label="perimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797373" start="3899" end="3916" title="coastline paradox" label="coastline paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q541468" start="4198" end="4208" title="West Coast Region" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="4217" end="4221" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="4223" end="4227" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="4233" end="4243" title="Gulf Coast of the United States" label="Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4251" end="4264" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q191468" start="4356" end="4363" title="pelagic" label="pelagic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322134" start="4438" end="4442" title="gulf" label="gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q39594" start="4446" end="4449" title="bay" label="bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="4453" end="4458" title="shore" label="shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="4610" end="4615" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="4701" end="4720" title="continental shelves" label="continental shelves"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="4910" end="4934" title="exclusive economic zones" label="exclusive economic zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367500" start="4948" end="4970" title="marine protected areas" label="marine protected areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q421069" start="5065" end="5075" title="Intertidal zone" label="intertidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q109534959" start="5105" end="5123" title="Coastal ecosystem" label="coastal ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5307" end="5339" title="Ecosystem service#Estuarine and coastal ecosystem services" label="estuaries and coastal ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="5526" end="5538" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="5725" end="5729" title="Tide" label="Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="5768" end="5776" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q733109" start="6090" end="6100" title="tidal bore" label="tidal bore"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="6144" end="6153" title="Estuary" label="estuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398201" start="6214" end="6225" title="tidal range" label="tidal range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205140" start="6514" end="6529" title="barrier islands" label="barrier islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="6534" end="6541" title="lagoons" label="lagoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879253" start="6695" end="6703" title="bedforms" label="bedforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502866" start="7418" end="7426" title="abrasion coast" label="abrasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502866" start="7430" end="7443" title="cliffed coast" label="cliffed coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="7932" end="7937" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="7977" end="7991" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11663" start="8012" end="8019" title="weather" label="weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="8052" end="8059" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553430" start="8061" end="8070" title="Accretion (geology)" label="accretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="8131" end="8150" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelves"/>
<link wikidata="Q554394" start="8178" end="8181" title="ria" label="ria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="8335" end="8349" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="8452" end="8458" title="harbor" label="harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="8469" end="8473" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q123480" start="8491" end="8501" title="landlocked" label="landlocked"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="8547" end="8552" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138347" start="8649" end="8665" title="Coastal defence and fortification" label="coastal defenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4508" start="8745" end="8749" title="navy" label="navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353040" start="8767" end="8778" title="coast guard" label="coast guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021711" start="8906" end="8920" title="seaside resort" label="seaside resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q112099" start="8942" end="8955" title="island nation" label="island nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="8978" end="8991" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="8993" end="9012" title="South Pacific Ocean" label="South Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="9017" end="9026" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="9028" end="9061" title="Tourism" label="tourism is central to the economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q321458" start="9149" end="9159" title="Sun tanning" label="sunbathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611761" start="9163" end="9180" title="Growth management" label="Growth management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316027" start="9185" end="9203" title="coastal management" label="coastal management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542312" start="9453" end="9468" title="coastal erosion" label="coastal erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="9473" end="9487" title="sea level rise" label="sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749926" start="9548" end="9565" title="beach nourishment" label="beach nourishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746652" start="9639" end="9654" title="managed retreat" label="managed retreat"/>
<link wikidata="Q271669" start="9999" end="10007" title="landform" label="landform"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155155" start="10054" end="10066" title="raised beach" label="raised beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="10184" end="10194" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161410" start="10199" end="10216" title="isostatic rebound" label="isostatic rebound"/>
<link wikidata="Q554394" start="10319" end="10322" title="ria" label="ria"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="10346" end="10351" title="fjord" label="fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535329" start="10576" end="10586" title="Geological resistance" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="10723" end="10729" title="erosion" label="eroded"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="10743" end="10747" title="wave" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172599" start="10798" end="10803" title="inlet" label="inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39594" start="10808" end="10811" title="bay" label="bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q191992" start="10870" end="10878" title="headland" label="headland"/>
<link wikidata="Q531953" start="10883" end="10890" title="outcrop" label="outcrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q661247" start="12344" end="12352" title="plunging breaker" label="plunging"/>
<link wikidata="Q661247" start="12804" end="12812" title="Spilling breaker" label="spilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q42820" start="13203" end="13215" title="Ligurian Sea" label="Ligurian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="13380" end="13385" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="13419" end="13425" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="13441" end="13447" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="13472" end="13481" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q11124206" start="13521" end="13536" title="Italian Riviera" label="Italian Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q182822" start="13545" end="13559" title="French Riviera" label="French Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q140075" start="13933" end="13951" title="Australian Riviera" label="Australian Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="13955" end="13965" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049525" start="13974" end="13989" title="Turkish Riviera" label="Turkish Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="14000" end="14010" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502866" start="14048" end="14061" title="cliffed coast" label="cliffed coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q107679" start="14147" end="14152" title="cliff" label="cliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426196" start="14159" end="14169" title="flat coast" label="flat coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q778857" start="14229" end="14245" title="graded shoreline" label="graded shoreline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14329" end="14342" title="primary coast" label="primary coast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14468" end="14483" title="secondary coast" label="secondary coast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14600" end="14615" title="erosional coast" label="erosional coast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14658" end="14676" title="depositional coast" label="depositional coast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14707" end="14719" title="active coast" label="active coast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14764" end="14777" title="passive coast" label="passive coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205140" start="14928" end="14942" title="Barrier island" label="Barrier island"/>
<link wikidata="Q39594" start="14945" end="14948" title="Bay" label="Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q31615" start="14951" end="14955" title="Cove" label="Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q191992" start="14958" end="14966" title="Headland" label="Headland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="14969" end="14978" title="Peninsula" label="Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q107679" start="15088" end="15093" title="cliff" label="cliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502866" start="15105" end="15115" title="Cliffed coast" label="Sea cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q954501" start="15329" end="15341" title="natural arch" label="natural arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052919" start="15398" end="15406" title="Sea cave" label="Sea cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q747957" start="15687" end="15692" title="stack (geology)" label="stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q747957" start="15812" end="15817" title="Stack (geology)" label="stump"/>
<link wikidata="Q480902" start="16183" end="16200" title="wave-cut platform" label="wave-cut platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q40080" start="16531" end="16536" title="Beach" label="Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875776" start="16539" end="16550" title="Beach cusps" label="Beach cusps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269346" start="16553" end="16569" title="Cuspate foreland" label="Cuspate foreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="16572" end="16583" title="Dune" label="Dune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="16586" end="16593" title="Mudflat" label="Mudflat"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155155" start="16596" end="16608" title="Raised beach" label="Raised beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q554394" start="16611" end="16614" title="Ria" label="Ria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337" start="16617" end="16622" title="Shoal" label="Shoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q217101" start="16625" end="16629" title="Spit (landform)" label="Spit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621258" start="16632" end="16644" title="Strand plain" label="Strand plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646169" start="16647" end="16660" title="Surge channel" label="Surge channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q498274" start="16663" end="16670" title="Tombolo" label="Tombolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="16722" end="16729" title="Estuary" label="Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="16732" end="16738" title="Lagoon" label="Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="16741" end="16751" title="Salt marsh" label="Salt marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="16753" end="16769" title="Mangrove" label="Mangrove forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q575913" start="16771" end="16783" title="Kelp forest" label="Kelp forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="16785" end="16796" title="Coral reef" label="Coral reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25220868" start="16798" end="16810" title="Oyster reef" label="Oyster reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158909" start="16849" end="16869" title="Concordant coastline" label="Concordant coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281693" start="16872" end="16892" title="Discordant coastline" label="Discordant coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="16895" end="16900" title="Fjord" label="Fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="16903" end="16909" title="Island" label="Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515058" start="16912" end="16922" title="Island arc" label="Island arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q28527" start="16925" end="16932" title="Machair" label="Machair"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="17192" end="17209" title="continental shelf" label="continental shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q213204" start="17367" end="17385" title="territorial waters" label="territorial waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="17390" end="17410" title="international waters" label="international waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q109534959" start="17533" end="17557" title="marine coastal ecosystem" label="marine coastal ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="17920" end="17934" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="18046" end="18052" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="US EPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q155930" start="18188" end="18204" title="Maritime transport" label="coastal shipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653224" start="18262" end="18278" title="littoral warfare" label="littoral warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q43518" start="18280" end="18294" title="Oceanography" label="Oceanographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173" start="18299" end="18316" title="Marine biology" label="marine biologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764288" start="18375" end="18390" title="marine habitats" label="marine habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="18405" end="18414" title="Estuary" label="estuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q191468" start="18422" end="18433" title="Pelagic zone" label="open waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="18482" end="18495" title="littoral zone" label="littoral zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q165" start="18542" end="18545" title="sea" label="sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="18547" end="18551" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="18556" end="18561" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="18583" end="18588" title="shore" label="shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622444" start="18650" end="18665" title="high water mark" label="high water mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246517" start="18734" end="18743" title="Underwater" label="submerged"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="18782" end="18804" title="coastal eutrophication" label="coastal eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869728" start="18809" end="18829" title="harmful algal blooms" label="harmful algal blooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q742139" start="18989" end="18995" title="Facies (geology)" label="facies"/>
<link wikidata="Q52151" start="19129" end="19143" title="paleogeography" label="paleogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q124096560" start="19347" end="19356" title="shoreface" label="shoreface"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="19384" end="19393" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648480" start="19547" end="19559" title="parasequence" label="parasequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711375" start="19696" end="19707" title="Lamination (geology)" label="laminations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083697" start="19856" end="19879" title="Western Interior Seaway" label="Western Interior Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="19941" end="19956" title="late Cretaceous" label="late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="19957" end="19963" title="Period (geology)" label="Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942933" start="20041" end="20052" title="Book Cliffs" label="Book Cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="20056" end="20060" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="20065" end="20073" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818734" start="20195" end="20204" title="Attrition (weathering)" label="Attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q129558" start="20207" end="20215" title="Ocean current" label="Currents"/>
<link wikidata="Q745430" start="20218" end="20228" title="Denudation" label="Denudation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987070" start="20231" end="20241" title="Deposition (geology)" label="Deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="20244" end="20251" title="Erosion" label="Erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="20254" end="20259" title="Flood" label="Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938255" start="20265" end="20280" title="Longshore drift" label="Longshore drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898474" start="20283" end="20299" title="Marine sediments" label="Marine sediments"/>
<link wikidata="Q325328" start="20302" end="20311" title="Saltation (geology)" label="Saltation"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="20314" end="20330" title="Sea level change" label="Sea level change"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="20334" end="20342" title="eustatic" label="eustatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188719" start="20346" end="20355" title="isostasy" label="isostatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q635485" start="20358" end="20371" title="Sedimentation" label="Sedimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138366" start="20374" end="20397" title="Coastal sediment supply" label="Coastal sediment supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445303" start="20401" end="20419" title="sediment transport" label="sediment transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="20423" end="20431" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361456" start="20435" end="20444" title="subaerial" label="subaerial"/>
<link wikidata="Q26100" start="20458" end="20468" title="Suspension (chemistry)" label="suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="20471" end="20475" title="Tide" label="Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q165848" start="20479" end="20490" title="Wind wave" label="Water waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q133900" start="20494" end="20505" title="diffraction" label="diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q72277" start="20509" end="20519" title="refraction" label="refraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q661247" start="20523" end="20536" title="wave breaking" label="wave breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975331" start="20540" end="20553" title="wave shoaling" label="wave shoaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="20556" end="20566" title="Weathering" label="Weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q311761" start="20644" end="20651" title="Puffin" label="puffins"/>
<link wikidata="Q219329" start="20653" end="20664" title="Sea turtle" label="sea turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355290" start="20669" end="20688" title="Rockhopper penguin" label="rockhopper penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="20709" end="20719" title="Gastropoda" label="Sea snails"/>
<link wikidata="Q220457" start="20741" end="20750" title="Barnacle" label="barnacles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369" start="20883" end="20891" title="Dolphin" label="dolphins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="20896" end="20904" title="seagulls" label="seagulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="20991" end="21004" title="littoral zone" label="littoral zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759860" start="21074" end="21081" title="Sessility (motility)" label="sessile"/>
<link wikidata="Q171446" start="21098" end="21104" title="Coral" label="corals"/>
<link wikidata="Q147256" start="21156" end="21168" title="Sea anemone" label="sea anemones"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="21195" end="21202" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q19413" start="21237" end="21244" title="pelican" label="pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901247" start="21250" end="21259" title="cormorant" label="cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q33140745" start="21279" end="21283" title="tern" label="tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27515" start="21289" end="21302" title="oystercatcher" label="oystercatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887135" start="21348" end="21356" title="sea lion" label="sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="21374" end="21379" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055316" start="21476" end="21480" title="kelp" label="kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="21510" end="21517" title="seaweed" label="seaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="21578" end="21587" title="Mangroves" label="Mangroves"/>
<link wikidata="Q646660" start="21589" end="21599" title="Seagrass" label="seagrasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="21622" end="21632" title="salt marsh" label="salt marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048983" start="21725" end="21733" title="Restinga" label="Restinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="21810" end="21845" title="Human impact on the environment" label="human-induced environmental impacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072708" start="21850" end="21877" title="coastal development hazards" label="coastal development hazards"/>
<link wikidata="Q183129" start="21949" end="21964" title="water pollution" label="water pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12203192" start="21966" end="21984" title="nutrient pollution" label="nutrient pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="21997" end="22019" title="coastal eutrophication" label="coastal eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q26869728" start="22024" end="22044" title="Harmful algal bloom" label="harmful algal blooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q220187" start="22047" end="22057" title="Oil spill" label="oil spills"/>
<link wikidata="Q463960" start="22061" end="22074" title="marine debris" label="marine debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="22136" end="22150" title="Sea level rise" label="Sea level rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542312" start="22179" end="22194" title="coastal erosion" label="coastal erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002254" start="22199" end="22218" title="saltwater intrusion" label="saltwater intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058325" start="22285" end="22301" title="marine pollution" label="marine pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q463960" start="22344" end="22357" title="Marine debris" label="Marine debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178988" start="22395" end="22422" title="Petroleum transport" label="transportation of petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q14970" start="22426" end="22433" title="tanker (ship)" label="tankers"/>
<link wikidata="Q220187" start="22471" end="22480" title="oil spill" label="oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552868" start="22548" end="22553" title="bilge" label="bilge"/>
<link wikidata="Q53581239" start="22794" end="22825" title="Sustainable Development Goal 14" label="Sustainable Development Goal 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q109534959" start="22919" end="22944" title="Marine coastal ecosystem" label="marine coastal ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="22965" end="22995" title="Sustainable development" label="sustainable economic practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q63440024" start="23077" end="23111" title="UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration" label="UN Decade on Ecosystem Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897058" start="23205" end="23221" title="Bank (geography)" label="Bank (geography)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65028727" start="23224" end="23238" title="Beach cleaning" label="Beach cleaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138339" start="23241" end="23282" title="Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation" label="Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412289" start="23285" end="23311" title="European Atlas of the Seas" label="European Atlas of the Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q421069" start="23314" end="23329" title="Intertidal zone" label="Intertidal zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="23332" end="23348" title="Land reclamation" label="Land reclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q676141" start="23351" end="23391" title="List of countries by length of coastline" label="List of countries by length of coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600993" start="23394" end="23426" title="List of U.S. states by coastline" label="List of U.S. states by coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q421069" start="23441" end="23456" title="Intertidal zone" label="Intertidal zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851432" start="23459" end="23475" title="Ballantine Scale" label="Ballantine Scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478783" start="23478" end="23490" title="Coastal path" label="Coastal path"/>
<link wikidata="Q23582296" start="23493" end="23502" title="ShoreZone" label="Shorezone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5237" wikidata="Q501571" url="?curid=5237" title="Catatonia">
<text>Catatonia is a complex syndrome most commonly seen in people with underlying mood disorders, such as major depressive disorder, or psychotic disorders, such as schizophrenia. People with catatonia exhibit abnormal movement and behaviors, which vary from person to person and may fluctuate in intensity within a single episode. People with catatonia appear withdrawn, meaning that they do not interact with the outside world and have difficulty processing information. They may be nearly motionless for days on end or perform repetitive purposeless movements. Two people may exhibit very different sets of behaviors and both still be diagnosed with catatonia. Treatment with benzodiazepines or ECT are most effective and lead to remission of symptoms in most cases.

There are different subtypes of catatonia, which represent groups of symptoms that commonly occur together. These include stuporous/akinetic catatonia, excited catatonia, malignant catatonia, and periodic catatonia.

Catatonia has historically been related to schizophrenia (catatonic schizophrenia), but is most often seen in mood disorders. It is now known that catatonic symptoms are nonspecific and may be observed in other mental, neurological, and medical conditions.

== Classification ==

=== Modern classifications ===
The ICD-11 is the most common manual used globally to define and diagnose illness, including mental illness. It diagnoses catatonia in someone who has three different symptoms associated with catatonia at one time. These symptoms are called stupor, catalepsy, waxy flexibility, mutism, negativism, posturing, mannerisms, stereotypies, psychomotor agitation, grimacing, echolalia, and echopraxia. It divides catatonia into three groups based on the underlying cause; Catatonia associated with another mental disorder, catatonia induced by psychoactive substance, and secondary catatonia.

The DSM-5 is the most common manual used by mental health professionals in the United States to define and diagnose different mental illnesses. The DSM-5 defines catatonia as “a syndrome characterized by lack of movement and communication, along with three or more of the following 12 behaviors; stupor, catalepsy, waxy flexibility, mutism, negativism, posturing, mannerism, stereotypy, agitation, grimacing, echolalia, or echopraxia.” As a syndrome, catatonia can only occur in people with an existing illness. The DSM-5 divides catatonia into 3 diagnoses. The most common of the three diagnoses is Catatonia Associated with Another Mental Disorder. Around 20% of cases are caused by an underlying medical condition, and known as Catatonic Disorder Due to Another Medical Condition. When the underlying condition is unknown it is considered Unspecified Catatonia.

==Signs and symptoms==
As discussed previously, the ICD-11 and DSM-5 both require 3 or more of the symptoms defined in the table below in order to diagnose catatonia. However, each person can have a different set of symptoms that may worsen, improve, and change in appearance throughout a single episode. Symptoms may develop over hours or days to weeks.

Because most patients with catatonia have an underlying psychiatric illness, the majority will present with worsening depression, mania, or psychosis followed by catatonia symptoms. Even when unable to interact, It should not be assumed that patients presenting with catatonia are unaware of their surroundings as some patients can recall in detail their catatonic state and their actions.

=== Subtypes ===
There are several subtypes of catatonia which are used currently: stuporous catatonia, excited catatonia, malignant catatonia, and periodic catatonia. Subtypes are defined by the group of symptoms and associated features that a person is experiencing or displaying. Notably, while catatonia can be divided into various subtypes, the appearance of catatonia is often dynamic and the same individual may have different subtypes at different times.

Stuporous catatonia: This form of catatonia is characterized by immobility, mutism, and a lack of response to the world around them. They may appear frozen in one position for long periods of time unable to eat, drink, or speak.

Excited catatonia: This form of catatonia is characterized by odd mannerisms and gestures, purposeless or inappropriate actions, excessive motor activity, restlessness, stereotypy, impulsivity, agitation, and combativeness. Speech and actions may be repetitive or mimic another person&#x27;s. People in this state are extremely hyperactive and may have delusions and hallucinations.

Malignant catatonia: This form of catatonia is life-threatening. It is characterized by fever, dramatic and rapid changes in blood pressure, increased heart rate and respiratory rate, and excessive sweating. Laboratory tests may be abnormal.

Periodic catatonia: This form of catatonia is characterized by only by a person having recurrent episodes of catatonia. Individuals will experience multiple episodes over time, without signs of catatonia in between episodes. Historically, the Wernicke-Kleist-Leonhard School considered periodic catatonia a distinct form of &quot;non-system schizophrenia&quot; characterized by recurrent acute phases with hyperkinetic and akinetic features and often psychotic symptoms, and the build-up of a residual state in between these acute phases, which is characterized by low-level catatonic features and aboulia of varying severity.

== Causes ==

Catatonia can only exist if a person has another underlying illness, and can be associated with a wide range of illnesses including psychiatric disorders, medical conditions, and substance use.

=== Psychiatric conditions ===
Mood disorders such as bipolar disorder and depression are the most common conditions underlying catatonia. Other psychiatric conditions that can cause catatonia include schizophrenia and other primary psychotic disorders, autism spectrum disorders, ADHD, and post-traumatic stress disorder. In autism, people tend to present with catatonia during periods of regression.

Psychodynamic theorists have interpreted catatonia as a defense against the potentially destructive consequences of responsibility, and the passivity of the disorder provides relief.

=== Medical conditions ===
Catatonia is also seen in many medical disorders, including encephalitis, meningitis, autoimmune disorders, focal neurological lesions (including strokes), alcohol withdrawal, abrupt or overly rapid benzodiazepine withdrawal, cerebrovascular disease, neoplasms, head injury, and some metabolic conditions (homocystinuria, diabetic ketoacidosis, hepatic encephalopathy, and hypercalcaemia).

==== Neurological disorders ====
Catatonia can occur due to a number of neurological conditions. For instance, certain types of encephalitis can cause catatonia. Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis is a form of autoimmune encephalitis which is known to cause catatonia in some people. Additionally, encephalitis has been reported to cause catatonia in people who have encephalitis due to HIV and herpes simplex virus (HSV). The research is limited, but some evidence suggests that people can develop catatonia after traumatic brain injury without a primary psychiatric disorder. Similarly, there are several case reports suggesting that people have experienced catatonia after a stroke, with some people having catatonia-associated symptoms that were unexplainable by their stroke itself, and which improved after treatment with benzodiazepines. Parkinson&#x27;s disease can cause catatonia for some people by impairing their ability to produce and secrete dopamine, a neurotransmitter which is thought to contribute to motor dysfunction in people with catatonia.

==== Metabolic and endocrine disorders ====
Abnormal thyroid function can cause catatonia when the thyroid overproduces or underproduces thyroid hormones. This is thought to occur due to thyroid hormones impact on metabolism including in the cells of the nervous system. Abnormal electrolyte levels have also been shown to cause catatonia in rare cases. Most notably, low levels of sodium in the blood can cause catatonia in some people.

==== Autoimmune disorders ====
As discussed previously, anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis is a form of autoimmune encephalitis which can cause catatonia. Additionally, autoimmune diseases that are not exclusively neurological can cause neurological and psychiatric symptoms including catatonia. For instance, systemic lupus erythematosus can cause catatonia and is thought to do by causing inflammation in the blood vessels of the brain or possibly by the body&#x27;s own antibodies damaging neurons. 

==== Infectious diseases ====
Certain types of infections are known to cause catatonia either through directly impairing brain function or by making a person more likely to contract diseases that impair brain function. HIV and AIDS can cause catatonia, most likely by predisposing one to infections in the brain, including different types of viral encephalitis. &quot;Borrelia burgdorferi&quot; causes Lyme disease, which has been shown to cause catatonia by infecting the brain and causing encephalitis.

==== Pharmacological causes ====
Use of NMDA receptor antagonists including ketamine and phencyclidine (PCP) can lead to catatonia-like states. Information about these effects has improved scientific understanding of the role of glutamate in catatonia. High dose and chronic use of stimulants like cocaine and amphetamines can lead to cases of catatonia, typically associated with psychosis. This is thought to be due to changes in the function of circuits of the brain associated with dopamine release.

== Pathogenesis ==
The mechanisms in the brain that cause catatonia are poorly understood. Currently, there are two main categories of explanations for what may be happening in the brain to cause catatonia. The first is that there is disruption of normal neurotransmitter production or release in certain areas of the brain preventing normal function of those areas of the brain, leading to behavioral and motor symptoms associated with catatonia. The second claims that disruption of communication between different areas of the brain causes catatonia.

=== Neurotransmitters ===
The neurotransmitters that are most strongly associated with catatonia are GABA, dopamine, and glutamate. GABA is the main inhibitory neurotransmitter of the brain, meaning that it slows down the activity of the systems of the brain it acts on. In catatonia, people have low levels of GABA which causes them to be overly activated, especially in the areas of the brain that cause inhibition. This is thought to cause the behavioral symptoms associated with catatonia including withdrawal. Dopamine can increase or decrease the activity of the area of the brain it acts on depending on where in the brain it is. Dopamine is lower than normal in people with catatonia, which is thought to cause many of the motor symptoms, because dopamine is the main neurotransmitter which activates the parts of the brain responsible for movement. Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter, meaning that it increases the activity of the areas of the brain it acts on. Notably, glutamate increases tells the neuron it acts on to fire, by binding to the NMDA receptor. People with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis can develop catatonia because their own antibodies attack the NMDA receptor, which reduces the ability of the brain to activate different areas of the brain using glutamate.

=== Neurological pathways ===
Several pathways in the brain have been studied which seem to contribute to catatonia when they are not functioning properly. However, these studies were unable to determine if the abnormalities they observed were the cause of catatonia or if the catatonia caused the abnormalities. Furthermore, it has also been hypothesized that pathways that connect the basal ganglia with the cortex and thalamus is involved in the development of catatonia.


==Diagnosis==

There is not yet a definitive consensus regarding diagnostic criteria of catatonia. In the fifth edition of the American Psychiatric Association&#x27;s &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders&quot; (DSM-5, 2013) and the eleventh edition of the World Health Organization&#x27;s &quot;International Classification of Diseases (&quot;ICD-11, 2022), the classification is more homogeneous than in earlier editions. Prominent researchers in the field have other suggestions for diagnostic criteria. Still, diagnosing catatonia can be challenging. Evidence suggests that there is as high as a 15-day average delay to diagnosis for people with catatonia.

DSM-5 classification

The DSM-5 does not classify catatonia as an independent disorder, but rather it classifies it as catatonia associated with another mental disorder, due to another medical condition, or as unspecified catatonia. 

Catatonia is diagnosed by the presence of three or more of the following 12 psychomotor symptoms in association with a mental disorder, medical condition, or unspecified:
* stupor: no psycho-motor activity; not actively relating to the environment
* catalepsy: passive induction of a posture held against gravity
* waxy flexibility: allowing positioning by an examiner and maintaining that position
* mutism: no, or very little, verbal response (exclude if known aphasia)
* negativism: opposition or no response to instructions or external stimuli
* posturing: spontaneous and active maintenance of a posture against gravity
* mannerisms that are odd, circumstantial caricatures of normal actions
* stereotypy: repetitive, abnormally frequent, non-goal-directed movements
* agitation, not influenced by external stimuli
* grimacing: keeping a fixed facial expression
* echolalia: mimicking another&#x27;s speech
* echopraxia: mimicking another&#x27;s movements.

Other disorders (additional code 293.89 [F06.1] to indicate the presence of the co-morbid catatonia):
* Catatonia associated with autism spectrum disorder
* Catatonia associated with schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders
** Catatonia associated with brief psychotic disorder
** Catatonia associated with schizophreniform disorder
** Catatonia associated with schizoaffective disorder
** Catatonia associated with a substance-induced psychotic disorder
* Catatonia associated with bipolar and related disorders
* Catatonia associated with major depressive disorder
* Catatonic disorder due to another medical condition

If catatonic symptoms are present but do not form the catatonic syndrome, a medication- or substance-induced aetiology should first be considered.

ICD-11 classification

In the ICD-11, catatonia is defined as a syndrome of primarily psychomotor disturbances that is characterized by the simultaneous occurrence of several symptoms such as stupor, catalepsy, waxy flexibility, mutism, negativism, posturing, mannerisms, stereotypies, psychomotor agitation, grimacing, echolalia, and echopraxia. Catatonia may occur in the context of specific mental disorders, including mood disorders, schizophrenia or other primary psychotic disorders, and neurodevelopmental disorders, and may be induced by psychoactive substances, including medications. Catatonia may also be caused by a medical condition not classified under mental, behavioral, or neurodevelopmental disorders.

=== Assessment/physical ===
Catatonia is often overlooked and under-diagnosed. Patients with catatonia most commonly have an underlying psychiatric disorder. For this reason, physicians may overlook signs of catatonia due to the severity of the psychosis the patient is presenting with. Furthermore, the patient may not be presenting with the common signs of catatonia such as mutism and posturing. Additionally, the motor abnormalities seen in catatonia are also present in psychiatric disorders. For example, a patient with mania will show increased motor activity and may not be considered for a diagnosis of excited catatonia, even if symptoms are developing that are not associated with mania. One way in which physicians can differentiate between the two is to observe the motor abnormality. Patients with mania present with increased goal-directed activity. On the other hand, the increased activity in catatonia is not goal-directed and often repetitive.

Catatonia is a clinical diagnosis and there is no specific laboratory test to diagnose it. However, certain testing can help determine what is causing the catatonia. An EEG will likely show diffuse slowing. If seizure activity is driving the syndrome, then an EEG would also be helpful in detecting this. CT or MRI will not show catatonia; however, they might reveal abnormalities that might be leading to the syndrome. Metabolic screens, inflammatory markers, or autoantibodies may reveal reversible medical causes of catatonia.

Vital signs should be frequently monitored as catatonia can progress to malignant catatonia which is life-threatening. Malignant catatonia is characterized by fever, hypertension, tachycardia, and tachypnea.

===Rating scale===
Various rating scales for catatonia have been developed, however, their utility for clinical care has not been well established. The most commonly used scale is the Bush-Francis Catatonia Rating Scale (BFCRS) (external link is provided below). The scale is composed of 23 items with the first 14 items being used as the screening tool. If 2 of the 14 are positive, this prompts for further evaluation and completion of the remaining 9 items.

A diagnosis can be supported by the lorazepam challenge or the zolpidem challenge. While proven useful in the past, barbiturates are no longer commonly used in psychiatry; thus the option of either benzodiazepines or ECT.

=== Laboratory findings ===
Certain lab findings are common with malignant catatonia that are uncommon in other forms of catatonia. These lab findings include: leukocytosis, elevated creatine kinase, low serum iron. The signs and symptoms of malignant catatonia overlap significantly with neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS). Therefore, the results of laboratory tests need to be considered in the context of clinical history, review of medications, and physical exam findings.

=== Differential diagnosis ===
The differential diagnosis of catatonia is extensive as signs and symptoms of catatonia may overlap significantly with those of other conditions. Therefore, a careful and detailed history, medication review, and physical exam are key to diagnosing catatonia and differentiating it from other conditions. Furthermore, some of these conditions can themselves lead to catatonia. The differential diagnosis is as follows:
* Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) and catatonia are both life-threatening conditions that share many of the same characteristics including fever, autonomic instability, rigidity, and delirium. Lab values of low serum iron, elevated creatine kinase, and white blood cell count are also shared by the two disorders, further complicating the diagnosis. There are features of malignant catatonia (posturing, impulsivity, etc.) that are absent from NMS and the lab results are not as consistent in malignant catatonia as they are in NMS. Some experts consider NMS to be a drug-induced condition associated with antipsychotics, particularly first generation antipsychotics, but it has not been established as a subtype. Therefore, discontinuing antipsychotics and starting benzodiazepines is a treatment for this condition, and similarly it is helpful in catatonia as well.
* Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis is an autoimmune disorder characterized by neuropsychiatric features and the presence of IgG antibodies. The presentation of anti-NMDA encephalitis has been categorized into 5 phases: prodromal phase, psychotic phase, unresponsive phase, hyperkinetic phase, and recovery phase. The psychotic phase progresses into the unresponsive phase characterized by mutism, decreased motor activity, and catatonia.
* Both serotonin syndrome and malignant catatonia may present with signs and symptoms of delirium, autonomic instability, hyperthermia, and rigidity. Again, similar to the presentation in NMS. However, patients with Serotonin syndrome have a history of ingestion of serotonergic drugs (ex: SSRI). These patients will also present with hyperreflexia, myoclonus, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.
* Malignant hyperthermia and malignant catatonia share features of autonomic instability, hyperthermia, and rigidity. However, malignant hyperthermia is a hereditary disorder of skeletal muscle that makes these patients susceptible to exposure to halogenated anesthetics and/or depolarizing muscle relaxants like succinylcholine. Malignant hyperthermia most commonly occurs in the intraoperative or postoperative periods. Other signs and symptoms of malignant hyperthermia include metabolic and respiratory acidosis, hyperkalemia, and cardiac arrhythmias.
* Akinetic mutism is a neurological disorder characterized by a decrease in goal-directed behavior and motivation; however, the patient has an intact level of consciousness. Patients may present with apathy, and may seem indifferent to pain, hunger, or thirst. Akinetic mutism has been associated with structural damage in a variety of brain areas. Akinetic mutism and catatonia may both manifest with immobility, mutism, and waxy flexibility. Differentiating both disorders is the fact that akinetic mutism does not present with echolalia, echopraxia, or posturing. Furthermore, it is not responsive to benzodiazepines as is the case for catatonia.
* Selective mutism has an anxious etiology but has also been associated with personality disorders. Patients with this disorder fail to speak with some individuals but will speak with others. Likewise, they may refuse to speak in certain situations; for example, a child who refuses to speak at school but is conversational at home. This disorder is distinguished from catatonia by the absence of any other signs/symptoms.
* Nonconvulsive status epilepticus is seizure activity with no accompanying tonic-clonic movements. It can present with stupor, similar to catatonia, and they both respond to benzodiazepines. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus is diagnosed by the presence of seizure activity seen on electroencephalogram (EEG). Catatonia, on the other hand, is associated with normal EEG or diffuse slowing.
* Delirium is characterized by fluctuating disturbed perception and consciousness in the ill individual. It has hypoactive and hyperactive or mixed forms. People with hyperactive delirium present similarly to those with excited catatonia and have symptoms of restlessness, agitation, and aggression. Those with hypoactive delirium present with similarly to stuporous catatonia, withdrawn and quiet. However, catatonia also includes other distinguishing features including posturing and rigidity as well as a positive response to benzodiazepines.
* Patients with locked-in syndrome present with immobility and mutism; however, unlike patients with catatonia who are unmotivated to communicate, patients with locked-in syndrome try to communicate with eye movements and blinking. Furthermore, locked-in syndrome is caused by damage to the brainstem.
* Stiff-person syndrome and catatonia are similar in that they may both present with rigidity, autonomic instability, and a positive response to benzodiazepines. However, stiff-person syndrome may be associated with anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase (anti-GAD) antibodies and other catatonic signs such as mutism and posturing are not part of the syndrome.
* Untreated late-stage Parkinson&#x27;s disease may present similarly to stuporous catatonia with symptoms of immobility, rigidity, and difficulty speaking. Further complicating the diagnosis is the fact that many patients with Parkinson&#x27;s disease will have major depressive disorder, which may be the underlying cause of catatonia. Parkinson&#x27;s disease can be distinguished from catatonia by a positive response to levodopa. Catatonia, on the other hand, will show a positive response to benzodiazepines.
* Extrapyramidal side effects of antipsychotic medication, especially dystonia and akathisia, can be difficult to distinguish from catatonic symptoms, or may confound them in the psychiatric setting. Extrapyramidal motor disorders usually do not involve social symptoms like negativism, while individuals with catatonic excitement typically do not have the physically painful compulsion to move that is seen in akathisia.
* Certain stimming behaviors and stress responses in individuals with autism spectrum disorders can present similarly to catatonia. In autism spectrum disorders, chronic catatonia is distinguished by a lasting deterioration of adaptive skills from the background of pre-existing autistic symptomatology that cannot be easily explained. Acute catatonia is usually clearly distinguishable from autistic symptoms.
* The diagnostic entities of obsessional slowness and psychogenic parkinsonism show overlapping features with catatonia, such as motor slowness, gegenhalten (oppositional paratonia), mannerisms, and reduced or absent speech. However, psychogenic parkinsonism involves tremor which is unusual in catatonia. Obsessional slowness is a controversial diagnosis, with presentations ranging from severe but common manifestations of obsessive compulsive disorder to catatonia.
* Down Syndrome Disintegrative Disorder (or Down Syndrome Regression Disorder, DSDD / DSRD) is a chronic condition characterized by loss of previously acquired adaptive, cognitive and social functioning occurring in persons with Down Syndrome, usually during adolescence or early adulthood. The clinical picture is variable, but often includes catatonic signs, which is why it was called &quot;catatonic psychosis&quot; in initial reports in 1946. DSDD seems to phenotypically overlap with obsessional slowness (see above) and catatonia-like regression occurring in ASD.

==Treatment==
Treating catatonia effectively requires treating the catatonia itself, treating the underlying condition, and helping them with their basic needs, like eating, drinking, and staying clean and safe, while they are withdrawn and incapable of caring for themselves.

=== Catatonia-specific treatments ===
The specifics of treating catatonia itself can vary from region to region, hospital to hospital, and individual to individual, but typically involves the use of benzodiazepines. In fact, in some cases it is unclear whether a person has catatonia or another condition which may present similarly. In these cases a &quot;benzodiazepine challenge&quot; is often done. During a &quot;benzodiazepine challenge&quot; a healthcare provider will give a moderate dose of a benzodiazepine to the patient and monitor them. If a person has catatonia they will often have improvements in their symptoms within 15 to 30 minutes. If the person does not improve within 30 minutes they are given a second dose and the process is repeated once more. If the person responds to either of the doses then they can be given benzodiazepines at a consistent dose and timing until their catatonia resolves. Depending on the person, a person may need to reduce their dosing slowly over time in order to prevent reoccurrence of their symptoms.

ECT is also commonly used to treat catatonia in people who do not improve with medication alone or whose symptoms reoccur whenever the dose of medications are reduced. ECT is usually administered with multiple sessions per week over two to four weeks. ECT has a success rate of 80% to 100%. ECT is effective for all subtypes of catatonia, however people who have catatonia with an underlying neurological condition show less improvement with ECT treatment.

Excessive glutamate activity is believed to be involved in catatonia; when first-line treatment options fail, NMDA antagonists such as amantadine or memantine may be used. Amantadine may have an increased incidence of tolerance with prolonged use and can cause psychosis, due to its additional effects on the dopamine system. Memantine has a more targeted pharmacological profile for the glutamate system, reduced incidence of psychosis and may therefore be preferred for individuals who cannot tolerate amantadine. Topiramate is another treatment option for resistant catatonia; it produces its therapeutic effects by producing glutamate antagonism via modulation of AMPA receptors.

=== Non-specific aspects of treatment ===

==== Treating the underlying condition ====
There are many medications that are known to cause catatonia in some people including steroids, stimulants, anticonvulsants, neuroleptics or dopamine blockers. If a person has catatonia and is on these medications, they should be considered as a potential cause if another cause is not apparent and discontinued if possible.

Antipsychotics are sometimes used in those with a co-existing psychosis, however they should be used with care as they may worsen catatonia and have a risk of neuroleptic malignant syndrome, a dangerous condition that can mimic catatonia and requires immediate discontinuation of the antipsychotic. There is evidence that clozapine works better than other antipsychotics to treat catatonia.

==== Supportive care ====
Supportive care is required in those with catatonia. This includes monitoring vital signs and fluid status, and in those with chronic symptoms; maintaining nutrition and hydration, medications to prevent a blood clot, and measures to prevent the development of pressure ulcers.

==Prognosis==
Twenty-five percent of psychiatric patients with catatonia will have more than one episode throughout their lives. Treatment response for patients with catatonia is 50–70%, with treatment failure being associated with a poor prognosis. Many of these patients will require long-term and continuous mental health care. The prognosis for people with catatonia due to schizophrenia is much worse compared to other causes. In cases of catatonia that develop into malignant catatonia, the mortality rate is as high as 20%.

===Complications===
Patients may experience several complications from being in a catatonic state. The nature of these complications will depend on the type of catatonia being experienced by the patient. For example, patients presenting with withdrawn catatonia may have refusal to eat which will in turn lead to malnutrition and dehydration. Furthermore, if immobility is a symptom the patient is presenting with, then they may develop pressure ulcers, muscle contractions, and are at risk of developing deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolus (PE). Patients with excited catatonia may be aggressive and violent, and physical trauma may result from this. Catatonia may progress to the malignant type which will present with autonomic instability and may be life-threatening. Other complications also include the development of pneumonia and neuroleptic malignant syndrome.

== Epidemiology ==
Catatonia has been historically studied in psychiatric patients. Catatonia is under-recognized because the features are often mistaken for other disorders including delirium or the negative symptoms of schizophrenia. The prevalence has been reported to be as high as 10% in those with acute psychiatric illnesses, and 9–30% in the setting of inpatient psychiatric care. The incidence of catatonia is 10.6 episodes per 100 000 person-years, which essentially means that in a group of 100,000 people, the group as a whole would experience 10 to 11 episodes of catatonia per year. Catatonia can occur at any age, but is most commonly seen in adolescence or young adulthood or in older adults with existing medical conditions. It occurs in males and females in approximately equal numbers. Around 20% of all catatonia cases can be attributed to a general medical condition. 
== History ==

=== Ancient history ===
There have been reports of stupor-like and catatonia-like states in people throughout the history of psychiatry. In ancient Greece, the first physician to document stupor-like or catatonia-like states was Hippocrates, in his &quot;Aphorisms.&quot; He never defined the syndrome, but seemingly observed these states in people he was treating for melancholia. In ancient China, the first descriptions of people that appear in the Huangdi Neijing (The Yellow Emperor&#x27;s Inner Canon), the book which forms the basis of Traditional Chinese Medicine. It is thought to have been compiled by many people over the course of centuries during the Warring States Period (475-221 BCE) and the early Han Dynasty (206 BCE-220 CE).

=== Modern history ===
The term “catatonia” was first used by German psychiatrist Karl Ludwig Kahlbaum in 1874, in his book &quot;Die Katatonie oder das Spannungsirresein&quot;, which translates to &quot;Catatonia or Tension Insanity&quot;. He viewed catatonia as its own illness, which would get worse over time in stages of mania, depression, and psychosis leading to dementia. This work heavily influenced another German psychiatrist, Emil Kraeplin, who was the first to classify catatonia as a syndrome. Kraeplin associated catatonia with a psychotic disorder called dementia praecox, which is no longer used as a diagnosis, but heavily informed the development of the concept of schizophrenia.

Kraeplin&#x27;s work influenced two other notable German psychiatrists, Karl Leonhard and Max Fink, and their colleagues to expand the concept of catatonia as a syndrome which could occur in the setting of many mental illnesses, not just psychotic disorders. They also laid the groundwork to describe different subtypes of catatonia still used today, including Stuporous Catatonia, Excited Catatonia, Malignant Catatonia, and Periodic Catatonia. Additionally, Leonhard and his colleagues categorized catatonia as either systematic or unsystematic, based on whether or not symptoms happened according to consistent and predictable patterns. These ways of thinking shaped the way that psychologists and psychiatrists thought of catatonia well into the 20th century. In fact, catatonia was a subtype of schizophrenia as recently as the DSM-III, and was not revised to be able to be applied to mood disorders until 1994 with the release of the DSM-IV.

In the latter half of the 20th century, clinicians observed that catatonia occurred in various psychiatric and medical conditions, not exclusively in schizophrenia. Max Fink and colleagues advocated for recognizing catatonia as an independent syndrome, highlighting its frequent association with mood disorders and responsiveness to treatments like benzodiazepines and ECT.

== Society and culture ==

=== Popular conceptions and origins ===
Catatonia, historically misunderstood, has been subject to shifting perceptions in society. As discussed previously, since the 19th century it was often linked exclusively to schizophrenia, perpetuating misconceptions. These historical misunderstandings have shaped the public opinions on catatonia. This has contributed to a lack of understanding about catatonia and its broader association with other mental disorders and medical conditions.

Popular culture and media have played a significant role in shaping societal perceptions of catatonia. In many cases, media portrayals reduce it to a stereotypical &quot;frozen state,&quot; similar to a coma, failing to capture the complexity of symptoms like stupor, agitation, and mutism. Such oversimplifications contribute to public misperceptions and get in the way of people receiving the care they need.

==See also==

* Acquiescence
* Akinetic mutism
* Autistic catatonia
* &quot;Awakenings&quot; (1990 biopic about catatonic patients, based on Oliver Sacks&#x27;s book of the same name)
* Blank expression
* Botulism
* Clouding of consciousness
* Disorganized schizophrenia
* &quot;Homecoming&quot; (features catatonia as a main plot point)
* Karolina Olsson
* Oneiroid syndrome
* Paranoid schizophrenia
* Persistent vegetative state
* Resignation syndrome
* Sensory overload
* Tonic immobility
* Sleep paralysis
==References==
== External links ==
* Catatonia in DSM-5
* Encyclopedia of Mental Disorders — Catatonic Disorders
* &quot;Schizophrenia: Catatonic Type&quot; video by Heinz Edgar Lehmann, 1952
* Bush-Francis Catatonia Rating Scale</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q501571" start="0" end="9" title="Catatonia" label="Catatonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179630" start="23" end="31" title="syndrome" label="syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="101" end="126" title="major depressive disorder" label="major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="160" end="173" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="674" end="688" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131543" start="693" end="696" title="Electroconvulsive therapy" label="ECT"/>
<link wikidata="Q188638" start="1093" end="1106" title="mood disorder" label="mood disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q335941" start="5414" end="5421" title="aboulia" label="aboulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="5854" end="5867" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="5907" end="5932" title="autism spectrum disorders" label="autism spectrum disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="5934" end="5938" title="ADHD" label="ADHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="5944" end="5974" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="6341" end="6351" title="meningitis" label="meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084905" start="6353" end="6372" title="autoimmune disorder" label="autoimmune disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="6413" end="6419" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119887" start="6466" end="6491" title="Benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome" label="benzodiazepine withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010352" start="6493" end="6516" title="cerebrovascular disease" label="cerebrovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="6518" end="6526" title="neoplasm" label="neoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920572" start="6529" end="6540" title="head injury" label="head injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q994859" start="6573" end="6587" title="homocystinuria" label="homocystinuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q877827" start="6589" end="6610" title="diabetic ketoacidosis" label="diabetic ketoacidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q642548" start="6612" end="6634" title="hepatic encephalopathy" label="hepatic encephalopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474877" start="6640" end="6654" title="hypercalcaemia" label="hypercalcaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="11910" end="11923" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184215" start="11944" end="11952" title="thalamus" label="thalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q466524" start="12127" end="12166" title="American Psychiatric Association" label="American Psychiatric Association&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="12173" end="12226" title="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" label="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064664" start="12234" end="12239" title="DSM-5" label="DSM-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="12279" end="12311" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q50018" start="12318" end="12358" title="International Classification of Diseases" label="International Classification of Diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q55695727" start="12366" end="12372" title="ICD-11" label="ICD-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064664" start="12710" end="12715" title="DSM-5" label="DSM-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q268594" start="13092" end="13098" title="stupor" label="stupor"/>
<link wikidata="Q918193" start="13169" end="13178" title="catalepsy" label="catalepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q460263" start="13234" end="13250" title="waxy flexibility" label="waxy flexibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q671776" start="13320" end="13326" title="mutism" label="mutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836" start="13382" end="13389" title="aphasia" label="aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601394" start="13469" end="13478" title="Abnormal posturing" label="posturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198115" start="13618" end="13628" title="stereotypy" label="stereotypy"/>
<link wikidata="Q937353" start="13788" end="13797" title="echolalia" label="echolalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280852" start="13833" end="13843" title="echopraxia" label="echopraxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414874" start="13962" end="13971" title="Comorbidity" label="co-morbid"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="14012" end="14036" title="autism spectrum disorder" label="autism spectrum disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="14065" end="14078" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787727" start="14147" end="14171" title="brief psychotic disorder" label="brief psychotic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157462" start="14201" end="14226" title="schizophreniform disorder" label="schizophreniform disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q834047" start="14256" end="14280" title="schizoaffective disorder" label="schizoaffective disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="14377" end="14384" title="Bipolar disorder" label="bipolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="14435" end="14460" title="major depressive disorder" label="major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="14529" end="14536" title="symptom" label="symptom"/>
<link wikidata="Q179630" start="14580" end="14588" title="syndrome" label="syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q55695727" start="14694" end="14700" title="ICD-11" label="ICD-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q131747645" start="17587" end="17606" title="lorazepam challenge" label="lorazepam challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="17711" end="17721" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q974869" start="17934" end="17946" title="leukocytosis" label="leukocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q409458" start="17957" end="17972" title="creatine kinase" label="creatine kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424956" start="18063" end="18093" title="neuroleptic malignant syndrome" label="neuroleptic malignant syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424956" start="18705" end="18735" title="Neuroleptic malignant syndrome" label="Neuroleptic malignant syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="19314" end="19327" title="antipsychotic" label="antipsychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554162" start="19343" end="19373" title="first generation antipsychotic" label="first generation antipsychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="19475" end="19489" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q574719" start="19578" end="19609" title="Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis" label="Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q616181" start="20020" end="20038" title="serotonin syndrome" label="serotonin syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q334477" start="20303" end="20307" title="Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor" label="SSRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429154" start="20348" end="20361" title="hyperreflexia" label="hyperreflexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275" start="20363" end="20372" title="myoclonus" label="myoclonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585081" start="20408" end="20430" title="Malignant hyperthermia" label="Malignant hyperthermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q424378" start="20719" end="20734" title="succinylcholine" label="succinylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q605259" start="20923" end="20935" title="hyperkalemia" label="hyperkalemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q418522" start="20964" end="20979" title="Akinetic mutism" label="Akinetic mutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q377493" start="21614" end="21630" title="Selective mutism" label="Selective mutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q980709" start="22051" end="22069" title="status epilepticus" label="status epilepticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="22317" end="22337" title="Electroencephalography" label="electroencephalogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q160796" start="22427" end="22435" title="Delirium" label="Delirium"/>
<link wikidata="Q794457" start="22987" end="23005" title="locked-in syndrome" label="locked-in syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235785" start="23275" end="23296" title="Stiff-person syndrome" label="Stiff-person syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="23652" end="23676" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q906492" start="24214" end="24222" title="dystonia" label="dystonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q416417" start="24227" end="24236" title="akathisia" label="akathisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15780353" start="24576" end="24584" title="stimming" label="stimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="24636" end="24660" title="autism spectrum disorder" label="autism spectrum disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25006" end="25026" title="obsessional slowness" label="obsessional slowness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531991" start="25043" end="25055" title="parkinsonism" label="parkinsonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392655" start="25148" end="25157" title="paratonia" label="paratonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="25245" end="25251" title="tremor" label="tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="25402" end="25431" title="obsessive compulsive disorder" label="obsessive compulsive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25448" end="25485" title="Down Syndrome Disintegrative Disorder" label="Down Syndrome Disintegrative Disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="25675" end="25688" title="Down Syndrome" label="Down Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q181136" start="27819" end="27828" title="glutamate" label="glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044974" start="27919" end="27935" title="NMDA antagonists" label="NMDA antagonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q409761" start="27944" end="27954" title="amantadine" label="amantadine"/>
<link wikidata="Q412189" start="27958" end="27967" title="memantine" label="memantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221174" start="28325" end="28335" title="Topiramate" label="Topiramate"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="28907" end="28920" title="Antipsychotic" label="Antipsychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424956" start="29066" end="29096" title="neuroleptic malignant syndrome" label="neuroleptic malignant syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q221361" start="29229" end="29238" title="clozapine" label="clozapine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208144" start="29263" end="29276" title="antipsychotic" label="antipsychotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751330" start="29531" end="29541" title="venous thromboembolism" label="blood clot"/>
<link wikidata="Q308978" start="30573" end="30587" title="pressure ulcer" label="pressure ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127006" start="30590" end="30608" title="muscle contraction" label="muscle contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762339" start="30641" end="30667" title="Deep vein thrombosis" label="deep vein thrombosis (DVT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="30672" end="30689" title="Pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185320" start="33241" end="33257" title="dementia praecox" label="dementia praecox"/>
<link wikidata="Q342522" start="35634" end="35646" title="Acquiescence" label="Acquiescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q418522" start="35649" end="35664" title="Akinetic mutism" label="Akinetic mutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808084" start="35667" end="35685" title="Autistic catatonia" label="Autistic catatonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q842073" start="35694" end="35704" title="Awakenings" label="Awakenings"/>
<link wikidata="Q258662" start="35759" end="35771" title="Oliver Sacks" label="Oliver Sacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829745" start="35779" end="35800" title="Awakenings (book)" label="book of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053525" start="35804" end="35820" title="Blank expression" label="Blank expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q154865" start="35823" end="35831" title="Botulism" label="Botulism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048048" start="35834" end="35859" title="Clouding of consciousness" label="Clouding of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q267759" start="35862" end="35888" title="Disorganized schizophrenia" label="Disorganized schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5889381" start="35897" end="35907" title="Homecoming (novel)" label="Homecoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280742" start="35958" end="35973" title="Karolina Olsson" label="Karolina Olsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544517" start="35976" end="35993" title="Oneiroid syndrome" label="Oneiroid syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="35996" end="36018" title="Paranoid schizophrenia" label="Paranoid schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q139720" start="36021" end="36048" title="Persistent vegetative state" label="Persistent vegetative state"/>
<link wikidata="Q55736393" start="36051" end="36071" title="Resignation syndrome" label="Resignation syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142286" start="36074" end="36090" title="Sensory overload" label="Sensory overload"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098451" start="36093" end="36109" title="Tonic immobility" label="Tonic immobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q486851" start="36112" end="36127" title="Sleep paralysis" label="Sleep paralysis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5244" wikidata="Q4681865" url="?curid=5244" title="Cipher">
<text>In cryptography, a cipher (or cypher) is an algorithm for performing encryption or decryption—a series of well-defined steps that can be followed as a procedure. An alternative, less common term is &quot;encipherment&quot;. To encipher or encode is to convert information into cipher or code. In common parlance, &quot;cipher&quot; is synonymous with &quot;code&quot;, as they are both a set of steps that encrypt a message; however, the concepts are distinct in cryptography, especially classical cryptography.

Codes generally substitute different length strings of characters in the output, while ciphers generally substitute the same number of characters as are input. A code maps one meaning with another. Words and phrases can be coded as letters or numbers. Codes typically have direct meaning from input to key. Codes primarily function to save time. Ciphers are algorithmic. The given input must follow the cipher&#x27;s process to be solved. Ciphers are commonly used to encrypt written information.

Codes operated by substituting according to a large codebook which linked a random string of characters or numbers to a word or phrase. For example, &quot;UQJHSE&quot; could be the code for &quot;Proceed to the following coordinates.&quot; When using a cipher the original information is known as plaintext, and the encrypted form as ciphertext. The ciphertext message contains all the information of the plaintext message, but is not in a format readable by a human or computer without the proper mechanism to decrypt it.

The operation of a cipher usually depends on a piece of auxiliary information, called a key (or, in traditional NSA parlance, a &quot;cryptovariable&quot;). The encrypting procedure is varied depending on the key, which changes the detailed operation of the algorithm. A key must be selected before using a cipher to encrypt a message. Without knowledge of the key, it should be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to decrypt the resulting ciphertext into readable plaintext.

Most modern ciphers can be categorized in several ways:

* By whether they work on blocks of symbols usually of a fixed size (block ciphers), or on a continuous stream of symbols (stream ciphers).
* By whether the same key is used for both encryption and decryption (symmetric key algorithms), or if a different key is used for each (asymmetric key algorithms). If the algorithm is symmetric, the key must be known to the recipient and sender and to no one else. If the algorithm is an asymmetric one, the enciphering key is different from, but closely related to, the deciphering key. If one key cannot be deduced from the other, the asymmetric key algorithm has the public/private key property and one of the keys may be made public without loss of confidentiality.

==Etymology==
Originating from the Arabic word for zero صفر (ṣifr), the word &quot;cipher&quot; spread to Europe as part of the Arabic numeral system during the Middle Ages. The Roman numeral system lacked the concept of zero, and this limited advances in mathematics. In this transition, the word was adopted into Medieval Latin as cifra, and then into Middle French as cifre. This eventually led to the English word cipher (minority spelling cypher). One theory for how the term came to refer to encoding is that the concept of zero was confusing to Europeans, and so the term came to refer to a message or communication that was not easily understood. 

The term &quot;cipher&quot; was later also used to refer to any Arabic digit, or to calculation using them, so encoding text in the form of Arabic numerals is literally converting the text to &quot;ciphers&quot;.

==Versus codes==

In casual contexts, &quot;code&quot; and &quot;cipher&quot; can typically be used interchangeably; however, the technical usages of the words refer to different concepts. Codes contain meaning; words and phrases are assigned to numbers or symbols, creating a shorter message. 

An example of this is the commercial telegraph code which was used to shorten long telegraph messages which resulted from entering into commercial contracts using exchanges of telegrams.

Another example is given by whole word ciphers, which allow the user to replace an entire word with a symbol or character, much like the way written Japanese utilizes Kanji (meaning Chinese characters in Japanese) characters to supplement the native Japanese characters representing syllables. An example using English language with Kanji could be to replace &quot;The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog&quot; by &quot;The quick brown 狐 jumps 上 the lazy 犬&quot;. Stenographers sometimes use specific symbols to abbreviate whole words.

Ciphers, on the other hand, work at a lower level: the level of individual letters, small groups of letters, or, in modern schemes, individual bits and blocks of bits. Some systems used both codes and ciphers in one system, using superencipherment to increase the security. In some cases the terms &quot;codes&quot; and &quot;ciphers&quot; are used synonymously with &quot;substitution&quot; and &quot;transposition&quot;, respectively.

Historically, cryptography was split into a dichotomy of codes and ciphers, while coding had its own terminology analogous to that of ciphers: &quot;&quot;encoding&quot;, &quot;codetext&quot;, &quot;decoding&quot;&quot; and so on.

However, codes have a variety of drawbacks, including susceptibility to cryptanalysis and the difficulty of managing a cumbersome codebook. Because of this, codes have fallen into disuse in modern cryptography, and ciphers are the dominant technique.

==Types==
There are a variety of different types of encryption. Algorithms used earlier in the history of cryptography are substantially different from modern methods, and modern ciphers can be classified according to how they operate and whether they use one or two keys.

===Historical===

The Caesar Cipher is one of the earliest known cryptographic systems. Julius Caesar used a cipher that shifts the letters in the alphabet in place by three and wrapping the remaining letters to the front to write to Marcus Tullius Cicero in approximately 50 BC.

Historical pen and paper ciphers used in the past are sometimes known as classical ciphers. They include simple substitution ciphers (such as ROT13) and transposition ciphers (such as a Rail Fence Cipher). For example, &quot;GOOD DOG&quot; can be encrypted as &quot;PLLX XLP&quot; where &quot;L&quot; substitutes for &quot;O&quot;, &quot;P&quot; for &quot;G&quot;, and &quot;X&quot; for &quot;D&quot; in the message. Transposition of the letters &quot;GOOD DOG&quot; can result in &quot;DGOGDOO&quot;. These simple ciphers and examples are easy to crack, even without plaintext-ciphertext pairs.

In the 1640s, the Parliamentarian commander, Edward Montagu, 2nd Earl of Manchester, developed ciphers to send coded messages to his allies during the English Civil War.

Simple ciphers were replaced by polyalphabetic substitution ciphers (such as the Vigenère) which changed the substitution alphabet for every letter. For example, &quot;GOOD DOG&quot; can be encrypted as &quot;PLSX TWF&quot; where &quot;L&quot;, &quot;S&quot;, and &quot;W&quot; substitute for &quot;O&quot;. With even a small amount of known or estimated plaintext, simple polyalphabetic substitution ciphers and letter transposition ciphers designed for pen and paper encryption are easy to crack. It is possible to create a secure pen and paper cipher based on a one-time pad, but these have other disadvantages.

During the early twentieth century, electro-mechanical machines were invented to do encryption and decryption using transposition, polyalphabetic substitution, and a kind of &quot;additive&quot; substitution. In rotor machines, several rotor disks provided polyalphabetic substitution, while plug boards provided another substitution. Keys were easily changed by changing the rotor disks and the plugboard wires. Although these encryption methods were more complex than previous schemes and required machines to encrypt and decrypt, other machines such as the British Bombe were invented to crack these encryption methods.

===Modern===
Modern encryption methods can be divided by two criteria: by type of key used, and by type of input data.

By type of key used ciphers are divided into:
* symmetric key algorithms (Private-key cryptography), where one same key is used for encryption and decryption, and
* asymmetric key algorithms (Public-key cryptography), where two different keys are used for encryption and decryption. 

In a symmetric key algorithm (e.g., DES and AES), the sender and receiver must have a shared key set up in advance and kept secret from all other parties; the sender uses this key for encryption, and the receiver uses the same key for decryption. The design of AES (Advanced Encryption System) was beneficial because it aimed to overcome the flaws in the design of the DES (Data encryption standard). AES&#x27;s designer&#x27;s claim that the common means of modern cipher cryptanalytic attacks are ineffective against AES due to its design structure.[12] 

Ciphers can be distinguished into two types by the type of input data:
* block ciphers, which encrypt block of data of fixed size, and
* stream ciphers, which encrypt continuous streams of data.

==Key size and vulnerability==
In a pure mathematical attack, (i.e., lacking any other information to help break a cipher) two factors above all count:

* Computational power available, i.e., the computing power which can be brought to bear on the problem. It is important to note that average performance/capacity of a single computer is not the only factor to consider. An adversary can use multiple computers at once, for instance, to increase the speed of exhaustive search for a key (i.e., &quot;brute force&quot; attack) substantially.
* Key size, i.e., the size of key used to encrypt a message. As the key size increases, so does the complexity of exhaustive search to the point where it becomes impractical to crack encryption directly.
Since the desired effect is computational difficulty, in theory one would choose an algorithm and desired difficulty level, thus decide the key length accordingly.

Claude Shannon proved, using information theory considerations, that any theoretically unbreakable cipher must have keys which are at least as long as the plaintext, and used only once: one-time pad.

==See also==
* Autokey cipher
* Cover-coding
* Encryption software
* List of ciphertexts
* Steganography
* Telegraph code

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Kish cypher
cyphered</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="3" end="15" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="19" end="25" title="Cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="30" end="36" title="Cipher" label="cypher"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="44" end="53" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="69" end="79" title="encryption" label="encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="83" end="93" title="decryption" label="decryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994879" start="357" end="361" title="code (cryptography)" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q10855346" start="488" end="510" title="classical cryptography" label="classical cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q637416" start="1063" end="1071" title="codebook" label="codebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162538" start="1308" end="1317" title="plaintext" label="plaintext"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589480" start="1345" end="1355" title="ciphertext" label="ciphertext"/>
<link wikidata="Q471771" start="1623" end="1626" title="key (cryptography)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="1647" end="1650" title="NSA" label="NSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q543151" start="2142" end="2154" title="block cipher" label="block cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q864718" start="2196" end="2209" title="stream cipher" label="stream cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q327675" start="2283" end="2306" title="symmetric key algorithm" label="symmetric key algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="2350" end="2374" title="asymmetric key algorithm" label="asymmetric key algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="3006" end="3010" title="0" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152551" start="3978" end="4003" title="commercial code (communications)" label="commercial telegraph code"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="4128" end="4136" title="telegram" label="telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="4307" end="4312" title="Kanji" label="Kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="4608" end="4621" title="Shorthand" label="Stenographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505167" start="4911" end="4928" title="superencipherment" label="superencipherment"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="5423" end="5436" title="cryptanalysis" label="cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q637416" start="5481" end="5489" title="codebook" label="codebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q467928" start="5698" end="5721" title="history of cryptography" label="history of cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q180943" start="5899" end="5912" title="Caesar cipher" label="Caesar Cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q10855346" start="6231" end="6247" title="classical cipher" label="classical cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q626500" start="6270" end="6289" title="substitution cipher" label="substitution cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q666455" start="6300" end="6305" title="ROT13" label="ROT13"/>
<link wikidata="Q840498" start="6311" end="6331" title="transposition cipher" label="transposition cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357696" start="6344" end="6361" title="Rail Fence Cipher" label="Rail Fence Cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702018" start="6800" end="6838" title="Edward Montagu, 2nd Earl of Manchester" label="Edward Montagu, 2nd Earl of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="6906" end="6923" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q374230" start="6958" end="6985" title="polyalphabetic substitution" label="polyalphabetic substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q55516" start="7007" end="7015" title="Vigenère cipher" label="Vigenère"/>
<link wikidata="Q150474" start="7491" end="7503" title="one-time pad" label="one-time pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751757" start="7754" end="7767" title="rotor machine" label="rotor machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q480476" start="8110" end="8115" title="Bombe" label="Bombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q327675" start="8334" end="8357" title="symmetric key algorithm" label="symmetric key algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q327675" start="8360" end="8384" title="Private-key cryptography" label="Private-key cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="8451" end="8475" title="asymmetric key algorithm" label="asymmetric key algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="8478" end="8501" title="Public-key cryptography" label="Public-key cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q543151" start="9202" end="9214" title="block cipher" label="block cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q864718" start="9266" end="9279" title="stream cipher" label="stream cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q850362" start="9785" end="9802" title="exhaustive search" label="exhaustive search"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557574" start="9869" end="9877" title="Key size" label="Key size"/>
<link wikidata="Q850362" start="9981" end="9998" title="exhaustive search" label="exhaustive search"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="10155" end="10164" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="10236" end="10250" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q150474" start="10422" end="10434" title="one-time pad" label="one-time pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989639" start="10452" end="10466" title="Autokey cipher" label="Autokey cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179142" start="10469" end="10481" title="Cover-coding" label="Cover-coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375622" start="10484" end="10503" title="Encryption software" label="Encryption software"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264533" start="10506" end="10525" title="List of ciphertexts" label="List of ciphertexts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15032" start="10528" end="10541" title="Steganography" label="Steganography"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141351" start="10544" end="10558" title="Telegraph code" label="Telegraph code"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5247" wikidata="Q83440" url="?curid=5247" title="Country music">
<text>Country (also called country and western) is a music genre originating in the southern regions of the United States, both the American South and the Southwest. First produced in the 1920s, country music is primarily focused on singing stories about working-class and blue-collar American life.

Country music is known for its ballads and dance tunes (i.e., &quot;honky-tonk music&quot;) with simple form, folk lyrics, and harmonies generally accompanied by instruments such as banjos, fiddles, harmonicas, and many types of guitar (including acoustic, electric, steel, and resonator guitars). Though it is primarily rooted in various forms of American folk music, such as old-time music and Appalachian music, many other traditions, including Mexican, Irish, and Hawaiian music, have had a formative influence on the genre. Blues modes from blues music have been used extensively throughout its history as well.

Once called &quot;hillbilly music&quot;, the term &quot;country music&quot; gained popularity in the 1940s. The genre came to encompass western music, which evolved parallel to hillbilly music from similar roots, in the mid-20th century. Contemporary styles of western music include Texas country, red dirt, and Hispano- and Mexican American-led Tejano and New Mexico music, which still exists alongside longstanding indigenous traditions.

In 2009, in the United States, country music was the most-listened-to rush-hour radio genre during the evening commute, and second-most popular in the morning commute.

==Origins==
The main components of the modern country music style date back to music traditions throughout the Southern United States and Southwestern United States, while its place in American popular music was established in the 1920s during the early days of music recording. According to country historian Bill C. Malone, country music was &quot;introduced to the world as a Southern phenomenon.&quot;

Migration into the southern Appalachian Mountains, of the Southeastern United States, brought the folk music and instruments of Europe and the Mediterranean Basin along with it for nearly 300 years, which developed into Appalachian music. As the country expanded westward, the Mississippi River and Louisiana became a crossroads for country music, giving rise to Cajun music. In the Southwestern United States, it was the Rocky Mountains, American frontier, and Rio Grande that acted as a similar backdrop for Native American, Mexican, and cowboy ballads, which resulted in New Mexico music and the development of western music, and it is directly related to Red Dirt, Texas country, and Tejano music styles. In the Asia-Pacific, the steel guitar sound of country music has its provenance in the music of Hawaii.

===Role of East Tennessee===

The U.S. Congress has formally recognized Bristol, Tennessee as the &quot;Birthplace of Country Music&quot;, based on the historic Bristol recording sessions of 1927. Since 2014, the city has been home to the Birthplace of Country Music Museum. Historians have also noted the influence of the less-known Johnson City sessions of 1928 and 1929, and the Knoxville sessions of 1929 and 1930. In addition, the Mountain City Fiddlers Convention, held in 1925, helped to inspire modern country music. Before these, pioneer settlers, in the Great Smoky Mountains region, had developed a rich musical heritage.

==Generations==
The first generation emerged in the 1920s, with Atlanta&#x27;s music scene playing a major role in launching country&#x27;s earliest recording artists. James Gideon &quot;Gid&quot; Tanner (1885–1960) was an American old-time fiddler and one of the earliest stars of what would come to be known as country music. His band, the Skillet Lickers, was one of the most innovative and influential string bands of the 1920s and 1930s. Its most notable members were Clayton McMichen (fiddle and vocal), Dan Hornsby (vocals), Riley Puckett (guitar and vocal) and Robert Lee Sweat (guitar). New York City record label Okeh Records began issuing hillbilly music records by Fiddlin&#x27; John Carson as early as 1923, followed by Columbia Records (series 15000D &quot;Old Familiar Tunes&quot;) (Samantha Bumgarner) in 1924, and RCA Victor Records in 1927 with the first famous pioneers of the genre Jimmie Rodgers, who is widely considered the &quot;Father of Country Music&quot;, and the first family of country music the Carter Family. Many &quot;hillbilly&quot; musicians recorded blues songs throughout the 1920s.

During the second generation (1930s–1940s), radio became a popular source of entertainment, and &quot;barn dance&quot; shows featuring country music were started all over the South, as far north as Chicago, and as far west as California. The most important was the &quot;Grand Ole Opry&quot;, aired starting in 1925 by WSM in Nashville and continuing to the present day. During the 1930s and 1940s, cowboy songs, or western music, which had been recorded since the 1920s, were popularized by films made in Hollywood, many featuring Gene Autry, who was known as king of the &quot;singing cowboys,&quot; and Hank Williams. Bob Wills was another country musician from the Lower Great Plains who had become very popular as the leader of a &quot;hot string band,&quot; and who also appeared in Hollywood westerns. His mix of country and jazz, which started out as dance hall music, would become known as western swing. Wills was one of the first country musicians known to have added an electric guitar to his band, in 1938. Country musicians began recording boogie in 1939, shortly after it had been played at Carnegie Hall, when Johnny Barfield recorded &quot;Boogie Woogie&quot;.

The third generation (1950s–1960s) started at the end of World War II with &quot;mountaineer&quot; string band music known as bluegrass, which emerged when Bill Monroe, along with Lester Flatt and Earl Scruggs, were introduced by Roy Acuff at the Grand Ole Opry. Gospel music remained a popular component of country music. The Native American, Hispano, and American frontier music of the Southwestern United States and Northern Mexico, became popular among poor communities in New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Texas; the basic ensemble consisted of classical guitar, bass guitar, dobro or steel guitar, though some larger ensembles featured electric guitars, trumpets, keyboards (especially the honky-tonk piano, a type of tack piano), banjos, and drums. By the early 1950s it blended with rock and roll, becoming the rockabilly sound produced by Sam Phillips, Norman Petty, and Bob Keane. Musicians like Elvis Presley, Buddy Holly, Jerry Lee Lewis, Ritchie Valens, Carl Perkins, Roy Orbison, and Johnny Cash emerged as enduring representatives of the style. Beginning in the mid-1950s, and reaching its peak during the early 1960s, the Nashville sound turned country music into a multimillion-dollar industry centered in Nashville, Tennessee; Patsy Cline and Jim Reeves were two of the most broadly popular Nashville sound artists, and their deaths in separate plane crashes in the early 1960s were a factor in the genre&#x27;s decline. Starting in the 1950s to the mid-1960s, western singer-songwriters such as Marty Robbins rose in prominence as did others, throughout western music traditions, like New Mexico music&#x27;s Al Hurricane. The late 1960s in American music produced a unique blend as a result of traditionalist backlash within separate genres. In the aftermath of the British Invasion, many desired a return to the &quot;old values&quot; of rock n&#x27; roll. At the same time there was a lack of enthusiasm in the country sector for Nashville-produced music. What resulted was a crossbred genre known as country rock.

Fourth generation (1970s–1980s) music included outlaw country with roots in the Bakersfield sound, and country pop with roots in the countrypolitan, folk music and soft rock. Between 1972 and 1975 singer/guitarist John Denver released a series of hugely successful songs blending country and folk-rock musical styles. By the mid-1970s, Texas country and Tejano music gained popularity with performers like Freddie Fender. During the early 1980s country artists continued to see their records perform well on the pop charts. In 1980 a style of &quot;neocountry disco music&quot; was popularized. During the mid-1980s a group of new artists began to emerge who rejected the more polished country-pop sound that had been prominent on radio and the charts in favor of more traditional &quot;back-to-basics&quot; production.

During the fifth generation (the 1990s), neotraditionalists and stadium country acts prospered.

The sixth generation (2000s–present) has seen a certain amount of diversification in regard to country music styles. It has also, however, seen a shift into patriotism and conservative politics since 9/11, though such themes are less prevalent in more modern trends. The influence of rock music in country has become more overt during the late 2000s and early 2010s. Most of the best-selling country songs of this era were those by Lady A, Florida Georgia Line, Carrie Underwood, and Taylor Swift. Hip hop also made its mark on country music with the emergence of country rap.

==History==

===First generation (1920s)===
The first commercial recordings of what was considered instrumental music in the traditional country style were &quot;Arkansas Traveler&quot; and &quot;Turkey in the Straw&quot; by fiddlers Henry Gilliland &amp; A.C. (Eck) Robertson on June 30, 1922, for Victor Records and released in April 1923. Columbia Records began issuing records with &quot;hillbilly&quot; music (series 15000D &quot;Old Familiar Tunes&quot;) as early as 1924.

The first commercial recording of what is widely considered to be the first country song featuring vocals and lyrics was Fiddlin&#x27; John Carson with &quot;Little Log Cabin in the Lane&quot; for Okeh Records on June 14, 1923.

Vernon Dalhart was the first country singer to have a nationwide hit in May 1924 with &quot;Wreck of the Old 97&quot;. The flip side of the record was &quot;Lonesome Road Blues&quot;, which also became very popular. In April 1924, &quot;Aunt&quot; Samantha Bumgarner and Eva Davis became the first female musicians to record and release country songs. The record 129-D produced by Columbia features Samantha playing fiddle and singing Big-Eyed Rabbit while Eva Davis plays banjo. The other side features Eva Davis playing banjo while singing Wild Bill Jones. Many of the early country musicians, such as the yodeler Cliff Carlisle, recorded blues songs into the 1930s. Other important early recording artists were Riley Puckett, Don Richardson, Fiddlin&#x27; John Carson, Uncle Dave Macon, Al Hopkins, Ernest V. Stoneman, Blind Alfred Reed, Charlie Poole and the North Carolina Ramblers and the Skillet Lickers. The steel guitar entered country music as early as 1922, when Jimmie Tarlton met famed Hawaiian guitarist Frank Ferera on the West Coast.

Jimmie Rodgers and the Carter Family are widely considered to be important early country musicians. From Scott County, Virginia, the Carters had learned sight reading of hymnals and sheet music using solfege. Their songs were first captured at a historic recording session in Bristol, Tennessee, on August 1, 1927, where Ralph Peer was the talent scout and sound recordist. A scene in the movie &quot;O Brother, Where Art Thou?&quot; depicts a similar occurrence in the same timeframe.

Rodgers fused hillbilly country, gospel, jazz, blues, pop, cowboy, and folk, and many of his best songs were his compositions, including &quot;Blue Yodel&quot;, which sold over a million records and established Rodgers as the premier singer of early country music. Beginning in 1927, and for the next 17 years, the Carters recorded some 300 old-time ballads, traditional tunes, country songs and gospel hymns, all representative of America&#x27;s southeastern folklore and heritage. Maybelle Carter went on to continue the family tradition with her daughters as The Carter Sisters; her daughter June would marry (in succession) Carl Smith, Rip Nix and Johnny Cash, having children with each who would also become country singers.

===Second generation (1930s–1940s)===
Record sales declined during the Great Depression. However, radio became a popular source of entertainment, and &quot;barn dance&quot; shows featuring country music were started by radio stations all over the South, as far north as Chicago, and as far west as California.

The most important was the &quot;Grand Ole Opry&quot;, aired starting in 1925 by WSM in Nashville and continuing to the present day. Some of the early stars on the &quot;Opry&quot; were Uncle Dave Macon, Roy Acuff and African American harmonica player DeFord Bailey. WSM&#x27;s 50,000-watt signal (in 1934) could often be heard across the country. Many musicians performed and recorded songs in any number of styles. Moon Mullican, for example, played western swing but also recorded songs that can be called rockabilly. Between 1947 and 1949, country crooner Eddy Arnold placed eight songs in the top 10. From 1945 to 1955 Jenny Lou Carson was one of the most prolific songwriters in country music.

====Singing cowboys and western swing====
In the 1930s and 1940s, cowboy songs, or western music, which had been recorded since the 1920s, were popularized by films made in Hollywood. Some of the popular singing cowboys from the era were Gene Autry, the Sons of the Pioneers, and Roy Rogers. Country music and western music were frequently played together on the same radio stations, hence the term &quot;country and western&quot; music, despite country and western being two distinct genres.

Cowgirls contributed to the sound in various family groups. Patsy Montana opened the door for female artists with her history-making song &quot;I Want To Be a Cowboy&#x27;s Sweetheart&quot;. This would begin a movement toward opportunities for women to have successful solo careers. Bob Wills was another country musician from the Lower Great Plains who had become very popular as the leader of a &quot;hot string band,&quot; and who also appeared in Hollywood westerns. His mix of country and jazz, which started out as dance hall music, would become known as western swing. Cliff Bruner, Moon Mullican, Milton Brown and Adolph Hofner were other early western swing pioneers. Spade Cooley and Tex Williams also had very popular bands and appeared in films. At its height, western swing rivaled the popularity of big band swing music.

====Changing instrumentation====
Drums were scorned by early country musicians as being &quot;too loud&quot; and &quot;not pure&quot;, but by 1935 western swing big band leader Bob Wills had added drums to the Texas Playboys. In the mid-1940s, the Grand Ole Opry did not want the Playboys&#x27; drummer to appear on stage. Although drums were commonly used by rockabilly groups by 1955, the less-conservative-than-the-Grand-Ole-Opry &quot;Louisiana Hayride&quot; kept its infrequently used drummer backstage as late as 1956. By the early 1960s, however, it was rare for a country band not to have a drummer. Bob Wills was one of the first country musicians known to have added an electric guitar to his band, in 1938. A decade later (1948) Arthur Smith achieved top 10 US country chart success with his MGM Records recording of &quot;Guitar Boogie&quot;, which crossed over to the US pop chart, introducing many people to the potential of the electric guitar. For several decades Nashville session players preferred the warm tones of the Gibson and Gretsch archtop electrics, but a &quot;hot&quot; Fender style, using guitars which became available beginning in the early 1950s, eventually prevailed as the signature guitar sound of country.

====Hillbilly boogie====
Country musicians began recording boogie in 1939, shortly after it had been played at Carnegie Hall, when Johnny Barfield recorded &quot;Boogie Woogie&quot;. The trickle of what was initially called hillbilly boogie, or okie boogie (later to be renamed country boogie), became a flood beginning in late 1945. One notable release from this period was the Delmore Brothers&#x27; &quot;Freight Train Boogie&quot;, considered to be part of the combined evolution of country music and blues towards rockabilly. In 1948, Arthur &quot;Guitar Boogie&quot; Smith achieved top ten US country chart success with his MGM Records recordings of &quot;Guitar Boogie&quot; and &quot;Banjo Boogie&quot;, with the former crossing over to the US pop charts. Other country boogie artists included Moon Mullican, Merrill Moore and Tennessee Ernie Ford. The hillbilly boogie period lasted into the 1950s and remains one of many subgenres of country into the 21st century.

====Bluegrass, folk and gospel====
By the end of World War II, &quot;mountaineer&quot; string band music known as bluegrass had emerged when Bill Monroe joined with Lester Flatt and Earl Scruggs, introduced by Roy Acuff at the Grand Ole Opry. That was the ordination of bluegrass music and how Bill Monroe came to be known as the &quot;Father of Bluegrass.&quot; Gospel music, too, remained a popular component of bluegrass and other sorts of country music. Red Foley, the biggest country star following World War II, had one of the first million-selling gospel hits (&quot;Peace in the Valley&quot;) and also sang boogie, blues and rockabilly. In the post-war period, country music was called &quot;folk&quot; in the trades, and &quot;hillbilly&quot; within the industry. In 1944, &quot;Billboard&quot; replaced the term &quot;hillbilly&quot; with &quot;folk songs and blues,&quot; and switched to &quot;country and western&quot; in 1949.

====Honky tonk====

Another type of stripped-down and raw music with a variety of moods and a basic ensemble of guitar, bass, dobro or steel guitar (and later) drums became popular, especially among rural residents in the three states of Texhomex, those being &quot;Tex&quot;as, Okla&quot;ho&quot;ma, and New &quot;Mex&quot;ico. It became known as honky tonk and had its roots in western swing and the ranchera music of Mexico and the border states, particularly New Mexico and Texas, together with the blues of the American South. Bob Wills and His Texas Playboys personified this music which has been described as &quot;a little bit of this, and a little bit of that, a little bit of black and a little bit of white ... just loud enough to keep you from thinking too much and to go right on ordering the whiskey.&quot; East Texan Al Dexter had a hit with &quot;Honky Tonk Blues&quot;, and seven years later &quot;Pistol Packin&#x27; Mama&quot;. These &quot;honky tonk&quot; songs were associated with barrooms, and was performed by the likes of Ernest Tubb, Kitty Wells (the first major female country solo singer), Ted Daffan, Floyd Tillman, the Maddox Brothers and Rose, Lefty Frizzell and Hank Williams; the music of these artists would later be called &quot;traditional&quot; country. Williams&#x27; influence in particular would prove to be enormous, inspiring many of the pioneers of rock and roll, such as Elvis Presley, Jerry Lee Lewis, Chuck Berry and Ike Turner, while providing a framework for emerging honky tonk talents like George Jones. Webb Pierce was the top-charting country artist of the 1950s, with 13 of his singles spending 113 weeks at number one. He charted 48 singles during the decade; 31 reached the top ten and 26 reached the top four.

===Third generation (1950s–1960s)===
By the early 1950s, a blend of western swing, country boogie, and honky tonk was played by most country bands, a mixture which followed in the footsteps of Gene Autry, Lydia Mendoza, Roy Rogers, and Patsy Montana. Western music, influenced by the cowboy ballads, New Mexico, Texas country and Tejano music rhythms of the Southwestern United States and Northern Mexico, reached its peak in popularity in the late 1950s, most notably with the song &quot;El Paso&quot;, first recorded by Marty Robbins in September 1959. Western music&#x27;s influence would continue to grow within the country music sphere, western musicians like Michael Martin Murphey, New Mexico music artists Al Hurricane and Antonia Apodaca, Tejano music performer Little Joe, and even folk revivalist John Denver, all first rose to prominence during this time. This western music influence largely kept the music of the folk revival and folk rock from influencing the country music genre much, despite the similarity in instrumentation and origins (see, for instance, the Byrds&#x27; negative reception during their appearance on the &quot;Grand Ole Opry&quot;). The main concern was largely political: most folk revival was largely driven by progressive activists, a stark contrast to the culturally conservative audiences of country music. John Denver was perhaps the only musician to have major success in both the country and folk revival genres throughout his career, later only a handful of artists like Burl Ives and Canadian musician Gordon Lightfoot successfully made the crossover to country after folk revival fell out of fashion. During the mid-1950s a new style of country music became popular, eventually to be referred to as rockabilly.

In 1953, the first all-country radio station was established in Lubbock, Texas. The music of the 1960s and 1970s targeted the American working class, and truckers in particular. As country radio became more popular, trucking songs like the 1963 hit song &quot;Six Days on the Road&quot; by Dave Dudley began to make up their own subgenre of country. These revamped songs sought to portray American truckers as a &quot;new folk hero&quot;, marking a significant shift in sound from earlier country music. The song was written by actual truckers and contained numerous references to the trucker culture of the time like &quot;ICC&quot; for Interstate Commerce Commission and &quot;little white pills&quot; as a reference to amphetamines. Starday Records in Nashville followed up on Dudley&#x27;s initial success with the release of &quot;Give Me 40 Acres&quot; by the Willis Brothers.

====Rockabilly====
Rockabilly was most popular with country fans in the 1950s; one of the first rock and roll superstars was former western yodeler Bill Haley, who repurposed his Four Aces of Western Swing into a rock and roll band in the early 1950s and renamed it the Comets. Bill Haley &amp; His Comets are credited with two of the first successful rock and roll records, &quot;Crazy Man, Crazy&quot; of 1953 and &quot;Rock Around the Clock&quot; in 1954.

1956 could be called the year of rockabilly in country music. Rockabilly was an early form of rock and roll, an upbeat combination of blues and country music. The number two, three and four songs on &quot;Billboard&#x27;s&quot; charts for that year were Elvis Presley, &quot;Heartbreak Hotel&quot;; Johnny Cash, &quot;I Walk the Line&quot;; and Carl Perkins, &quot;Blue Suede Shoes&quot;. Reflecting this success, George Jones released a rockabilly record that year under the pseudonym &quot;Thumper Jones&quot;, wanting to capitalize on the popularity of rockabilly without alienating his traditional country base. Cash and Presley placed songs in the top 5 in 1958 with No. 3 &quot;Guess Things Happen That Way/Come In, Stranger&quot; by Cash, and No. 5 by Presley &quot;Don&#x27;t/I Beg of You.&quot; Presley acknowledged the influence of rhythm and blues artists and his style, saying &quot;The colored folk been singin&#x27; and playin&#x27; it just the way I&#x27;m doin&#x27; it now, man for more years than I know.&quot; Within a few years, many rockabilly musicians returned to a more mainstream style or had defined their own unique style.

Country music gained national television exposure through &quot;Ozark Jubilee&quot; on ABC-TV and radio from 1955 to 1960 from Springfield, Missouri. The program showcased top stars including several rockabilly artists, some from the Ozarks. As Webb Pierce put it in 1956, &quot;Once upon a time, it was almost impossible to sell country music in a place like New York City. Nowadays, television takes us everywhere, and country music records and sheet music sell as well in large cities as anywhere else.&quot;
The Country Music Association was founded in 1958, in part because numerous country musicians were appalled by the increased influence of rock and roll on country music.

====The Nashville and countrypolitan sounds====
Beginning in the mid-1950s, and reaching its peak during the early 1960s, the Nashville sound turned country music into a multimillion-dollar industry centered in Nashville, Tennessee. Under the direction of producers such as Chet Atkins, Bill Porter, Paul Cohen, Owen Bradley, Bob Ferguson, and later Billy Sherrill, the sound brought country music to a diverse audience and helped revive country as it emerged from a commercially fallow period. This subgenre was notable for borrowing from 1950s pop stylings: a prominent and smooth vocal, backed by a string section (violins and other orchestral strings) and vocal chorus. Instrumental soloing was de-emphasized in favor of trademark &quot;licks&quot;. Leading artists in this genre included Jim Reeves, Skeeter Davis, Connie Smith, the Browns, Patsy Cline, and Eddy Arnold. The &quot;slip note&quot; piano style of session musician Floyd Cramer was an important component of this style. The Nashville Sound collapsed in mainstream popularity in 1964, a victim of both the British Invasion and the deaths of Reeves and Cline in separate airplane crashes. By the mid-1960s, the genre had developed into countrypolitan. Countrypolitan was aimed straight at mainstream markets, and it sold well throughout the later 1960s into the early 1970s. Top artists included Tammy Wynette, Lynn Anderson and Charlie Rich, as well as such former &quot;hard country&quot; artists as Ray Price and Marty Robbins. Despite the appeal of the Nashville sound, many traditional country artists emerged during this period and dominated the genre: Loretta Lynn, Merle Haggard, Buck Owens, Porter Wagoner, George Jones, and Sonny James among them.

====Country-soul crossover====

In 1962, Ray Charles surprised the pop world by turning his attention to country and western music, topping the charts and rating number three for the year on &quot;Billboard&#x27;s&quot; pop chart with the &quot;I Can&#x27;t Stop Loving You&quot; single, and recording the landmark album &quot;Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music&quot;.

====Bakersfield sound====
Another subgenre of country music grew out of hardcore honky tonk with elements of western swing and originated north-northwest of Los Angeles in Bakersfield, California, where many &quot;Okies&quot; and other Dust Bowl migrants had settled. Influenced by one-time West Coast residents Bob Wills and Lefty Frizzell, by 1966 it was known as the Bakersfield sound. It relied on electric instruments and amplification, in particular the Telecaster electric guitar, more than other subgenres of the country music of the era, and it can be described as having a sharp, hard, driving, no-frills, edgy flavor—hard guitars and honky-tonk harmonies. Leading practitioners of this style were Buck Owens, Merle Haggard, Tommy Collins, Dwight Yoakam, Gary Allan, and Wynn Stewart, each of whom had his own style.

Ken Nelson, who had produced Owens and Haggard and Rose Maddox became interested in the trucking song subgenre following the success of &quot;Six Days on the Road&quot; and asked Red Simpson to record an album of trucking songs. Haggard&#x27;s &quot;White Line Fever&quot; was also part of the trucking subgenre.

===Western music merges with country===

The country music scene of the 1940s until the 1970s was largely dominated by western music influences, so much so that the genre began to be called &quot;country and western&quot;. Even today, cowboy and frontier values continue to play a role in the larger country music, with western wear, cowboy boots, and cowboy hats continues to be in fashion for country artists.

West of the Mississippi River, many of these western genres continue to flourish, including the Red Dirt of Oklahoma, New Mexico music of New Mexico, and both Texas country music and Tejano music of Texas. During the 1950s until the early 1970s, the latter part of the western heyday in country music, many of these genres featured popular artists that continue to influence both their distinctive genres and larger country music. Red Dirt featured Bob Childers and Steve Ripley; for New Mexico music Al Hurricane, Al Hurricane Jr., and Antonia Apodaca; and within the Texas scenes Willie Nelson, Freddie Fender, Johnny Rodriguez, and Little Joe.

As Outlaw country music emerged as subgenre in its own right, Red Dirt, New Mexico, Texas country, and Tejano grew in popularity as a part of the Outlaw country movement. Originating in the bars, fiestas, and honky-tonks of Oklahoma, New Mexico, and Texas, their music supplemented outlaw country&#x27;s singer-songwriter tradition as well as 21st-century rock-inspired alternative country and hip hop-inspired country rap artists.

===Fourth generation (1970s–1980s)===
====Outlaw movement====
Outlaw country was derived from the traditional western, including Red Dirt, New Mexico, Texas country, Tejano, and honky-tonk musical styles of the late 1950s and 1960s. Songs such as the 1963 Johnny Cash popularized &quot;Ring of Fire&quot; show clear influences from the likes of Al Hurricane and Little Joe, this influence just happened to culminate with artists such as Ray Price (whose band, the &quot;Cherokee Cowboys&quot;, included Willie Nelson and Roger Miller) and mixed with the anger of an alienated subculture of the nation during the period, a collection of musicians that came to be known as the outlaw movement revolutionized the genre of country music in the early 1970s. &quot;After I left Nashville (the early 70s), I wanted to relax and play the music that I wanted to play, and just stay around Texas, maybe Oklahoma. Waylon and I had that outlaw image going, and when it caught on at colleges and we started selling records, we were O.K. The whole outlaw thing, it had nothing to do with the music, it was something that got written in an article, and the young people said, &#x27;Well, that&#x27;s pretty cool.&#x27; And started listening.&quot; (Willie Nelson) The term &quot;outlaw country&quot; is traditionally associated with Willie Nelson, Jerry Jeff Walker, Hank Williams, Jr., Merle Haggard, Waylon Jennings and Joe Ely. It was encapsulated in the 1976 album &quot;Wanted! The Outlaws&quot;.

Though the outlaw movement as a cultural fad had died down after the late 1970s (with Jennings noting in 1978 that it had gotten out of hand and led to real-life legal scrutiny), many western and outlaw country music artists maintained their popularity during the 1980s by forming supergroups, such as The Highwaymen, Texas Tornados, and Bandido.

====Country pop====
Country pop or soft pop, with roots in the countrypolitan sound, folk music, and soft rock, is a subgenre that first emerged in the 1970s. Although the term first referred to country music songs and artists that crossed over to top 40 radio, country pop acts are now more likely to cross over to adult contemporary music. It started with pop music singers like Glen Campbell, Bobbie Gentry, John Denver, Olivia Newton-John, Anne Murray, B. J. Thomas, the Bellamy Brothers, and Linda Ronstadt having hits on the country charts. Between 1972 and 1975, singer/guitarist John Denver released a series of hugely successful songs blending country and folk-rock musical styles (&quot;Rocky Mountain High&quot;, &quot;Sunshine on My Shoulders&quot;, &quot;Annie&#x27;s Song&quot;, &quot;Thank God I&#x27;m a Country Boy&quot;, and &quot;I&#x27;m Sorry&quot;), and was named Country Music Entertainer of the Year in 1975. The year before, Olivia Newton-John, an Australian pop singer, won the &quot;Best Female Country Vocal Performance&quot; as well as the Country Music Association&#x27;s most coveted award for females, &quot;Female Vocalist of the Year&quot;. In response George Jones, Tammy Wynette, Jean Shepard and other traditional Nashville country artists dissatisfied with the new trend formed the short-lived &quot;Association of Country Entertainers&quot; in 1974; the ACE soon unraveled in the wake of Jones and Wynette&#x27;s bitter divorce and Shepard&#x27;s realization that most others in the industry lacked her passion for the movement.
During the mid-1970s, Dolly Parton, a successful mainstream country artist since the late 1960s, mounted a high-profile campaign to cross over to pop music, culminating in her 1977 hit &quot;Here You Come Again&quot;, which topped the U.S. country singles chart, and also reached No. 3 on the pop singles charts. Parton&#x27;s male counterpart, Kenny Rogers, came from the opposite direction, aiming his music at the country charts, after a successful career in pop, rock and folk music with the First Edition, achieving success the same year with &quot;Lucille&quot;, which topped the country charts and reached No. 5 on the U.S. pop singles charts, as well as reaching Number 1 on the British all-genre chart. Parton and Rogers would both continue to have success on both country and pop charts simultaneously, well into the 1980s. Country music propelled Kenny Rogers’ career, making him a three-time Grammy Award winner and six-time Country Music Association Awards winner. Having sold more than 50 million albums in the US, one of his Song &quot;The Gambler,&quot; inspired several TV films, with Rogers as the main character. Artists like Crystal Gayle, Ronnie Milsap and Barbara Mandrell would also find success on the pop charts with their records. In 1975, author Paul Hemphill stated in the &quot;Saturday Evening Post&quot;, &quot;Country music isn&#x27;t really country anymore; it is a hybrid of nearly every form of popular music in America.&quot;
During the early 1980s, country artists continued to see their records perform well on the pop charts. Willie Nelson and Juice Newton each had two songs in the top 5 of the Billboard Hot 100 in the early eighties: Nelson charted &quot;Always on My Mind&quot; (#5, 1982) and &quot;To All the Girls I&#x27;ve Loved Before&quot; (#5, 1984, a duet with Julio Iglesias), and Newton achieved success with &quot;Queen of Hearts&quot; (#2, 1981) and &quot;Angel of the Morning&quot; (#4, 1981). Four country songs topped the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 in the 1980s: &quot;Lady&quot; by Kenny Rogers, from the late fall of 1980; &quot;9 to 5&quot; by Dolly Parton, &quot;I Love a Rainy Night&quot; by Eddie Rabbitt (these two back-to-back at the top in early 1981); and &quot;Islands in the Stream&quot;, a duet by Dolly Parton and Kenny Rogers in 1983, a pop-country crossover hit written by Barry, Robin, and Maurice Gibb of the Bee Gees. Newton&#x27;s &quot;Queen of Hearts&quot; almost reached No. 1, but was kept out of the spot by the pop ballad juggernaut &quot;Endless Love&quot; by Diana Ross and Lionel Richie. The move of country music toward neotraditional styles led to a marked decline in country/pop crossovers in the late 1980s, and only one song in that period—Roy Orbison&#x27;s &quot;You Got It&quot;, from 1989—made the top 10 of both the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Country Singles&quot; and Hot 100 charts, due largely to a revival of interest in Orbison after his sudden death. The only song with substantial country airplay to reach number one on the pop charts in the late 1980s was &quot;At This Moment&quot; by Billy Vera and the Beaters, an R&amp;B song with slide guitar embellishment that appeared at number 42 on the country charts from minor crossover airplay. The record-setting, multi-platinum group Alabama was named Artist of the Decade for the 1980s by the Academy of Country Music.

====Country rock====


Country rock is a genre that started in the 1960s but became prominent in the 1970s. The late 1960s in American music produced a unique blend as a result of traditionalist backlash within separate genres. In the aftermath of the British Invasion, many desired a return to the &quot;old values&quot; of rock n&#x27; roll. At the same time there was a lack of enthusiasm in the country sector for Nashville-produced music. What resulted was a crossbred genre known as country rock. Early innovators in this new style of music in the 1960s and 1970s included Bob Dylan, who was the first to revert to country music with his 1967 album &quot;John Wesley Harding&quot; (and even more so with that album&#x27;s follow-up, &quot;Nashville Skyline&quot;), followed by Gene Clark, Clark&#x27;s former band the Byrds (with Gram Parsons on &quot;Sweetheart of the Rodeo&quot;) and its spin-off the Flying Burrito Brothers (also featuring Gram Parsons), guitarist Clarence White, Michael Nesmith (the Monkees and the First National Band), the Grateful Dead, Neil Young, Commander Cody, the Allman Brothers Band, Charlie Daniels, the Marshall Tucker Band, Poco, Buffalo Springfield, Stephen Stills&#x27; band Manassas and Eagles, among many, even the former folk music duo Ian &amp; Sylvia, who formed Great Speckled Bird in 1969. The Eagles would become the most successful of these country rock acts, and their compilation album &quot;Their Greatest Hits (1971–1975)&quot; remains the second-best-selling album in the US with 29 million copies sold. The Rolling Stones also got into the act with songs like &quot;Dead Flowers&quot;; the original recording of &quot;Honky Tonk Women&quot; was performed in a country style, but it was subsequently re-recorded in a hard rock style for the single version, and the band&#x27;s preferred country version was later released on the album &quot;Let It Bleed&quot;, under the title &quot;Country Honk&quot;.
Described by AllMusic as the &quot;father of country-rock&quot;, Gram Parsons&#x27; work in the early 1970s was acclaimed for its purity and for his appreciation for aspects of traditional country music. Though his career was cut tragically short by his 1973 death, his legacy was carried on by his protégé and duet partner Emmylou Harris; Harris would release her debut solo in 1975, an amalgamation of country, rock and roll, folk, blues and pop. Subsequent to the initial blending of the two polar opposite genres, other offspring soon resulted, including Southern rock, heartland rock and in more recent years, alternative country. In the decades that followed, artists such as Juice Newton, Alabama, Hank Williams, Jr. (and, to an even greater extent, Hank Williams III), Gary Allan, Shania Twain, Brooks &amp; Dunn, Faith Hill, Garth Brooks, Dwight Yoakam, Steve Earle, Dolly Parton, Rosanne Cash and Linda Ronstadt moved country further towards rock influence.

====Neocountry====
In 1980, a style of &quot;neocountry disco music&quot; was popularized by the film &quot;Urban Cowboy&quot;. It was during this time that a glut of pop-country crossover artists began appearing on the country charts: former pop stars Bill Medley (of the Righteous Brothers), &quot;England Dan&quot; Seals (of England Dan and John Ford Coley), Tom Jones, and Merrill Osmond (both alone and with some of his brothers; his younger sister Marie Osmond was already an established country star) all recorded significant country hits in the early 1980s. Sales in record stores rocketed to $250 million in 1981; by 1984, 900 radio stations began programming country or neocountry pop full-time. As with most sudden trends, however, by 1984 sales had dropped below 1979 figures.

====Truck-driving country====

Truck-driving country music is a genre of country music
and is a fusion of honky-tonk, country rock and the Bakersfield sound.
It has the tempo of country rock and the emotion of honky-tonk, and its lyrics focus on a truck driver&#x27;s lifestyle. Truck-driving country songs often deal with the profession of trucking and love. Well-known artists who sing truck driving country include Dave Dudley, Red Sovine, Dick Curless, Red Simpson, Del Reeves, the Willis Brothers and Jerry Reed, with C. W. McCall and Cledus Maggard (pseudonyms of Bill Fries and Jay Huguely, respectively) being more humorous entries in the subgenre. Dudley is known as the father of truck driving country.

====Neotraditionalist movement====
During the mid-1980s, a group of new artists began to emerge who rejected the more polished country-pop sound that had been prominent on radio and the charts, in favor of more, traditional, &quot;back-to-basics&quot; production. Many of the artists during the latter half of the 1980s drew on traditional honky-tonk, bluegrass, folk and western swing. Artists who typified this sound included Travis Tritt, Reba McEntire, George Strait, Keith Whitley, Alan Jackson, John Anderson, Patty Loveless, Kathy Mattea, Randy Travis, Dwight Yoakam, Clint Black, Ricky Skaggs, and the Judds.

===Fifth generation (1990s)===

Country music was aided by the U.S. Federal Communications Commission&#x27;s (FCC) Docket 80–90, which led to a significant expansion of FM radio in the 1980s by adding numerous higher-fidelity FM signals to rural and suburban areas. At this point, country music was mainly heard on rural AM radio stations; the expansion of FM was particularly helpful to country music, which migrated to FM from the AM band as AM became overcome by talk radio (the country music stations that stayed on AM developed the classic country format for the AM audience). At the same time, beautiful music stations already in rural areas began abandoning the format (leading to its effective demise) to adopt country music as well. This wider availability of country music led to producers seeking to polish their product for a wider audience. In 1990, &quot;Billboard&quot;, which had published a country music chart since the 1940s, changed the methodology it used to compile the chart: singles sales were removed from the methodology, and only airplay on country radio determined a song&#x27;s place on the chart.

In the 1990s, country music became a worldwide phenomenon thanks to Garth Brooks, who enjoyed one of the most successful careers in popular music history, breaking records for both sales and concert attendance throughout the decade. The RIAA has certified his recordings at a combined (128× platinum), denoting roughly 113 million U.S. shipments. Other artists who experienced success during this time included Clint Black, John Michael Montgomery, Tracy Lawrence, Tim McGraw, Kenny Chesney, Travis Tritt, Alan Jackson and the newly formed duo of Brooks &amp; Dunn; George Strait, whose career began in the 1980s, also continued to have widespread success in this decade and beyond. Toby Keith began his career as a more pop-oriented country singer in the 1990s, evolving into an outlaw persona in the early 2000s with &quot;Pull My Chain&quot; and its follow-up, &quot;Unleashed&quot;.

====Success of female artists====

Female artists such as Reba McEntire, Patty Loveless, Faith Hill, Martina McBride, Deana Carter, LeAnn Rimes, Mindy McCready, Pam Tillis, Lorrie Morgan, Shania Twain, and Mary Chapin Carpenter all released platinum-selling albums in the 1990s. The Dixie Chicks became one of the most popular country bands in the 1990s and early 2000s. Their 1998 debut album &quot;Wide Open Spaces&quot; went on to become certified 12× platinum while their 1999 album &quot;Fly&quot; went on to become 10× platinum. After their third album, &quot;Home&quot;, was released in 2003, the band made political news in part because of lead singer Natalie Maines&#x27;s comments disparaging then-President George W. Bush while the band was overseas (Maines stated that she and her bandmates were ashamed to be from the same state as Bush, who had just commenced the Iraq War a few days prior). The comments caused a rift between the band and the country music scene, and the band&#x27;s fourth (and most recent) album, 2006&#x27;s &quot;Taking the Long Way&quot;, took a more rock-oriented direction; the album was commercially successful overall among non-country audiences but largely ignored among country audiences. After &quot;Taking the Long Way&quot;, the band broke up for a decade (with two of its members continuing as the Court Yard Hounds) before reuniting in 2016 and releasing new material in 2020.
Canadian artist Shania Twain became the best selling female country artist of the decade. This was primarily due to the success of her breakthrough sophomore 1995 album, &quot;The Woman in Me&quot;, which was certified 12× platinum sold over 20 million copies worldwide and its follow-up, 1997&#x27;s &quot;Come On Over&quot;, which was certified 20× platinum and sold over 40 million copies. The album became a major worldwide phenomenon and became one of the world&#x27;s best selling albums for three years (1998, 1999 and 2000); it also went on to become the best selling country album of all time.

Unlike the majority of her contemporaries, Twain enjoyed large international success that had been seen by very few country artists, before or after her. Critics have noted that Twain enjoyed much of her success due to breaking free of traditional country stereotypes and for incorporating elements of rock and pop into her music. In 2002, she released her successful fourth studio album, titled &quot;Up!&quot;, which was certified 11× platinum and sold over 15 million copies worldwide. Shania Twain has been nominated eighteen times for Grammy Awards and won five Grammys. [] She was the best-paid country music star in 2016 according to Forbes, with a net worth of $27.5 million. []Twain has been credited with breaking international boundaries for country music, as well as inspiring many country artists to incorporate different genres into their music in order to attract a wider audience. She is also credited with changing the way in which many female country performers would market themselves, as unlike many before her she used fashion and her sex appeal to get rid of the stereotypical &#x27;honky-tonk&#x27; image the majority of country singers had in order to distinguish herself from many female country artists of the time.

====Line dancing revival====
In the early-mid-1990s, country western music was influenced by the popularity of line dancing. This influence was so great that Chet Atkins was quoted as saying, &quot;The music has gotten pretty bad, I think. It&#x27;s all that damn line dancing.&quot; By the end of the decade, however, at least one line dance choreographer complained that good country line dance music was no longer being released. In contrast, artists such as Don Williams and George Jones who had more or less had consistent chart success through the 1970s and 1980s suddenly had their fortunes fall rapidly around 1991 when the new chart rules took effect.

====Alternative country====

Country influences combined with Punk rock and alternative rock to forge the &quot;cowpunk&quot; scene in Southern California during the 1980s, which included bands such as the Long Ryders, Lone Justice and the Beat Farmers, as well as the established punk group X, whose music had begun to include country and rockabilly influences. Simultaneously, a generation of diverse country artists outside of California emerged that rejected the perceived cultural and musical conservatism associated with Nashville&#x27;s mainstream country musicians in favor of more countercultural outlaw country and the folk singer-songwriter traditions of artists such as Woody Guthrie, Gram Parsons and Bob Dylan.

Artists from outside California who were associated with early alternative country included singer-songwriters such as Lucinda Williams, Lyle Lovett and Steve Earle, the Nashville country rock band Jason and the Scorchers, the Providence &quot;cowboy pop&quot; band Rubber Rodeo, and the British post-punk band the Mekons. Earle, in particular, was noted for his popularity with both country and college rock audiences: He promoted his 1986 debut album &quot;Guitar Town&quot; with a tour that saw him open for both country singer Dwight Yoakam and alternative rock band the Replacements. Yoakam also cultivated a fanbase spanning multiple genres through his stripped-down honky-tonk influenced sound, association with the cowpunk scene, and performances at Los Angeles punk rock clubs.

These early styles had coalesced into a genre by the time the Illinois group Uncle Tupelo released their influential debut album &quot;No Depression&quot; in 1990. The album is widely credited as being the first &quot;alternative country&quot; album, and inspired the name of &quot;No Depression&quot; magazine, which exclusively covered the new genre. Following Uncle Tupelo&#x27;s disbanding in 1994, its members formed two significant bands in the genre: Wilco and Son Volt. Although Wilco&#x27;s sound had moved away from country and towards indie rock by the time they released their critically acclaimed album &quot;Yankee Hotel Foxtrot&quot; in 2002, they have continued to be an influence on later alt-country artists.

Other acts who became prominent in the alt-country genre during the 1990s and 2000s included the Bottle Rockets, the Handsome Family, Blue Mountain, Robbie Fulks, Blood Oranges, Bright Eyes, Drive-By Truckers, Old 97&#x27;s, Old Crow Medicine Show, Nickel Creek, Neko Case, and Whiskeytown, whose lead singer Ryan Adams later had a successful solo-career. Alt-country, in various iterations overlapped with other genres, including Red Dirt country music (Cross Canadian Ragweed), jam bands (My Morning Jacket and the String Cheese Incident), and indie folk (the Avett Brothers).

Despite the genre&#x27;s growing popularity in the 1980s, 1990s and 2000s, alternative country and neo-traditionalist artists saw minimal support from country radio in those decades, despite strong sales and critical acclaim for albums such as the soundtrack to the 2000 film &quot;O Brother, Where Art Thou?&quot;. In 1987, the Beat Farmers gained airplay on country music stations with their song &quot;Make It Last&quot;, but the single was pulled from the format when station programmers decreed the band&#x27;s music was too rock-oriented for their audience. However, some alt-country songs have been crossover hits to mainstream country radio in cover versions by established artists on the format; Lucinda Williams&#x27; &quot;Passionate Kisses&quot; was a hit for Mary Chapin Carpenter in 1993, Ryan Adams&#x27; &quot;When the Stars Go Blue&quot; was a hit for Tim McGraw in 2007, and Old Crow Medicine Show&#x27;s &quot;Wagon Wheel&quot; was a hit for Darius Rucker (member of Hootie &amp; The Blowfish) in 2013.

In the 2010s, the alt-country genre saw an increase in its critical and commercial popularity, owing to the success of artists such as the Civil Wars, Chris Stapleton, Sturgill Simpson, Jason Isbell, Lydia Loveless and Margo Price. In 2019, Kacey Musgraves – a country artist who had gained a following with indie rock fans and music critics despite minimal airplay on country radio – won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year for her album &quot;Golden Hour&quot;.

===Sixth generation (2000s–present)===


The sixth generation of country music continued to be influenced by other genres such as pop, rock, and R&amp;B. Richard Marx crossed over with his &quot;Days in Avalon&quot; album, which features five country songs and several singers and musicians. Alison Krauss sang background vocals to Marx&#x27;s single &quot;Straight from My Heart.&quot; Also, Bon Jovi had a hit single, &quot;Who Says You Can&#x27;t Go Home&quot;, with Jennifer Nettles of Sugarland. Kid Rock&#x27;s collaboration with Sheryl Crow, &quot;Picture,&quot; was a major crossover hit in 2001 and began Kid Rock&#x27;s transition from hard rock to a country-rock hybrid that would later produce another major crossover hit, 2008&#x27;s &quot;All Summer Long.&quot; (Crow, whose music had often incorporated country elements, would also officially cross over into country with her hit &quot;Easy&quot; from her debut country album &quot;Feels like Home&quot;). Darius Rucker, frontman for the 1990s pop-rock band Hootie &amp; the Blowfish, began a country solo career in the late 2000s, one that to date has produced five albums and several hits on both the country charts and the Billboard Hot 100. Singer-songwriter Unknown Hinson became famous for his appearance in the Charlotte television show &quot;Wild, Wild, South&quot;, after which Hinson started his own band and toured in southern states. Other rock stars who featured a country song on their albums were Don Henley (who released &quot;Cass County&quot; in 2015, an album which featured collaborations with numerous country artists) and Poison.

The back half of the 2010–2020 decade saw an increasing number of mainstream country acts collaborate with pop and R&amp;B acts; many of these songs achieved commercial success by appealing to fans across multiple genres; examples include collaborations between Kane Brown and Marshmello and Maren Morris and Zedd. There has also been interest from pop singers in country music, including Beyoncé, Lady Gaga, Alicia Keys, Gwen Stefani, Justin Timberlake, Justin Bieber and Pink. Supporting this movement is the new generation of contemporary pop-country, including Taylor Swift, Miranda Lambert, Carrie Underwood, Kacey Musgraves, Miley Cyrus, Billy Ray Cyrus, Sam Hunt, Chris Young, who introduced new themes in their works, touching on fundamental rights, feminism, and controversies about racism and religion of the older generations.

====Popular culture====

In 2005, country singer Carrie Underwood rose to fame as the winner of the fourth season of &quot;American Idol;&quot; she has since become one of the most prominent recording artists in the genre, with worldwide sales of more than 65 million records and seven Grammy Awards. With her first single, &quot;Inside Your Heaven&quot;, Underwood became the only solo country artist to have a number 1 hit on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart in the 2000–2009 decade and also broke &quot;Billboard&quot; chart history as the first country music artist ever to debut at No. 1 on the Hot 100. Underwood&#x27;s debut album, &quot;Some Hearts&quot;, became the best-selling solo female debut album in country music history, the fastest-selling debut country album in the history of the SoundScan era and the best-selling country album of the last 10 years, being ranked by &quot;Billboard&quot; as the number 1 Country Album of the 2000–2009 decade. She has also become the female country artist with the most number one hits on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Country Songs chart in the Nielsen SoundScan era (1991–present), having 14 #1s and breaking her own &quot;Guinness Book&quot; record of ten. In 2007, Underwood won the Grammy Award for Best New Artist, becoming only the second Country artist in history (and the first in a decade) to win it. She also made history by becoming the seventh woman to win Entertainer of the Year at the Academy of Country Music Awards, and the first woman in history to win the award twice, as well as twice consecutively. &quot;Time&quot; has listed Underwood as one of the 100 most influential people in the world.
In 2016, Underwood topped the Country Airplay chart for the 15th time, becoming the female artist with the most number ones on that chart.

Carrie Underwood was only one of several country stars produced by a television series in the 2000s. In addition to Underwood, &quot;American Idol&quot; launched the careers of Kellie Pickler, Josh Gracin, Bucky Covington, Kristy Lee Cook, Danny Gokey, Lauren Alaina and Scotty McCreery (as well as that of occasional country singer Kelly Clarkson) in the decade, and would continue to launch country careers in the 2010s. The series &quot;Nashville Star&quot;, while not nearly as successful as &quot;Idol&quot;, did manage to bring Miranda Lambert, Kacey Musgraves and Chris Young to mainstream success, also launching the careers of lower-profile musicians such as Buddy Jewell, Sean Patrick McGraw, and Canadian musician George Canyon. &quot;Can You Duet?&quot; produced the duos Steel Magnolia and Joey + Rory. Teen sitcoms also have influenced modern country music; in 2008, actress Jennette McCurdy (best known as the sidekick Sam on the teen sitcom &quot;iCarly&quot;) released her first single, &quot;So Close&quot;, following that with the single &quot;Generation Love&quot; in 2011. Another teen sitcom star, Miley Cyrus (of Disney Channel&#x27;s &quot;Hannah Montana&quot;), also had a crossover hit in the late 2000s with &quot;The Climb&quot; and another with a duet with her father, Billy Ray Cyrus, with &quot;Ready, Set, Don&#x27;t Go.&quot; Jana Kramer, an actress in the teen drama &quot;One Tree Hill&quot;, released a country album in 2012 that has produced two hit singles as of 2013. Actresses Hayden Panettiere and Connie Britton began recording country songs as part of their roles in the TV shows &quot;Nashville&quot; and &quot;Pretty Little Liars&quot; star Lucy Hale released her debut album &quot;Road Between&quot; in 2014.

In 2010, the group Lady Antebellum won five Grammys, including the coveted Song of the Year and Record of the Year for &quot;Need You Now&quot;. A large number of duos and vocal groups emerged on the charts in the 2010s, many of which feature close harmony in the lead vocals. In addition to Lady A, groups such as Little Big Town, the Band Perry, Gloriana, Thompson Square, Eli Young Band, Zac Brown Band and British duo the Shires have emerged to occupy a large share of mainstream success alongside solo singers such as Kacey Musgraves and Miranda Lambert.
One of the most commercially successful country artists of the late 2000s and early 2010s has been singer-songwriter Taylor Swift. Swift first became widely known in 2006 when her debut single, &quot;Tim McGraw&quot;, was released when Swift was only 16 years old. In 2006, Swift released her self-titled debut studio album, which spent 275 weeks on &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, one of the longest runs of any album on that chart. In 2008, Taylor Swift released her second studio album, &quot;Fearless&quot;, which made her the second longest number-one charted on &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and the second best-selling album (just behind Adele&#x27;s &quot;21&quot;) within the past 5 years. At the 2010 Grammys, Taylor Swift was 20 and won Album of the Year for &quot;Fearless&quot;, which made her the youngest artist to win this award. Swift has received fourteen Grammys already.

Buoyed by her teen idol status among girls and a change in the methodology of compiling the &quot;Billboard&quot; charts to favor pop-crossover songs, Swift&#x27;s 2012 single &quot;We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together&quot; spent the most weeks at the top of Billboard&#x27;s Hot 100 chart and Hot Country Songs chart of any song in nearly five decades. The song&#x27;s long run at the top of the chart was somewhat controversial, as the song is largely a pop song without much country influence and its success on the charts was driven by a change to the chart&#x27;s criteria to include airplay on non-country radio stations, prompting disputes over what constitutes a country song; many of Swift&#x27;s later releases, such as album &quot;1989&quot; (2014), &quot;Reputation&quot; (2017), and &quot;Lover&quot; (2019) were released solely to pop audiences. Swift returned to country music in her recent folk-inspired releases, &quot;Folklore&quot; (2020) and &quot;Evermore&quot; (2020), with songs like &quot;Betty&quot; and &quot;No Body, No Crime&quot;.

==== Modern variations ====
===== Influence of rock, pop and hip-hop =====
In the mid to late 2010s, country music began to increasingly sound more like the style of modern-day Pop music, with more simple and repetitive lyrics, more electronic-based instrumentation, and experimentation with &quot;talk-singing&quot; and rap, pop-country pulled farther away from the traditional sounds of country music and received criticisms from country music purists while gaining in popularity with mainstream audiences. The topics addressed have also changed, turning controversial such as acceptance of the LGBT community, safe sex, recreational marijuana use, and questioning religious sentiment. Influences also come from some pop artists&#x27; interest in the country genre, including Justin Timberlake with the album &quot;Man of the Woods,&quot; Beyoncé&#x27;s song &quot;Daddy Lessons&quot; from &quot;Lemonade&quot;, Kelly Clarkson, Gwen Stefani with &quot;Nobody but You&quot;, Bruno Mars, Lady Gaga, Alicia Keys, and Pink.

The influence of rock music in country has become more overt during the late 2000s and early 2010s as artists like Eric Church, Jason Aldean, and Brantley Gilbert have had success; Aaron Lewis, former frontman for the rock group Staind, had a moderately successful entry into country music in 2011 and 2012, as did Dallas Smith, former frontman of the band Default.

Maren Morris success collaboration &quot;The Middle&quot; with EDM producer Zedd is considered one of the representations of the fusion of electro-pop with country music.

Lil Nas X song &quot;Old Town Road&quot; spent 19 weeks atop the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart, becoming the longest-running number-one song since the chart debuted in 1958, winning Billboard Music Awards, MTV Video Music Awards and Grammy Award. Sam Hunt &quot;Leave the Night On&quot; peaked concurrently on the Hot Country Songs and Country Airplay charts, making Hunt the first country artist in 22 years, since Billy Ray Cyrus, to reach the top of three country charts simultaneously in the Nielsen SoundScan-era. With the fusion genre of &quot;country trap&quot;—a fusion of country/western themes to a hip hop beat, but usually with fully sung lyrics—emerging in the late 2010s, line dancing country had a minor revival, examples of the phenomenon include &quot;The Git Up&quot; by Blanco Brown. Blanco Brown has gone on to make more traditional country soul songs such as &quot;I Need Love&quot; and a rendition of &quot;Don&#x27;t Take the Girl&quot; with Tim McGraw, and collaborations like &quot;Just the Way&quot; with Parmalee. Another country trap artist known as Breland has seen success with &quot;My Truck, &quot;Throw It Back&quot; with Keith Urban, and &quot;Praise the Lord&quot; featuring Thomas Rhett.

Emo rap musician Sueco, released a cowpunk song in collaboration is country musician Warren Zeiders titled &quot;Ride It Hard&quot;.

====== Bro country ======
In the early 2010s, &quot;bro-country&quot;, a genre noted primarily for its themes on drinking and partying, girls, and pickup trucks became particularly popular. Notable artists associated with this genre are Luke Bryan, Jason Aldean, Blake Shelton, Jake Owen and Florida Georgia Line whose song &quot;Cruise&quot; became the best-selling country song of all time. Research in the mid-2010s suggested that about 45 percent of country&#x27;s best-selling songs could be considered bro-country, with the top two artists being Luke Bryan and Florida Georgia Line. Albums by bro-country singers also sold very well—in 2013, Luke Bryan&#x27;s &quot;Crash My Party&quot; was the third best-selling of all albums in the United States, with Florida Georgia Line&#x27;s &quot;Here&#x27;s to the Good Times&quot; at sixth, and Blake Shelton&#x27;s &quot;Based on a True Story&quot; at ninth. It is also thought that the popularity of bro-country helped country music to surpass classic rock as the most popular genre in the American country in 2012. The genre however is controversial as it has been criticized by other country musicians and commentators over its themes and depiction of women, opening up a divide between the older generation of country singers and the younger bro country singers that was described as &quot;civil war&quot; by musicians, critics, and journalists.&quot; In 2014, Maddie &amp; Tae&#x27;s &quot;Girl in a Country Song&quot;, addressing many of the controversial bro-country themes, peaked at number one on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Country Airplay chart.

===== Bluegrass and Americana =====


Bluegrass is a genre that contain songs about going through hard times, country loving, and telling stories. Its history can be traced back to the 1600s. During this time, many people were coming to America from Ireland, Scotland and England. Those people brought the first version of Bluegrass to the Americas. After several years of bluegrass&#x27; development, Bill Monroe became the &quot;father&quot; of bluegrass. Other sources argue that The Monroe Brothers were the first stars of bluegrass. Newer artists like Billy Strings, the Grascals, Molly Tuttle, Tyler Childers and the Infamous Stringdusters have been increasing the popularity of this genre, alongside some of the genres more established stars who still remain popular including Rhonda Vincent, Alison Krauss and Union Station, Ricky Skaggs and Del McCoury. The genre has developed in the Northern Kentucky and Cincinnati area. Other artists include New South (band), Doc Watson, Osborne Brothers, and many others.

In an effort to combat the over-reliance of mainstream country music on pop-infused artists, the sister genre of Americana began to gain popularity and increase in prominence, receiving eight Grammy categories of its own in 2009. Though Americana music gained popularity in 2009, the first Americana singer was likely Hank Williams in the 1950s. Americana music incorporates elements of country music, bluegrass, folk, blues, gospel, rhythm and blues, roots rock and southern soul and is overseen by the Americana Music Association and the Americana Music Honors &amp; Awards. As a result of an increasingly pop-leaning mainstream, many more traditional-sounding artists such as Tyler Childers, Zach Bryan and Old Crow Medicine Show began to associate themselves more with Americana and the alternative country scene where their sound was more celebrated. Similarly, many established country acts who no longer received commercial airplay, including Emmylou Harris and Lyle Lovett, began to flourish again.

===== Contemporary country and western revival =====
During the mid-1980s, a group of new artists began to emerge who rejected the more polished country-pop sound that had been prominent on radio and the charts, in favor of more, traditional, &quot;back-to-basics&quot; production. Many of the artists during the latter half of the 1980s drew on traditional honky-tonk, bluegrass, folk and western swing. Artists who typified this sound included Travis Tritt, Reba McEntire, George Strait, Keith Whitley, Alan Jackson, John Anderson, Patty Loveless, Kathy Mattea, Randy Travis, Dwight Yoakam, Clint Black, Ricky Skaggs, and the Judds.

Beginning in 1989, a confluence of events brought an unprecedented commercial boom to country music. New marketing strategies were used to engage fans, powered by technology that more accurately tracked the popularity of country music, and boosted by a political and economic climate that focused attention on the genre. Garth Brooks (&quot;Friends in Low Places&quot;) in particular attracted fans with his fusion of neotraditionalist country and stadium rock. Other artists such as Brooks and Dunn (&quot;Boot Scootin&#x27; Boogie&quot;) also combined conventional country with slick, rock elements, while Lorrie Morgan, Mary Chapin Carpenter, and Kathy Mattea updated neotraditionalist styles.
Roots of conservative country was Lee Greenwood&#x27;s &quot;God Bless the USA&quot;. The September 11 attacks of 2001 and the economic recession helped move country music back into the spotlight. Many country artists, such as Alan Jackson with his ballad on terrorist attacks, &quot;Where Were You (When the World Stopped Turning)&quot;, wrote songs that celebrated the military, highlighted the gospel, and emphasized home and family values over wealth. Alt-Country singer Ryan Adams song &quot;New York, New York&quot; pays tribute to New York City, and its popular music video (which was shot 4 days before the attacks) shows Adams playing in front of the Manhattan skyline, Along with several shots of the city. In contrast, more rock-oriented country singers took more direct aim at the attacks&#x27; perpetrators; Toby Keith&#x27;s &quot;Courtesy of the Red, White and Blue (The Angry American)&quot; threatened to &quot;a boot in&quot; the posterior of the enemy, while Charlie Daniels&#x27;s &quot;This Ain&#x27;t No Rag, It&#x27;s a Flag&quot; promised to &quot;hunt&quot; the perpetrators &quot;down like a mad dog hound.&quot; These songs gained such recognition that it put country music back into popular culture. Darryl Worley recorded &quot;Have You Forgotten&quot; also. There have been numerous patriotic country songs throughout the years.
Some modern artists that primarily or entirely produce country pop music include Kacey Musgraves, Maren Morris, Kelsea Ballerini, Sam Hunt, Kane Brown, Chris Lane, and Dan + Shay. The singers who are part of this country movement are also defined as &quot;Nashville&#x27;s new generation of country&quot;.

Although the changes made by the new generation, it has been recognized by major music awards associations and successes in Billboard and international charts. &quot;Golden Hour&quot; by Kacey Musgraves won album of the year at 61st Annual Grammy Awards, Academy of Country Music Awards, Country Music Association Awards, although it has received criticism from some traditional country music fans.

==International==

===Australia===

Australian country music has a long tradition. Influenced by US country music, it has developed a distinct style, shaped by British and Irish folk ballads and Australian bush balladeers like Henry Lawson and Banjo Paterson. Country instruments, including the guitar, banjo, fiddle and harmonica, create the distinctive sound of country music in Australia and accompany songs with strong storyline and memorable chorus.

Folk songs sung in Australia between the 1780s and 1920s, based around such themes as the struggle against government tyranny, or the lives of bushrangers, swagmen, drovers, stockmen and shearers, continue to influence the genre. This strain of Australian country, with lyrics focusing on Australian subjects, is generally known as &quot;bush music&quot; or &quot;bush band music&quot;. &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot;, often regarded as Australia&#x27;s unofficial national anthem, is a quintessential Australian country song, influenced more by British and Irish folk ballads than by US country and western music. The lyrics were composed by the poet Banjo Paterson in 1895. Other popular songs from this tradition include &quot;The Wild Colonial Boy&quot;, &quot;Click Go the Shears&quot;, &quot;The Queensland Drover&quot; and &quot;The Dying Stockman&quot;. Later themes which endure to the present include the experiences of war, of droughts and flooding rains, of Aboriginality and of the railways and trucking routes which link Australia&#x27;s vast distances.

Pioneers of a more Americanised popular country music in Australia included Tex Morton (known as &quot;The Father of Australian Country Music&quot;) in the 1930s. Author Andrew Smith delivers a through research and engaged view of Tex Morton&#x27;s life and his impact on the country music scene in Australia in the 1930s and 1940s. Other early stars included Buddy Williams, Shirley Thoms and Smoky Dawson. Buddy Williams (1918–1986) was the first Australian-born to record country music in Australia in the late 1930s and was the pioneer of a distinctly Australian style of country music called the bush ballad that others such as Slim Dusty would make popular in later years. During the Second World War, many of Buddy Williams recording sessions were done whilst on leave from the Army. At the end of the war, Williams would go on to operate some of the largest travelling tent rodeo shows Australia has ever seen.

In 1952, Dawson began a radio show and went on to national stardom as a singing cowboy of radio, TV and film. Slim Dusty (1927–2003) was known as the &quot;King of Australian Country Music&quot; and helped to popularise the Australian bush ballad. His successful career spanned almost six decades, and his 1957 hit &quot;A Pub with No Beer&quot; was the biggest-selling record by an Australian to that time, and with over seven million record sales in Australia he is the most successful artist in Australian musical history. Dusty recorded and released his one-hundredth album in the year 2000 and was given the honour of singing &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; in the closing ceremony of the Sydney 2000 Olympic Games. Dusty&#x27;s wife Joy McKean penned several of his most popular songs.

Chad Morgan, who began recording in the 1950s, has represented a vaudeville style of comic Australian country; Frank Ifield achieved considerable success in the early 1960s, especially in the UK Singles Charts and Reg Lindsay was one of the first Australians to perform at Nashville&#x27;s Grand Ole Opry in 1974. Eric Bogle&#x27;s 1972 folk lament to the Gallipoli Campaign &quot;And the Band Played Waltzing Matilda&quot; recalled the British and Irish origins of Australian folk-country. Singer-songwriter Paul Kelly, whose music style straddles folk, rock and country, is often described as the poet laureate of Australian music. 
By the 1990s, country music had attained crossover success in the pop charts, with artists like James Blundell and James Reyne singing &quot;Way Out West&quot;, and country star Kasey Chambers winning the ARIA Award for Best Female Artist in three years (2000, 2002 and 2004), tying with pop stars Wendy Matthews and Sia for the most wins in that category. Furthermore, Chambers has gone on to win nine ARIA Awards for Best Country Album and, in 2018, became the youngest artist to ever be inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame. The crossover influence of Australian country is also evident in the music of successful contemporary bands the Waifs and the John Butler Trio. Nick Cave has been heavily influenced by the country artist Johnny Cash. In 2000, Cash, covered Cave&#x27;s &quot;The Mercy Seat&quot; on the album &quot;American III: Solitary Man&quot;, seemingly repaying Cave for the compliment he paid by covering Cash&#x27;s &quot;The Singer&quot; (originally &quot;The Folk Singer&quot;) on his &quot;Kicking Against the Pricks&quot; album. Subsequently, Cave cut a duet with Cash on a version of Hank Williams&#x27; &quot;I&#x27;m So Lonesome I Could Cry&quot; for Cash&#x27;s &quot;American IV: The Man Comes Around&quot; album (2002).

Popular contemporary performers of Australian country music include John Williamson (who wrote the iconic &quot;True Blue&quot;), Lee Kernaghan (whose hits include &quot;Boys from the Bush&quot; and &quot;The Outback Club&quot;), Gina Jeffreys, Forever Road and Sara Storer. In the U.S., Olivia Newton-John, Sherrié Austin and Keith Urban have attained great success. During her time as a country singer in the 1970s, Newton-John became the first (and to date only) non-US winner of the Country Music Association Award for Female Vocalist of the Year which many considered a controversial decision by the CMA; after starring in the rock-and-roll musical film &quot;Grease&quot; in 1978, Newton-John (mirroring the character she played in the film) shifted to pop music in the 1980s. Urban is arguably considered the most successful international Australian country star, winning nine CMA Awards, including three Male Vocalist of the Year wins and two wins of the CMA&#x27;s top honour Entertainer of the Year. Pop star Kylie Minogue found success with her 2018 country pop album &quot;Golden&quot; which she recorded in Nashville reaching number one in Scotland, the UK and her native Australia.

Country music has been a particularly popular form of musical expression among Indigenous Australians. Troy Cassar-Daley is among Australia&#x27;s successful contemporary indigenous performers, and Kev Carmody and Archie Roach employ a combination of folk-rock and country music to sing about Aboriginal rights issues.

The Tamworth Country Music Festival began in 1973 and now attracts up to 100,000 visitors annually. Held in Tamworth, New South Wales (country music capital of Australia), it celebrates the culture and heritage of Australian country music. During the festival the CMAA holds the Country Music Awards of Australia ceremony awarding the Golden Guitar trophies. Other significant country music festivals include the Whittlesea Country Music Festival (near Melbourne) and the Mildura Country Music Festival for &quot;independent&quot; performers during October, and the Canberra Country Music Festival held in the national capital during November.

&quot;Country HQ&quot; showcases new talent on the rise in the country music scene down under. CMC (the Country Music Channel), a 24‑hour music channel dedicated to non-stop country music, can be viewed on pay TV and features once a year the Golden Guitar Awards, CMAs and CCMAs alongside international shows such as &quot;The Wilkinsons&quot;, &quot;The Road Hammers&quot;, and &quot;Country Music Across America&quot;.

===Canada===
Outside of the United States, Canada has the largest country music fan and artist base, something that is to be expected given the two countries&#x27; proximity and cultural parallels. Mainstream country music is culturally ingrained in the prairie provinces, the British Columbia Interior, Northern Ontario, and in Atlantic Canada. Celtic traditional music developed in Atlantic Canada in the form of Scottish, Acadian and Irish folk music popular amongst Irish, French and Scottish immigrants to Canada&#x27;s Atlantic Provinces (Newfoundland, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and Prince Edward Island). Like the southern United States and Appalachia, all four regions are of heavy British Isles stock and rural; as such, the development of traditional music in the Maritimes somewhat mirrored the development of country music in the US South and Appalachia. Country and western music never really developed separately in Canada; however, after its introduction to Canada, following the spread of radio, it developed quite quickly out of the Atlantic Canadian traditional scene. While true Atlantic Canadian traditional music is very Celtic or &quot;sea shanty&quot; in nature, even today, the lines have often been blurred. Certain areas often are viewed as embracing one strain or the other more openly. For example, in Newfoundland the traditional music remains unique and Irish in nature, whereas traditional musicians in other parts of the region may play both genres interchangeably.
&quot;Don Messer&#x27;s Jubilee&quot; was a Halifax, Nova Scotia-based country/folk variety television show that was broadcast nationally from 1957 to 1969. In Canada it out-performed &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot; broadcast from the United States and became the top-rated television show throughout much of the 1960s. &quot;Don Messer&#x27;s Jubilee&quot; followed a consistent format throughout its years, beginning with a tune named &quot;Goin&#x27; to the Barndance Tonight&quot;, followed by fiddle tunes by Messer, songs from some of his &quot;Islanders&quot; including singers Marg Osburne and Charlie Chamberlain, the featured guest performance, and a closing hymn. It ended with &quot;Till We Meet Again&quot;. The guest performance slot gave national exposure to numerous Canadian folk musicians, including Stompin&#x27; Tom Connors and Catherine McKinnon. Some Maritime country performers went on to further fame beyond Canada. Hank Snow, Wilf Carter (also known as Montana Slim), and Anne Murray are the three most notable. The cancellation of the show by the public broadcaster in 1969 caused a nationwide protest, including the raising of questions in the Parliament of Canada.

The Prairie provinces, due to their western cowboy and agrarian nature, are the true heartland of Canadian country music. While the Prairies never developed a traditional music culture anything like the Maritimes, the folk music of the Prairies often reflected the cultural origins of the settlers, who were a mix of Scottish, Ukrainian, German and others. For these reasons polkas and western music were always popular in the region, and with the introduction of the radio, mainstream country music flourished. As the culture of the region is western and frontier in nature, the specific genre of country and western is more popular today in the Prairies than in any other part of the country. No other area of the country embraces all aspects of the culture, from two-step dancing, to the cowboy dress, to rodeos, to the music itself, like the Prairies do. The Atlantic Provinces, on the other hand, produce far more traditional musicians, but they are not usually specifically country in nature, usually bordering more on the folk or Celtic genres.

Canadian country pop star Shania Twain is the best-selling female country artist of all time and one of the best-selling artists of all time in any genre. Furthermore, she is the only woman to have three consecutive albums be certified Diamond.

===Mexico and Latin America===

Country music artists from the U.S. have seen crossover with Latin American audiences, particularly in Mexico. Country music artists from throughout the U.S. have recorded renditions of Mexican folk songs, including &quot;El Rey&quot; which was performed on George Strait&#x27;s &quot;Twang&quot; album and during Al Hurricane&#x27;s tribute concert. American Latin pop crossover musicians, like Lorenzo Antonio&#x27;s &quot;Ranchera Jam&quot; have also combined Mexican songs with country songs in a New Mexico music style.

While Tejano and New Mexico music is typically thought of as being Spanish language, the genres have also had charting musicians focused on English language music. During the 1970s, singer-songwriter Freddy Fender had two #1 country music singles, that were popular throughout North America, with &quot;Before the Next Teardrop Falls&quot; and &quot;Wasted Days and Wasted Nights&quot;. Notable songs which have been influenced by Hispanic and Latin culture as performed by US country music artists include Marty Robbins&#x27; &quot;El Paso&quot; trilogy, Willie Nelson and Merle Haggard covering the Townes Van Zandt song &quot;Pancho and Lefty&quot;, &quot;Toes&quot; by Zac Brown Band, and &quot;Sangria&quot; by Blake Shelton.
Regional Mexican is a radio format featuring many of Mexico&#x27;s versions of country music. It includes a number of different styles, usually named after their region of origin. One specific song style, the Canción Ranchera, or simply Ranchera, literally meaning &quot;ranch song&quot;, found its origins in the Mexican countryside and was first popularized with Mariachi. It has since also become popular with Grupero, Banda, Norteño, Tierra Caliente, Duranguense and other regional Mexican styles. The Corrido, a different song style with a similar history, is also performed in many other regional styles, and is most related to the western style of the United States and Canada. Other song styles performed in regional Mexican music include Ballads, Cumbias, Boleros, among others. Country en Español (Country in Spanish) is also popular in Mexico. Some Mexican artists began performing country songs in Spanish during the 1970s, and the genre became prominent mainly in the northern regions of the country during the 1980s. A Country en Español popularity boom also reached the central regions of Mexico during the 1990s. For most of its history, Country en Español mainly resembled Neotraditional country. However, in more modern times, some artists have incorporated influences from other country music subgenres.

In Argentina, on the last weekend of September, the yearly San Pedro Country Music Festival takes place in the town of San Pedro, Buenos Aires. The festival features bands from different places in Argentina, as well as international artists from Brazil, Uruguay, Chile, Peru and the U.S.

===United Kingdom===
Country music is popular in the United Kingdom, although somewhat less so than in other English-speaking countries. There are some British country music acts and publications. Although radio stations devoted to country are among the most popular in other Anglophone nations, none of the top ten most-listened-to stations in the UK are country stations, and national broadcaster BBC Radio does not offer a full-time country station (BBC Radio 2 Country, a &quot;pop-up&quot; station, operated four days each year between 2015 and 2017). The BBC does offer a country show on BBC Radio 2 each week hosted by Bob Harris.

The most successful British country music act of the 21st century are Ward Thomas and the Shires. In 2015, the Shires&#x27; album &quot;Brave&quot;, became the first UK country act ever to chart in the Top 10 of the UK Albums Chart and they became the first UK country act to receive an award from the American Country Music Association. In 2016, Ward Thomas then became the first UK country act to hit number 1 in the UK Albums Chart with their album &quot;Cartwheels&quot;.

There is the C2C: Country to Country festival held every year, and for many years there was a festival at Wembley Arena, which was broadcast on the BBC, the International Festivals of Country Music, promoted by Mervyn Conn, held at the venue between 1969 and 1991. The shows were later taken into Europe, and featured such stars as Johnny Cash, Dolly Parton, Tammy Wynette, David Allan Coe, Emmylou Harris, Boxcar Willie, Johnny Russell and Jerry Lee Lewis. A handful of country musicians had even greater success in mainstream British music than they did in the U.S., despite a certain amount of disdain from the music press. Britain&#x27;s largest music festival Glastonbury has featured major US country acts in recent years, such as Kenny Rogers in 2013 and Dolly Parton in 2014.
From within the UK, few country musicians achieved widespread mainstream success. Many British singers who performed the occasional country songs are of other genres. Tom Jones, by this point near the end of his peak success as a pop singer, had a string of country hits in the late 1970s and early 1980s. The Bee Gees had some fleeting success in the genre, with one country hit as artists (&quot;Rest Your Love on Me&quot;) and a major hit as songwriters (&quot;Islands in the Stream&quot;); Barry Gibb, the band&#x27;s usual lead singer and last surviving member, acknowledged that country music was a major influence on the band&#x27;s style. Singer Engelbert Humperdinck, while charting only once in the U.S. country top 40 with &quot;After the Lovin&#x27;&quot;, achieved widespread success on both the U.S. and British pop charts with his covers of Nashville country ballads such as &quot;Release Me&quot;, &quot;Am I That Easy to Forget&quot; and &quot;There Goes My Everything&quot;. Welsh singer Bonnie Tyler initially started her career making country records, and in 1978 her single &quot;It&#x27;s a Heartache&quot; reached number four on the UK Singles Chart. In 2013, Tyler returned to her roots, blending the country elements of her early work with the rock of her successful material on her album &quot;Rocks and Honey&quot; which featured a duet with Vince Gill. The songwriting tandem of Roger Cook and Roger Greenaway wrote a number of country hits, in addition to their widespread success in pop songwriting; Cook is notable for being the only Briton to be inducted into the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame.

A niche country subgenre popular in the West Country is Scrumpy and Western, which consists mostly of novelty songs and comedy music recorded there (its name comes from scrumpy, an alcoholic beverage). A primarily local interest, the largest Scrumpy and Western hit in the UK and Ireland was &quot;The Combine Harvester&quot;, which pioneered the genre and reached number one in both the UK and Ireland; Fred Wedlock had a number-six hit in 1981 with &quot;The Oldest Swinger in Town&quot;. In 1975, comedian Billy Connolly topped the UK Singles Chart with &quot;D.I.V.O.R.C.E.&quot;, a parody of the Tammy Wynette song &quot;D-I-V-O-R-C-E&quot;.
The British Country Music Festival is an annual three-day festival held in the seaside resort of Blackpool. It uniquely promotes artists from the United Kingdom and Ireland to celebrate the impact that Celtic and British settlers to America had on the origins of country music. Past headline artists have included Amy Wadge, Ward Thomas, Tom Odell, Nathan Carter, Lisa McHugh, Catherine McGrath, Wildwood Kin, The Wandering Hearts and Henry Priestman.

===Ireland===
In Ireland, Country and Irish is a music genre that combines traditional Irish folk music with US country music. Television channel TG4 began a quest for Ireland&#x27;s next country star called &quot;Glór Tíre&quot;, translated as &quot;Country Voice&quot;. It is now in its sixth season and is one of TG4&#x27;s most-watched TV shows. Over the past ten years, country and gospel recording artist James Kilbane has reached multi-platinum success with his mix of Christian and traditional country influenced albums. James Kilbane like many other Irish artists is today working closer with Nashville. Daniel O&#x27;Donnell achieved international success with his brand of music crossing country, Irish folk and European easy listening, earning a strong following among older women both in the British Isles and in North America. A recent success in the Irish arena has been Crystal Swing.

===Japan and Asia===

In Japan, country and western music first developed a following before World War II, but many Japanese became exposed to it after the war due to the Far East Network. One of the first Japanese western acts was Biji Kuroda &amp; The Chuck Wagon Boys, other vintage artists include Jimmie Tokita and His Mountain Playboys, The Blue Rangers, Wagon Aces, and Tomi Fujiyama. While the majority of these musicians sung in English, a few of them sang in the Japanese language, such as Fujiyama and Kazuya Kosaka. The genre continues to have a dedicated following in Japan, thanks to Charlie Nagatani, Katsuoshi Suga, J.T. Kanehira, Dicky Kitano, and Manami Sekiya. Country and western venues in Japan include the former annual Country Gold which were put together by Charlie Nagatani, and the modern honky tonks at Little Texas in Tokyo and Armadillo in Nagoya.

In India, there is an annual concert festival called &quot;Blazing Guitars&quot; held in Chennai brings together Anglo-Indian musicians from all over the country (including some who have emigrated to places like Australia). The year 2003 brought home-grown Indian, Bobby Cash to the forefront of the country music culture in India when he became India&#x27;s first international country music artist to chart singles in Australia.

In the Philippines, country music has found their way into Cordilleran way of life, which often compares the Igorot lifestyle to that of US cowboys. The Philippines was once a US Commonwealth from 1900 to 1946, and country music began to be exported to the islands in the early 20th centurty. Baguio City has an FM station that caters to country music, DZWR 99.9 Country, which is part of the Catholic Media Network. Bombo Radyo Baguio has a segment on its Sunday slot for Igorot, Ilocano and country music. And as of recently, DWUB occasionally plays country music. Many country music musicians tour the Philippines. Original Pinoy Music has influences from country.

===Other international country music===

Tom Roland, from the Country Music Association International, explains country music&#x27;s global popularity: &quot;In this respect, at least, Country Music listeners around the globe have something in common with those in the United States. In Germany, for instance, Rohrbach identifies three general groups that gravitate to the genre: people intrigued with the US cowboy icon, middle-aged fans who seek an alternative to harder rock music and younger listeners drawn to the pop-influenced sound that underscores many current Country hits.&quot; One of the first US people to perform country music abroad was George Hamilton IV. He was the first country musician to perform in the Soviet Union; he also toured in Australia and the Middle East. He was deemed the &quot;International Ambassador of Country Music&quot; for his contributions to the globalization of country music. Johnny Cash, Emmylou Harris, Keith Urban, and Dwight Yoakam have also made numerous international tours. The Country Music Association undertakes various initiatives to promote country music internationally.

====Middle East====
In Iran, country music has appeared in recent years. According to &quot;Melody Music Magazine&quot;, the pioneer of country music in Iran is the English-speaking country music band Dream Rovers, whose founder, singer and songwriter is Erfan Rezayatbakhsh (elf). The band was formed in 2007 in Tehran, and during this time they have been trying to introduce and popularize country music in Iran by releasing two studio albums and performing live at concerts, despite the difficulties that the Islamic regime in Iran makes for bands that are active in the western music field.

Musician Toby Keith performed alongside Saudi Arabian folk musician Rabeh Sager in 2017. This concert was similar to the performances of Jazz ambassadors that performed distinctively American style music internationally.

====Continental Europe====
In Sweden, Rednex rose to stardom combining country music with electro-pop in the 1990s. In 1994, the group had a worldwide hit with their version of the traditional Southern tune &quot;Cotton-Eyed Joe&quot;. Artists popularizing more traditional country music in Sweden have been Ann-Louise Hanson, Hasse Andersson, Kikki Danielsson, Elisabeth Andreassen and Jill Johnson. In Poland an international country music festival, known as Piknik Country, has been organised in Mrągowo in Masuria since 1983. The number of country music artists in France has increased. Some of the most important are Liane Edwards, Annabel, Rockie Mountains, Tahiana, and Lili West. French rock and roll singer Eddy Mitchell is also inspired by Americana and country music.

In the Netherlands there are many artists producing popular country and Americana music, which is mostly in the English language, as well as Dutch country and country-like music in the Dutch language. The latter is mainly popular on the countrysides in the northern and eastern parts of the Netherlands and is less associated with its US brethren, although it sounds sometimes very similar. Well-known popular artists mainly performing in English are Waylon, Danny Vera, Ilse DeLange, Douwe Bob and Henk Wijngaard.

Norway had a significant country scene from the late 1970s to the late 2000s, with bands and artists including Hellbillies, Bjøro Håland, Terje Tysland, Vassendgutane, Øystein Sunde, and Rotlaus. The scene and its concerts were considered mostly a rural scene, such that most bands sang in dialects, but occasional songs made it to national fame even in the larger cities. The songs occasionally used inspirations from rock music, Norwegian folk music, and polka, but remained recognisable as country music.

==Performers and shows==
===US cable television===
Several US television networks are at least partly devoted to the genre: Country Music Television (CMT) (the first channel devoted to country music) and CMT Music (both owned by Paramount Global), RFD-TV and The Cowboy Channel (both owned by Rural Media Group), Heartland (owned by Get After It Media), Circle Country (a joint venture of the &quot;Grand Ole Opry&quot; and Gray Television), The Country Network (owned by TCN Country, LLC), and Country Music Channel (the country-oriented sister channel of California Music Channel).

The Nashville Network (TNN) was launched in 1983 as a channel devoted to country music, and later added sports and outdoor lifestyle programming. It actually launched just two days after CMT. In 2000, after TNN and CMT fell under the same corporate ownership, TNN was stripped of its country format and rebranded as &quot;The National Network&quot;, then &quot;Spike TV&quot; in 2003, &quot;Spike&quot; in 2006, and finally Paramount Network in 2018. TNN was later revived from 2012 to 2013 after Jim Owens Entertainment (the company responsible for prominent TNN hosts Crook &amp; Chase) acquired the trademark and licensed it to Luken Communications; that channel renamed itself Heartland after Luken was embroiled in an unrelated dispute that left the company bankrupt.

Great American Country (GAC) was launched in 1995, also as a country music-oriented channel that would later add lifestyle programming pertaining to the American Heartland and South. In Spring 2021, GAC&#x27;s then-owner, Discovery, Inc. divested the network to GAC Media, which also acquired the equestrian network Ride TV. Later, in the summer of that year, GAC Media relaunched Great American Country as GAC Family, a family-oriented general entertainment network, while Ride TV was relaunched as GAC Living, a network devoted to programming pertaining to lifestyles of the American South. The GAC acronym which once stood for &quot;Great American Country&quot; now stands for &quot;Great American Channels&quot;.

===Canadian television===

Only one television channel was dedicated to country music in Canada: CMT owned by Corus Entertainment (90%) and Viacom (10%). However, the lifting of strict genre licensing restrictions saw the network remove the last of its music programming at the end of August 2017 for a schedule of generic off-network family sitcoms, Cancom-compliant lifestyle programming, and reality programming. In the past, the current-day Cottage Life network saw some country focus as Country Canada and later, CBC Country Canada before that network drifted into an alternate network for overflow CBC content as Bold. Stingray Music continues to maintain several country music audio-only channels on cable radio.

In the past, country music had an extensive presence, especially on the Canadian national broadcaster, CBC Television. The show &quot;Don Messer&#x27;s Jubilee&quot; significantly affected country music in Canada; for instance, it was the program that launched Anne Murray&#x27;s career. Gordie Tapp&#x27;s &quot;Country Hoedown&quot; and its successor, &quot;The Tommy Hunter Show&quot;, ran for a combined 36 years on the CBC, from 1956 to 1992; in its last nine years on air, the U.S. cable network TNN carried Hunter&#x27;s show.

===Australian cable television===
The only network dedicated to country music in Australia was the Country Music Channel owned by Foxtel. It ceased operations in June 2020 and was replaced by CMT (owned by Network 10 parent company Paramount Networks UK &amp; Australia).

===British digital television===
One music video channel is dedicated to country music in the United Kingdom: Music &amp; Memories, owned by Canis Media. Music &amp; Memories, formerly known as Keep it Country and Spotlight, features a mix of country-western, pop oldies and Celtic folk music.

===Festivals===
==Culture==
=== Race in modern country music ===

The history of country music is complex, and the genre draws from influences from both African and European musical traditions. Despite this multicultural origin, country music is today largely associated with white Americans. This has been attributed to the efforts to segregate the music industry by record labels, beginning in the 1920s. However, because country music is a wide genre, subgenres including Indian and Hispanic country, have existed since the early 1970s. Furthermore, one of the first artists to perform at the Grand Ole Opry, a famous country music show, was DeFord Bailey, who was African-American. African-American rapper Lil Nas X, whose breakout song Old Town Road, a mixture of country and rap, has achieved widespread success. His aforementioned song topped the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Country Songs list, before controversially being removed, sparking a debate around whether the removal was racially motivated&quot;. Billboard&quot; denied these allegations, stating that the decision was purely based on musical composition.

The close association of conservative values and contemporary country music began as a counter-reaction to the anti-war movement of the 1960s. Prior to this, virtually all country music, up until that point referred to as &quot;hillbilly music&quot;, lacked specific political alignment, and was instead focused on everyday problems and angst of the working class. Merle Haggard&#x27;s 1969 album Okie from Muskogee brought a staunchly political, conservative take on country music, which proved popular. Republican president Richard Nixon further cemented this conservative musical association during his years in office, by frequently hosting country musicians, declaring October 1970 to be country music month, and by politically pandering to audiences where country music was popular.

Black country-music artist Mickey Guyton had been included among the nominees for the 2021 award. Guyton has expressed bewilderment that, despite substantial coverage by online platforms like Spotify and Apple Music, her music, like that of Valerie June, another black musician who embraces aspects of country in her Appalachian- and Gospel-tinged work and who has been embraced by international music audiences, is still effectively ignored by American broadcast country-music radio. Guyton&#x27;s 2021 album &quot;Remember Her Name&quot; in part references the case of black health-care professional Breonna Taylor, who was killed in her home by police.

In 2023, &quot;Try That in a Small Town&quot; by Jason Aldean became the subject of widespread controversy and media attention following the release of its music video. Tennessee state representative Justin Jones referred to the song as a &quot;heinous vile racist song&quot; which attempts to normalize &quot;racist, violence, vigilantism and white nationalism&quot;. Others understood the lyrics to be supportive of lynchings and sundown towns. Aldean himself responded to the criticism by stating that the song at no point made any references to race, nor did he believe that such interpretations were accurate.

In 2024, Beyoncé published her country music-inspired eighth studio album &quot;Cowboy Carter&quot;, a project conceptualized as a journey through a reinvention of Americana, spotlighting the overlooked contributions of Black pioneers to American musical and cultural history. The album had a cultural and commercial impact on black country artists, being praised by critics and artists belonging to the music genre.

==See also==
* American Country Countdown Awards
* Canadian Country Music Association
* CMT Music Awards
* Country (identity)
* Country and Irish
* Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum
* Country-western dance
* Culture of the Southern United States
* Music genre
* List of country music performers
* List of RPM number-one country singles
* Music of the United States
* Pop music
* Western Music Association
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* Thomas S. Johnson (1981) &quot;That Ain&#x27;t Country: The Distinctiveness of Commercial Western Music&quot; JEMF Quarterly. Vol. 17, No. 62. Summer, 1981. pp 75–84.
* 
* Bill Legere (1977). &quot;Record Collectors Guide of Country LPs&quot;. Limited ed. Mississauga, Ont.: W.J. Legere. 269, 25, 29, 2 p., thrice perforated and looseleaf. Without ISBN
* Bill Legere ([1977]). &quot;E[lectrical] T[anscription]s: Transcription Library of Bill Legere&quot;. Mississauga, Ont.: B. Legere. 3 vols., each of which is thrice perforated and looseleaf. N.B.: Vol. 1–2, Country Artists—vol. 2, Pop Artists. Without ISBN
* 
* Diane Pecknold (ed.) &quot;Hidden in the Mix: The African American Presence in Country Music.&quot; Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2013.
* 
==External links==

* The Country Music Association – Nashville, Tennessee(CMA)
* Western Music Association (WMA) 
* Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum – Nashville, Tennessee
* Grand Ole Opry – Nashville, Tennessee
* Irish country music 
* Country Music Festivals Ontario Website
* Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame Foundation
* TIME Archive of country music&#x27;s progression
* Xroad.virginia.edu, alt country from American Studies at the University of Virginia
* Largest collection of online Country music radio stations
* Kingwood Kowboy&#x27;s History Of Country Music
* A Treasure Trove for Country Music Collectors. The British Archive of Country Music Records, BACM, is dedicated to the preservation of traditional country music</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="0" end="7" title="Country music" label="Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="21" end="40" title="Country music" label="country and western"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="47" end="58" title="popular music" label="music genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="126" end="140" title="American South" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="145" end="158" title="American southwest" label="the Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="235" end="242" title="Narrative" label="stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034963" start="249" end="262" title="Working class in the United States" label="working-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191714" start="267" end="278" title="blue-collar worker" label="blue-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="326" end="332" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="363" end="379" title="Honky-tonk#Music" label="honky-tonk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="477" end="482" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="485" end="491" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="494" end="503" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="524" end="530" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="542" end="550" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="552" end="560" title="electric guitar" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617520" start="562" end="567" title="steel guitar" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051615" start="573" end="582" title="resonator guitar" label="resonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541229" start="643" end="662" title="American folk music" label="American folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q972424" start="672" end="686" title="old-time music" label="old-time music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780884" start="691" end="708" title="Appalachian music" label="Appalachian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397325" start="743" end="750" title="Music of Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378776" start="752" end="757" title="Music of Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071834" start="763" end="777" title="Music of Hawaii" label="Hawaiian music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="824" end="835" title="Jazz scale#Blues scale" label="Blues modes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="841" end="852" title="blues music" label="blues music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448" start="931" end="940" title="hillbilly" label="hillbilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357284" start="996" end="1006" title="popularity" label="popularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425111" start="1049" end="1062" title="Western music (North America)" label="western music"/>
<link wikidata="Q14493900" start="1196" end="1209" title="Texas country" label="Texas country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422697" start="1211" end="1219" title="Red dirt (music)" label="red dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="1238" end="1254" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican American"/>
<link wikidata="Q431415" start="1259" end="1265" title="Tejano music" label="Tejano"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="1270" end="1286" title="New Mexico music" label="New Mexico music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1330" end="1351" title="Indigenous music of North America#Southwest" label="indigenous traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="1634" end="1656" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="1661" end="1687" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745518" start="1708" end="1730" title="American popular music" label="American popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908379" start="1833" end="1847" title="Bill C. Malone" label="Bill C. Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="1958" end="1979" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139046" start="1988" end="2014" title="Southeastern United States" label="Southeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="2028" end="2038" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2058" end="2064" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="2073" end="2092" title="Mediterranean Basin" label="Mediterranean Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780884" start="2150" end="2167" title="Appalachian music" label="Appalachian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="2207" end="2224" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="2229" end="2238" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026089" start="2293" end="2304" title="Cajun music" label="Cajun music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="2352" end="2367" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="2369" end="2386" title="American frontier" label="American frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="2392" end="2402" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662072" start="2440" end="2455" title="Indigenous music of North America" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397325" start="2457" end="2464" title="Music of Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q178521" start="2470" end="2476" title="cowboy" label="cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="2504" end="2520" title="New Mexico music" label="New Mexico music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425111" start="2544" end="2557" title="Western music (North America)" label="western music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="2646" end="2658" title="Asia-Pacific" label="Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617520" start="2664" end="2676" title="steel guitar" label="steel guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071834" start="2726" end="2741" title="music of Hawaii" label="music of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q98560886" start="2796" end="2815" title="Concurrent resolution" label="formally recognized"/>
<link wikidata="Q917821" start="2816" end="2834" title="Bristol, Tennessee" label="Bristol, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969120" start="2905" end="2931" title="Bristol sessions" label="Bristol recording sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129004" start="2983" end="3017" title="Birthplace of Country Music Museum" label="Birthplace of Country Music Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268230" start="3078" end="3099" title="Johnson City sessions" label="Johnson City sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q55316148" start="3180" end="3213" title="Mountain City Fiddlers Convention" label="Mountain City Fiddlers Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360486" start="3308" end="3329" title="Great Smoky Mountains" label="Great Smoky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177517" start="3442" end="3468" title="Country music in Atlanta" label="Atlanta&amp;#x27;s music scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q347039" start="3546" end="3581" title="Gid Tanner" label="James Gideon &amp;quot;Gid&amp;quot; Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523075" start="3720" end="3735" title="Skillet Lickers" label="Skillet Lickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q174165" start="3757" end="3767" title="Innovation" label="innovative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099296" start="3851" end="3867" title="Clayton McMichen" label="Clayton McMichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013096" start="3888" end="3899" title="Dan Hornsby" label="Dan Hornsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153098" start="3910" end="3923" title="Riley Puckett" label="Riley Puckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757254" start="4001" end="4013" title="Okeh Records" label="Okeh Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411165" start="4055" end="4080" title="Fiddlin&amp;#x27; John Carson" label="Fiddlin&amp;#x27; John Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="4111" end="4127" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408631" start="4176" end="4194" title="Samantha Bumgarner" label="Samantha Bumgarner"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="4209" end="4227" title="RCA Victor Records" label="RCA Victor Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q366358" start="4280" end="4294" title="Jimmie Rodgers (country singer)" label="Jimmie Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412029" start="4404" end="4417" title="Carter Family" label="Carter Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098695" start="4771" end="4785" title="Grand Ole Opry" label="Grand Ole Opry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955790" start="4819" end="4822" title="WSM (AM)" label="WSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="4826" end="4835" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q342723" start="5032" end="5042" title="Gene Autry" label="Gene Autry"/>
<link wikidata="Q206181" start="5106" end="5119" title="Hank Williams" label="Hank Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q888326" start="5121" end="5130" title="Bob Wills" label="Bob Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="5175" end="5187" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q906647" start="5241" end="5244" title="Dixieland" label="hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623969" start="5245" end="5256" title="string band" label="string band"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="5289" end="5307" title="Western (genre)" label="Hollywood westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="5332" end="5336" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730388" start="5399" end="5412" title="western swing" label="western swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q212952" start="5554" end="5560" title="boogie-woogie" label="boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="5606" end="5619" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386971" start="5626" end="5641" title="Johnny Barfield" label="Johnny Barfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5736" end="5748" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="5805" end="5814" title="Bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q170042" start="5835" end="5846" title="Bill Monroe" label="Bill Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346706" start="5859" end="5871" title="Lester Flatt" label="Lester Flatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q74032" start="5876" end="5888" title="Earl Scruggs" label="Earl Scruggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q455773" start="5909" end="5918" title="Roy Acuff" label="Roy Acuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="5942" end="5954" title="Gospel music" label="Gospel music"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="6006" end="6021" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="6036" end="6053" title="American frontier" label="American frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="6067" end="6093" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104194" start="6098" end="6113" title="Northern Mexico" label="Northern Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="6156" end="6166" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="6168" end="6176" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="6182" end="6187" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q719120" start="6221" end="6237" title="classical guitar" label="classical guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="6239" end="6250" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056351" start="6252" end="6257" title="dobro" label="dobro"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="6313" end="6328" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="6331" end="6338" title="trumpet" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="6341" end="6349" title="Keyboard instrument" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673920" start="6395" end="6405" title="tack piano" label="tack piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="6408" end="6413" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11404" start="6420" end="6424" title="drum" label="drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="6462" end="6475" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="6490" end="6500" title="rockabilly" label="rockabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q321354" start="6519" end="6531" title="Sam Phillips" label="Sam Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432130" start="6533" end="6545" title="Norman Petty" label="Norman Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932987" start="6551" end="6560" title="Bob Keane" label="Bob Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="6577" end="6590" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977" start="6592" end="6603" title="Buddy Holly" label="Buddy Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q202729" start="6605" end="6620" title="Jerry Lee Lewis" label="Jerry Lee Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q309725" start="6622" end="6636" title="Ritchie Valens" label="Ritchie Valens"/>
<link wikidata="Q310339" start="6638" end="6650" title="Carl Perkins" label="Carl Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q188426" start="6652" end="6663" title="Roy Orbison" label="Roy Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="6669" end="6680" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751782" start="6809" end="6824" title="Nashville sound" label="Nashville sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="6894" end="6914" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q273080" start="6916" end="6927" title="Patsy Cline" label="Patsy Cline"/>
<link wikidata="Q362435" start="6932" end="6942" title="Jim Reeves" label="Jim Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q919565" start="7185" end="7198" title="Marty Robbins" label="Marty Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="7275" end="7291" title="New Mexico music" label="New Mexico music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840946" start="7299" end="7311" title="Al Hurricane" label="Al Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q211418" start="7457" end="7473" title="British Invasion" label="British Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q840407" start="7586" end="7596" title="enthusiasm" label="enthusiasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q613408" start="7694" end="7706" title="country rock" label="country rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q964658" start="7756" end="7770" title="outlaw country" label="outlaw country"/>
<link wikidata="Q804401" start="7789" end="7806" title="Bakersfield sound" label="Bakersfield sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280497" start="7812" end="7823" title="country pop" label="country pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751782" start="7842" end="7856" title="Nashville sound" label="countrypolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217191" start="7873" end="7882" title="soft rock" label="soft rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460" start="7923" end="7934" title="John Denver" label="John Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q14493900" start="8045" end="8058" title="Texas country music" label="Texas country"/>
<link wikidata="Q431415" start="8063" end="8075" title="Tejano music" label="Tejano music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452648" start="8115" end="8129" title="Freddie Fender" label="Freddie Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q458480" start="8571" end="8589" title="Neotraditional country" label="neotraditionalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q379033" start="8594" end="8609" title="stadium rock" label="stadium country"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="8827" end="8831" title="September 11 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="8911" end="8921" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q389870" start="9059" end="9065" title="Lady A" label="Lady A"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644642" start="9067" end="9087" title="Florida Georgia Line" label="Florida Georgia Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q215546" start="9089" end="9105" title="Carrie Underwood" label="Carrie Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="9111" end="9123" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="9125" end="9132" title="Hip hop music" label="Hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706919" start="9191" end="9202" title="country rap" label="country rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714258" start="9367" end="9384" title="The Arkansas Traveler (song)" label="Arkansas Traveler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177219" start="9401" end="9420" title="Turkey in the Straw" label="Turkey in the Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281246" start="9461" end="9481" title="Eck Robertson" label="A.C. (Eck) Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="9547" end="9563" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411165" start="9806" end="9831" title="Fiddlin&amp;#x27; John Carson" label="Fiddlin&amp;#x27; John Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747961" start="9843" end="9871" title="The Little Old Log Cabin in the Lane" label="Little Log Cabin in the Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757254" start="9882" end="9894" title="Okeh Records" label="Okeh Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q704781" start="9914" end="9928" title="Vernon Dalhart" label="Vernon Dalhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312009" start="10006" end="10025" title="Wreck of the Old 97" label="Wreck of the Old 97"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408631" start="10162" end="10180" title="Samantha Bumgarner" label="Samantha Bumgarner"/>
<link wikidata="Q41923" start="10522" end="10527" title="yodel" label="yodel"/>
<link wikidata="Q720208" start="10530" end="10544" title="Cliff Carlisle" label="Cliff Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153098" start="10628" end="10641" title="Riley Puckett" label="Riley Puckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293399" start="10643" end="10657" title="Don Richardson (musician)" label="Don Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411165" start="10659" end="10684" title="Fiddlin&amp;#x27; John Carson" label="Fiddlin&amp;#x27; John Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492614" start="10686" end="10702" title="Uncle Dave Macon" label="Uncle Dave Macon"/>
<link wikidata="Q617475" start="10704" end="10714" title="Al Hopkins" label="Al Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356526" start="10716" end="10734" title="Ernest Stoneman" label="Ernest V. Stoneman"/>
<link wikidata="Q884114" start="10736" end="10753" title="Blind Alfred Reed" label="Blind Alfred Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066976" start="10755" end="10800" title="Charlie Poole and the North Carolina Ramblers" label="Charlie Poole and the North Carolina Ramblers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523075" start="10805" end="10824" title="the Skillet Lickers" label="the Skillet Lickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617520" start="10830" end="10842" title="steel guitar" label="steel guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443244" start="10932" end="10944" title="Frank Ferera" label="Frank Ferera"/>
<link wikidata="Q366358" start="10965" end="10979" title="Jimmie Rodgers (country singer)" label="Jimmie Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412029" start="10988" end="11001" title="Carter Family" label="Carter Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q505834" start="11070" end="11092" title="Scott County, Virginia" label="Scott County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q882254" start="11118" end="11131" title="sight reading" label="sight reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q159563" start="11165" end="11172" title="solfege" label="solfege"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969120" start="11211" end="11237" title="Bristol sessions" label="historic recording session"/>
<link wikidata="Q917821" start="11241" end="11259" title="Bristol, Tennessee" label="Bristol, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129732" start="11286" end="11296" title="Ralph Peer" label="Ralph Peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q501874" start="11366" end="11392" title="O Brother, Where Art Thou?" label="O Brother, Where Art Thou?"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930030" start="11595" end="11605" title="Blue yodel" label="Blue Yodel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721455" start="12014" end="12032" title="The Carter Sisters" label="The Carter Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q233253" start="12047" end="12051" title="June Carter Cash" label="June"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040657" start="12080" end="12090" title="Carl Smith (musician)" label="Carl Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="12104" end="12115" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="12254" end="12270" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098695" start="12527" end="12541" title="Grand Ole Opry" label="Grand Ole Opry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955790" start="12575" end="12578" title="WSM (AM)" label="WSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="12582" end="12591" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492614" start="12680" end="12696" title="Uncle Dave Macon" label="Uncle Dave Macon"/>
<link wikidata="Q455773" start="12698" end="12707" title="Roy Acuff" label="Roy Acuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179504" start="12746" end="12759" title="DeFord Bailey" label="DeFord Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907524" start="12911" end="12924" title="Moon Mullican" label="Moon Mullican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730388" start="12946" end="12959" title="western swing" label="western swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="13003" end="13013" title="rockabilly" label="rockabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q721943" start="13054" end="13065" title="Eddy Arnold" label="Eddy Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246757" start="13118" end="13134" title="Jenny Lou Carson" label="Jenny Lou Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12341515" start="13399" end="13413" title="singing cowboy" label="singing cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q342723" start="13433" end="13443" title="Gene Autry" label="Gene Autry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414335" start="13449" end="13469" title="Sons of the Pioneers" label="Sons of the Pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="Q367129" start="13475" end="13485" title="Roy Rogers" label="Roy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q272845" start="13749" end="13762" title="Patsy Montana" label="Patsy Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q888326" start="13972" end="13981" title="Bob Wills" label="Bob Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="14026" end="14038" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q906647" start="14092" end="14095" title="Dixieland" label="hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623969" start="14096" end="14107" title="string band" label="string band"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="14140" end="14158" title="Western (genre)" label="Hollywood westerns"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="14183" end="14187" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730388" start="14250" end="14263" title="western swing" label="western swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101089" start="14265" end="14277" title="Cliff Bruner" label="Cliff Bruner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907524" start="14279" end="14292" title="Moon Mullican" label="Moon Mullican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531285" start="14294" end="14306" title="Milton Brown" label="Milton Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q365403" start="14311" end="14324" title="Adolph Hofner" label="Adolph Hofner"/>
<link wikidata="Q366469" start="14366" end="14378" title="Spade Cooley" label="Spade Cooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q321178" start="14383" end="14395" title="Tex Williams" label="Tex Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q207378" start="14502" end="14510" title="big band" label="big band"/>
<link wikidata="Q888326" start="14735" end="14749" title="Texas Playboys" label="Texas Playboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872224" start="14964" end="14981" title="Louisiana Hayride" label="Louisiana Hayride"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="15205" end="15220" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q363822" start="15265" end="15277" title="Arthur &amp;quot;Guitar Boogie&amp;quot; Smith" label="Arthur Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616720" start="15359" end="15372" title="Guitar Boogie (song)" label="Guitar Boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q210278" start="15563" end="15569" title="Gibson Guitar Corporation" label="Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061402" start="15574" end="15581" title="Gretsch" label="Gretsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q175391" start="15623" end="15629" title="Fender Musical Instruments Corporation" label="Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q212952" start="15827" end="15833" title="boogie-woogie" label="boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="15879" end="15892" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386971" start="15899" end="15914" title="Johnny Barfield" label="Johnny Barfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184543" start="16143" end="16163" title="the Delmore Brothers" label="the Delmore Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="16287" end="16297" title="rockabilly" label="rockabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q363822" start="16308" end="16346" title="Arthur &amp;quot;Guitar Boogie&amp;quot; Smith" label="Arthur &amp;quot;Guitar Boogie&amp;quot; Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616720" start="16430" end="16443" title="Guitar Boogie (song)" label="Guitar Boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907524" start="16570" end="16583" title="Moon Mullican" label="Moon Mullican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922029" start="16585" end="16598" title="Merrill Moore (musician)" label="Merrill Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q963827" start="16603" end="16623" title="Tennessee Ernie Ford" label="Tennessee Ernie Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16793" end="16805" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="16858" end="16867" title="Bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q170042" start="16885" end="16896" title="Bill Monroe" label="Bill Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346706" start="16909" end="16921" title="Lester Flatt" label="Lester Flatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q74032" start="16926" end="16938" title="Earl Scruggs" label="Earl Scruggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q170042" start="17038" end="17049" title="Bill Monroe" label="Bill Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="17107" end="17119" title="Gospel music" label="Gospel music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135973" start="17202" end="17211" title="Red Foley" label="Red Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919234" start="17318" end="17337" title="Peace in the Valley" label="Peace in the Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="17532" end="17541" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056351" start="17811" end="17816" title="dobro" label="dobro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708334" start="17923" end="17931" title="Texhomex" label="Texhomex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="17945" end="17962" title="Texas" label="&amp;quot;Tex&amp;quot;as"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="17964" end="17984" title="Oklahoma" label="Okla&amp;quot;ho&amp;quot;ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="17990" end="18012" title="New Mexico" label="New &amp;quot;Mex&amp;quot;ico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627155" start="18033" end="18043" title="Honky tonk music" label="honky tonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q727634" start="18087" end="18095" title="ranchera" label="ranchera"/>
<link wikidata="Q888326" start="18217" end="18226" title="Bob Wills" label="Bob Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423868" start="18517" end="18526" title="Al Dexter" label="Al Dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3905803" start="18600" end="18624" title="Pistol Packin&amp;#x27; Mama" label="Pistol Packin&amp;#x27; Mama"/>
<link wikidata="Q963142" start="18732" end="18743" title="Ernest Tubb" label="Ernest Tubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q272913" start="18745" end="18756" title="Kitty Wells" label="Kitty Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328312" start="18803" end="18813" title="Ted Daffan" label="Ted Daffan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430397" start="18815" end="18828" title="Floyd Tillman" label="Floyd Tillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883210" start="18834" end="18858" title="Maddox Brothers and Rose" label="Maddox Brothers and Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347215" start="18860" end="18874" title="Lefty Frizzell" label="Lefty Frizzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q206181" start="18879" end="18892" title="Hank Williams" label="Hank Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="19100" end="19113" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q202729" start="19115" end="19130" title="Jerry Lee Lewis" label="Jerry Lee Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921" start="19132" end="19143" title="Chuck Berry" label="Chuck Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q208871" start="19148" end="19158" title="Ike Turner" label="Ike Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q508202" start="19225" end="19237" title="George Jones" label="George Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347695" start="19239" end="19250" title="Webb Pierce" label="Webb Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q342723" start="19645" end="19655" title="Gene Autry" label="Gene Autry"/>
<link wikidata="Q864524" start="19657" end="19670" title="Lydia Mendoza" label="Lydia Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q367129" start="19672" end="19682" title="Roy Rogers" label="Roy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q272845" start="19688" end="19701" title="Patsy Montana" label="Patsy Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="19752" end="19762" title="New Mexico music" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q14493900" start="19764" end="19777" title="Texas country music" label="Texas country"/>
<link wikidata="Q431415" start="19782" end="19794" title="Tejano music" label="Tejano music"/>
<link wikidata="Q858847" start="19810" end="19836" title="Southwestern United States" label="Southwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104194" start="19841" end="19856" title="Northern Mexico" label="Northern Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351760" start="19941" end="19948" title="El Paso (song)" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q919565" start="19974" end="19987" title="Marty Robbins" label="Marty Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928543" start="20117" end="20139" title="Michael Martin Murphey" label="Michael Martin Murphey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="20141" end="20157" title="New Mexico music" label="New Mexico music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840946" start="20166" end="20178" title="Al Hurricane" label="Al Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q17385586" start="20183" end="20198" title="Antonia Apodaca" label="Antonia Apodaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q431415" start="20200" end="20212" title="Tejano music" label="Tejano music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650524" start="20223" end="20233" title="Little Joe (singer)" label="Little Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460" start="20260" end="20271" title="John Denver" label="John Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745458" start="20379" end="20391" title="American folk music revival" label="folk revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q186472" start="20396" end="20405" title="folk rock" label="folk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q211526" start="20527" end="20536" title="the Byrds" label="the Byrds"/>
<link wikidata="Q315723" start="20969" end="20978" title="Burl Ives" label="Burl Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q359552" start="21001" end="21017" title="Gordon Lightfoot" label="Gordon Lightfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q49273" start="21276" end="21290" title="Lubbock, Texas" label="Lubbock, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980331" start="21366" end="21374" title="History of the trucking industry in the United States" label="truckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173181" start="21502" end="21513" title="Dave Dudley" label="Dave Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647715" start="21850" end="21880" title="Interstate Commerce Commission" label="Interstate Commerce Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445303" start="21934" end="21946" title="amphetamines" label="amphetamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476893" start="21948" end="21963" title="Starday Records" label="Starday Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775006" start="22078" end="22093" title="Willis Brothers" label="Willis Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q202319" start="22244" end="22254" title="Bill Haley" label="Bill Haley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914477" start="22366" end="22372" title="Bill Haley &amp;amp; His Comets" label="Comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183211" start="22477" end="22493" title="Crazy Man, Crazy" label="Crazy Man, Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q552098" start="22518" end="22539" title="Rock Around the Clock" label="Rock Around the Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="22589" end="22599" title="rockabilly" label="rockabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="22650" end="22663" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="22690" end="22695" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="22761" end="22777" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="22810" end="22823" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343509" start="22831" end="22847" title="Heartbreak Hotel" label="Heartbreak Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="22855" end="22866" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q919867" start="22874" end="22889" title="I Walk the Line" label="I Walk the Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q310339" start="22901" end="22913" title="Carl Perkins" label="Carl Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q885912" start="22921" end="22937" title="Blue Suede Shoes" label="Blue Suede Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="23398" end="23414" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043038" start="23771" end="23784" title="Ozark Jubilee" label="Ozark Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q135615" start="23834" end="23855" title="Springfield, Missouri" label="Springfield, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321468" start="23941" end="23947" title="Ozarks" label="Ozarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137230" start="24223" end="24248" title="Country Music Association" label="Country Music Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="24601" end="24621" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q72096" start="24664" end="24675" title="Chet Atkins" label="Chet Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910527" start="24677" end="24688" title="Bill Porter (sound engineer)" label="Bill Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059168" start="24690" end="24700" title="Paul Cohen (record producer)" label="Paul Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042598" start="24702" end="24714" title="Owen Bradley" label="Owen Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932409" start="24716" end="24728" title="Bob Ferguson (music)" label="Bob Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q323499" start="24740" end="24754" title="Billy Sherrill" label="Billy Sherrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997126" start="24992" end="25006" title="string section" label="string section"/>
<link wikidata="Q362435" start="25183" end="25193" title="Jim Reeves" label="Jim Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q292412" start="25195" end="25208" title="Skeeter Davis" label="Skeeter Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q464218" start="25210" end="25222" title="Connie Smith" label="Connie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410071" start="25224" end="25234" title="the Browns" label="the Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q273080" start="25236" end="25247" title="Patsy Cline" label="Patsy Cline"/>
<link wikidata="Q721943" start="25253" end="25264" title="Eddy Arnold" label="Eddy Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q969629" start="25324" end="25336" title="Floyd Cramer" label="Floyd Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q211418" start="25464" end="25480" title="British Invasion" label="British Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751782" start="25593" end="25607" title="countrypolitan" label="countrypolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q234017" start="25753" end="25766" title="Tammy Wynette" label="Tammy Wynette"/>
<link wikidata="Q163593" start="25768" end="25781" title="Lynn Anderson" label="Lynn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q563057" start="25786" end="25798" title="Charlie Rich" label="Charlie Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929135" start="25859" end="25868" title="Ray Price (musician)" label="Ray Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q919565" start="25873" end="25886" title="Marty Robbins" label="Marty Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q272931" start="26016" end="26028" title="Loretta Lynn" label="Loretta Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q183092" start="26030" end="26043" title="Merle Haggard" label="Merle Haggard"/>
<link wikidata="Q712353" start="26045" end="26055" title="Buck Owens" label="Buck Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q712139" start="26057" end="26071" title="Porter Wagoner" label="Porter Wagoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q508202" start="26073" end="26085" title="George Jones" label="George Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302274" start="26091" end="26102" title="Sonny James" label="Sonny James"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="26157" end="26168" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228847" start="26361" end="26389" title="I Can&amp;#x27;t Stop Loving You" label="I Can&amp;#x27;t Stop Loving You"/>
<link wikidata="Q860771" start="26443" end="26485" title="Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music" label="Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730388" start="26603" end="26616" title="western swing" label="western swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q49256" start="26666" end="26689" title="Bakersfield, California" label="Bakersfield, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q446406" start="26708" end="26712" title="Okie" label="Okie"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="26730" end="26739" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q888326" start="26806" end="26815" title="Bob Wills" label="Bob Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347215" start="26820" end="26834" title="Lefty Frizzell" label="Lefty Frizzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q804401" start="26864" end="26881" title="Bakersfield sound" label="Bakersfield sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q623103" start="26954" end="26964" title="Telecaster" label="Telecaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q712353" start="27202" end="27212" title="Buck Owens" label="Buck Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q183092" start="27214" end="27227" title="Merle Haggard" label="Merle Haggard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258587" start="27229" end="27242" title="Tommy Collins (country music)" label="Tommy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q713099" start="27244" end="27257" title="Dwight Yoakam" label="Dwight Yoakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494805" start="27259" end="27269" title="Gary Allan" label="Gary Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q200717" start="27275" end="27287" title="Wynn Stewart" label="Wynn Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738652" start="27322" end="27332" title="Ken Nelson (United States record producer)" label="Ken Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q537189" start="27373" end="27384" title="Rose Maddox" label="Rose Maddox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136070" start="27501" end="27512" title="Red Simpson" label="Red Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q27349305" start="27956" end="27968" title="western wear" label="western wear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138187" start="27970" end="27981" title="cowboy boot" label="cowboy boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138175" start="27988" end="27998" title="cowboy hat" label="cowboy hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="28061" end="28078" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422697" start="28145" end="28153" title="Red dirt (music)" label="Red Dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="28157" end="28165" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="28167" end="28183" title="New Mexico music" label="New Mexico music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="28187" end="28197" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q14493900" start="28208" end="28227" title="Texas country music" label="Texas country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q431415" start="28232" end="28244" title="Tejano music" label="Tejano music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="28248" end="28253" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307900" start="28498" end="28510" title="Bob Childers" label="Bob Childers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411849" start="28515" end="28527" title="Steve Ripley" label="Steve Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840946" start="28550" end="28562" title="Al Hurricane" label="Al Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153301" start="28564" end="28580" title="Al Hurricane Jr." label="Al Hurricane Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q17385586" start="28586" end="28601" title="Antonia Apodaca" label="Antonia Apodaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="28631" end="28644" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452648" start="28646" end="28660" title="Freddie Fender" label="Freddie Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702401" start="28662" end="28678" title="Johnny Rodriguez" label="Johnny Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650524" start="28684" end="28694" title="Little Joe (singer)" label="Little Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="29053" end="29057" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q438476" start="29067" end="29086" title="alternative country" label="alternative country"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="29091" end="29098" title="hip-hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706919" start="29108" end="29119" title="country rap" label="country rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q964658" start="29192" end="29206" title="Outlaw country" label="Outlaw country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422697" start="29259" end="29267" title="Red dirt (music)" label="Red Dirt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="29269" end="29279" title="New Mexico music" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q14493900" start="29281" end="29294" title="Texas country music" label="Texas country"/>
<link wikidata="Q431415" start="29296" end="29302" title="Tejano music" label="Tejano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627155" start="29308" end="29318" title="honky-tonk" label="honky-tonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="29386" end="29397" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473718" start="29416" end="29428" title="Ring of Fire (song)" label="Ring of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840946" start="29475" end="29487" title="Al Hurricane" label="Al Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650524" start="29492" end="29502" title="Little Joe (singer)" label="Little Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929135" start="29567" end="29576" title="Ray Price (musician)" label="Ray Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="29633" end="29646" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q712359" start="29651" end="29663" title="Roger Miller" label="Roger Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q964658" start="29805" end="29820" title="outlaw country" label="outlaw movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="30448" end="30461" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q979411" start="30463" end="30480" title="Jerry Jeff Walker" label="Jerry Jeff Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q552819" start="30482" end="30500" title="Hank Williams, Jr." label="Hank Williams, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q251287" start="30517" end="30532" title="Waylon Jennings" label="Waylon Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691407" start="30537" end="30544" title="Joe Ely" label="Joe Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968132" start="30590" end="30609" title="Wanted! The Outlaws" label="Wanted! The Outlaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292096" start="30740" end="30758" title="Don&amp;#x27;t You Think This Outlaw Bit&amp;#x27;s Done Got Out of Hand" label="gotten out of hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="30899" end="30910" title="Supergroup (music)" label="supergroups"/>
<link wikidata="Q261341" start="30920" end="30934" title="The Highwaymen (country supergroup)" label="The Highwaymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q367687" start="30936" end="30950" title="Texas Tornados" label="Texas Tornados"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507591" start="30956" end="30963" title="Bandido (supergroup)" label="Bandido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751782" start="31029" end="31043" title="countrypolitan" label="countrypolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217191" start="31067" end="31076" title="soft rock" label="soft rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q378988" start="31282" end="31306" title="adult contemporary music" label="adult contemporary music"/>
<link wikidata="Q162667" start="31347" end="31360" title="Glen Campbell" label="Glen Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q272253" start="31362" end="31375" title="Bobbie Gentry" label="Bobbie Gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q105460" start="31377" end="31388" title="John Denver" label="John Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q185165" start="31390" end="31408" title="Olivia Newton-John" label="Olivia Newton-John"/>
<link wikidata="Q236543" start="31410" end="31421" title="Anne Murray" label="Anne Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q706518" start="31423" end="31435" title="B. J. Thomas" label="B. J. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q815801" start="31437" end="31457" title="the Bellamy Brothers" label="the Bellamy Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q229375" start="31463" end="31477" title="Linda Ronstadt" label="Linda Ronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904567" start="31663" end="31682" title="Rocky Mountain High" label="Rocky Mountain High"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641606" start="31696" end="31720" title="Sunshine on My Shoulders" label="Sunshine on My Shoulders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134613" start="31734" end="31751" title="Annie&amp;#x27;s Song" label="Annie&amp;#x27;s Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7710433" start="31765" end="31797" title="Thank God I&amp;#x27;m a Country Boy" label="Thank God I&amp;#x27;m a Country Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966788" start="31815" end="31829" title="I&amp;#x27;m Sorry (John Denver song)" label="I&amp;#x27;m Sorry"/>
<link wikidata="Q522569" start="32182" end="32194" title="Jean Shepard" label="Jean Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="32556" end="32568" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10522333" start="32725" end="32744" title="Here You Come Again (song)" label="Here You Come Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q217160" start="32879" end="32891" title="Kenny Rogers" label="Kenny Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734124" start="33026" end="33043" title="Kenny Rogers and the First Edition" label="the First Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697256" start="33088" end="33095" title="Lucille (Kenny Rogers song)" label="Lucille"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="33438" end="33450" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137234" start="33471" end="33503" title="Country Music Association Awards" label="Country Music Association Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q434512" start="33679" end="33692" title="Crystal Gayle" label="Crystal Gayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q558582" start="33694" end="33707" title="Ronnie Milsap" label="Ronnie Milsap"/>
<link wikidata="Q292373" start="33712" end="33728" title="Barbara Mandrell" label="Barbara Mandrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="34099" end="34112" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q435679" start="34117" end="34129" title="Juice Newton" label="Juice Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q449736" start="34231" end="34248" title="Always on My Mind" label="Always on My Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810832" start="34276" end="34315" title="To All the Girls I&amp;#x27;ve Loved Before" label="To All the Girls I&amp;#x27;ve Loved Before"/>
<link wikidata="Q122003" start="34345" end="34359" title="Julio Iglesias" label="Julio Iglesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270607" start="34401" end="34416" title="Queen of Hearts (Hank DeVito song)" label="Queen of Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176192" start="34444" end="34464" title="Angel of the Morning" label="Angel of the Morning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800071" start="34563" end="34567" title="Lady (Kenny Rogers song)" label="Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q217160" start="34577" end="34589" title="Kenny Rogers" label="Kenny Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646459" start="34625" end="34631" title="9 to 5 (Dolly Parton song)" label="9 to 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="34641" end="34653" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978302" start="34661" end="34681" title="I Love a Rainy Night" label="I Love a Rainy Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282956" start="34691" end="34704" title="Eddie Rabbitt" label="Eddie Rabbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163515" start="34766" end="34787" title="Islands in the Stream (song)" label="Islands in the Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="34921" end="34929" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q989611" start="35059" end="35071" title="Endless Love (song)" label="Endless Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q36290" start="35081" end="35091" title="Diana Ross" label="Diana Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q26695" start="35096" end="35109" title="Lionel Richie" label="Lionel Richie"/>
<link wikidata="Q188426" start="35268" end="35279" title="Roy Orbison" label="Roy Orbison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022983" start="35293" end="35303" title="You Got It" label="You Got It"/>
<link wikidata="Q862771" start="35371" end="35390" title="Hot Country Songs" label="Hot Country Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812420" start="35602" end="35616" title="At This Moment" label="At This Moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q434492" start="35626" end="35636" title="Billy Vera" label="Billy Vera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140332" start="35822" end="35829" title="Alabama (American band)" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q211418" start="36161" end="36177" title="British Invasion" label="British Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q613408" start="36398" end="36410" title="country rock" label="country rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="36488" end="36497" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q740161" start="36570" end="36589" title="John Wesley Harding" label="John Wesley Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q120631" start="36654" end="36671" title="Nashville Skyline" label="Nashville Skyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q471979" start="36692" end="36702" title="Gene Clark" label="Gene Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q211526" start="36729" end="36738" title="the Byrds" label="the Byrds"/>
<link wikidata="Q438124" start="36745" end="36757" title="Gram Parsons" label="Gram Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q928243" start="36767" end="36790" title="Sweetheart of the Rodeo" label="Sweetheart of the Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q200769" start="36815" end="36842" title="the Flying Burrito Brothers" label="the Flying Burrito Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095533" start="36884" end="36898" title="Clarence White" label="Clarence White"/>
<link wikidata="Q954997" start="36900" end="36915" title="Michael Nesmith" label="Michael Nesmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q464036" start="36917" end="36928" title="the Monkees" label="the Monkees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453366" start="36937" end="36956" title="First National Band" label="First National Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="36963" end="36976" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="36978" end="36988" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115087" start="36990" end="37004" title="Commander Cody and His Lost Planet Airmen" label="Commander Cody"/>
<link wikidata="Q507327" start="37006" end="37030" title="the Allman Brothers Band" label="the Allman Brothers Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q551478" start="37032" end="37047" title="Charlie Daniels" label="Charlie Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061590" start="37049" end="37073" title="the Marshall Tucker Band" label="the Marshall Tucker Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q548990" start="37075" end="37079" title="Poco (band)" label="Poco"/>
<link wikidata="Q48992" start="37081" end="37100" title="Buffalo Springfield" label="Buffalo Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q354496" start="37102" end="37116" title="Stephen Stills" label="Stephen Stills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537930" start="37128" end="37136" title="Manassas (band)" label="Manassas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189635" start="37141" end="37147" title="Eagles (band)" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655684" start="37192" end="37208" title="Ian &amp;amp; Sylvia" label="Ian &amp;amp; Sylvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q736180" start="37221" end="37240" title="Great Speckled Bird (band)" label="Great Speckled Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282662" start="37356" end="37387" title="Their Greatest Hits (1971–1975)" label="Their Greatest Hits (1971–1975)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="37471" end="37489" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742705" start="37534" end="37546" title="Dead Flowers (The Rolling Stones song)" label="Dead Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418659" start="37586" end="37602" title="Honky Tonk Women" label="Honky Tonk Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q379339" start="37808" end="37820" title="Let It Bleed" label="Let It Bleed"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="37883" end="37891" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q231286" start="38194" end="38208" title="Emmylou Harris" label="Emmylou Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q852767" start="38429" end="38442" title="Southern rock" label="Southern rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q747717" start="38444" end="38458" title="heartland rock" label="heartland rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q438476" start="38485" end="38504" title="alternative country" label="alternative country"/>
<link wikidata="Q435679" start="38552" end="38564" title="Juice Newton" label="Juice Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140332" start="38566" end="38573" title="Alabama (American band)" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q552819" start="38575" end="38593" title="Hank Williams, Jr." label="Hank Williams, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q741600" start="38627" end="38644" title="Hank Williams III" label="Hank Williams III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494805" start="38647" end="38657" title="Gary Allan" label="Gary Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131433" start="38659" end="38671" title="Shania Twain" label="Shania Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q929683" start="38673" end="38690" title="Brooks &amp;amp; Dunn" label="Brooks &amp;amp; Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q464241" start="38692" end="38702" title="Faith Hill" label="Faith Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q216288" start="38704" end="38716" title="Garth Brooks" label="Garth Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q713099" start="38718" end="38731" title="Dwight Yoakam" label="Dwight Yoakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q781634" start="38733" end="38744" title="Steve Earle" label="Steve Earle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="38746" end="38758" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q462289" start="38760" end="38772" title="Rosanne Cash" label="Rosanne Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q229375" start="38777" end="38791" title="Linda Ronstadt" label="Linda Ronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q538042" start="38947" end="38959" title="Urban Cowboy" label="Urban Cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q862315" start="39092" end="39103" title="Bill Medley" label="Bill Medley"/>
<link wikidata="Q610228" start="39108" end="39130" title="the Righteous Brothers" label="the Righteous Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557820" start="39133" end="39162" title="Dan Seals" label="&amp;quot;England Dan&amp;quot; Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377971" start="39167" end="39198" title="England Dan and John Ford Coley" label="England Dan and John Ford Coley"/>
<link wikidata="Q180850" start="39201" end="39210" title="Tom Jones (singer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922035" start="39216" end="39230" title="Merrill Osmond" label="Merrill Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543041" start="39260" end="39272" title="The Osmonds" label="his brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q465641" start="39293" end="39305" title="Marie Osmond" label="Marie Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627155" start="39735" end="39745" title="honky-tonk" label="honky-tonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q613408" start="39747" end="39759" title="country rock" label="country rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q804401" start="39768" end="39785" title="Bakersfield sound" label="Bakersfield sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="39798" end="39803" title="tempo" label="tempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q508846" start="39877" end="39889" title="truck driver" label="truck driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173181" start="40047" end="40058" title="Dave Dudley" label="Dave Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136093" start="40060" end="40070" title="Red Sovine" label="Red Sovine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2675743" start="40072" end="40084" title="Dick Curless" label="Dick Curless"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136070" start="40086" end="40097" title="Red Simpson" label="Red Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183809" start="40099" end="40109" title="Del Reeves" label="Del Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775006" start="40111" end="40130" title="the Willis Brothers" label="the Willis Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q712914" start="40135" end="40145" title="Jerry Reed" label="Jerry Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022574" start="40152" end="40164" title="C. W. McCall" label="C. W. McCall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131044" start="40169" end="40183" title="Cledus Maggard" label="Cledus Maggard"/>
<link wikidata="Q188235" start="40771" end="40783" title="Travis Tritt" label="Travis Tritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q229430" start="40785" end="40798" title="Reba McEntire" label="Reba McEntire"/>
<link wikidata="Q366584" start="40800" end="40813" title="George Strait" label="George Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q346036" start="40815" end="40828" title="Keith Whitley" label="Keith Whitley"/>
<link wikidata="Q380927" start="40830" end="40842" title="Alan Jackson" label="Alan Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699148" start="40844" end="40857" title="John Anderson (musician)" label="John Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q455939" start="40859" end="40873" title="Patty Loveless" label="Patty Loveless"/>
<link wikidata="Q442892" start="40875" end="40887" title="Kathy Mattea" label="Kathy Mattea"/>
<link wikidata="Q467519" start="40889" end="40901" title="Randy Travis" label="Randy Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q713099" start="40903" end="40916" title="Dwight Yoakam" label="Dwight Yoakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q320264" start="40918" end="40929" title="Clint Black" label="Clint Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347095" start="40931" end="40943" title="Ricky Skaggs" label="Ricky Skaggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755990" start="40949" end="40958" title="the Judds" label="the Judds"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="41029" end="41062" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="41130" end="41138" title="FM radio" label="FM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="41282" end="41290" title="AM radio" label="AM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q502319" start="41427" end="41437" title="talk radio" label="talk radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128236" start="41498" end="41513" title="classic country" label="classic country"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877851" start="41561" end="41576" title="beautiful music" label="beautiful music"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="41830" end="41839" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q862771" start="41869" end="41888" title="Hot Country Songs" label="country music chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q126687914" start="42029" end="42042" title="country radio" label="country radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q216288" start="42157" end="42169" title="Garth Brooks" label="Garth Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="42326" end="42330" title="RIAA" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="42380" end="42388" title="RIAA certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q320264" start="42500" end="42511" title="Clint Black" label="Clint Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189986" start="42513" end="42536" title="John Michael Montgomery" label="John Michael Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447661" start="42538" end="42552" title="Tracy Lawrence" label="Tracy Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q356487" start="42554" end="42564" title="Tim McGraw" label="Tim McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q467526" start="42566" end="42579" title="Kenny Chesney" label="Kenny Chesney"/>
<link wikidata="Q188235" start="42581" end="42593" title="Travis Tritt" label="Travis Tritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q380927" start="42595" end="42607" title="Alan Jackson" label="Alan Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q929683" start="42636" end="42653" title="Brooks &amp;amp; Dunn" label="Brooks &amp;amp; Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q366584" start="42655" end="42668" title="George Strait" label="George Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q559819" start="42772" end="42782" title="Toby Keith" label="Toby Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259376" start="42914" end="42927" title="Pull My Chain" label="Pull My Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897025" start="42959" end="42968" title="Unleashed (Toby Keith album)" label="Unleashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q229430" start="43035" end="43048" title="Reba McEntire" label="Reba McEntire"/>
<link wikidata="Q455939" start="43050" end="43064" title="Patty Loveless" label="Patty Loveless"/>
<link wikidata="Q464241" start="43066" end="43076" title="Faith Hill" label="Faith Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q256732" start="43078" end="43093" title="Martina McBride" label="Martina McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q509285" start="43095" end="43107" title="Deana Carter" label="Deana Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q120533" start="43109" end="43120" title="LeAnn Rimes" label="LeAnn Rimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q539064" start="43122" end="43136" title="Mindy McCready" label="Mindy McCready"/>
<link wikidata="Q464232" start="43138" end="43148" title="Pam Tillis" label="Pam Tillis"/>
<link wikidata="Q464208" start="43150" end="43163" title="Lorrie Morgan" label="Lorrie Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131433" start="43165" end="43177" title="Shania Twain" label="Shania Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q270765" start="43183" end="43204" title="Mary Chapin Carpenter" label="Mary Chapin Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q142636" start="43260" end="43272" title="Dixie Chicks" label="Dixie Chicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279112" start="43377" end="43393" title="Wide Open Spaces (album)" label="Wide Open Spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286786" start="43470" end="43473" title="Fly (Dixie Chicks album)" label="Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286748" start="43543" end="43547" title="Home (Dixie Chicks album)" label="Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q242605" start="43637" end="43651" title="Natalie Maines" label="Natalie Maines"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="43695" end="43709" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="43855" end="43863" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286764" start="44026" end="44045" title="Taking the Long Way" label="Taking the Long Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178291" start="44322" end="44339" title="Court Yard Hounds" label="Court Yard Hounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q131433" start="44418" end="44430" title="Shania Twain" label="Shania Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976781" start="44578" end="44593" title="The Woman in Me (album)" label="The Woman in Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944486" start="44709" end="44721" title="Come On Over" label="Come On Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211171" start="45408" end="45411" title="Up! (album)" label="Up!"/>
<link wikidata="Q131433" start="45495" end="45507" title="Shania Twain" label="Shania Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="45546" end="45559" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627155" start="46111" end="46121" title="honky-tonk" label="honky-tonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q912389" start="46360" end="46372" title="line dancing" label="line dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q72096" start="46407" end="46418" title="Chet Atkins" label="Chet Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q908569" start="46711" end="46723" title="Don Williams" label="Don Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q508202" start="46728" end="46740" title="George Jones" label="George Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="46973" end="46982" title="Punk rock" label="Punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="46987" end="47003" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268922" start="47023" end="47030" title="cowpunk" label="cowpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252204" start="47113" end="47128" title="the Long Ryders" label="the Long Ryders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671303" start="47130" end="47142" title="Lone Justice" label="Lone Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892926" start="47147" end="47163" title="the Beat Farmers" label="the Beat Farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570087" start="47203" end="47204" title="X (American band)" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="47593" end="47606" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q438124" start="47608" end="47620" title="Gram Parsons" label="Gram Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="47625" end="47634" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q256813" start="47756" end="47772" title="Lucinda Williams" label="Lucinda Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q543637" start="47774" end="47785" title="Lyle Lovett" label="Lyle Lovett"/>
<link wikidata="Q781634" start="47790" end="47801" title="Steve Earle" label="Steve Earle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244658" start="47835" end="47858" title="Jason and the Scorchers" label="Jason and the Scorchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q63229806" start="47881" end="47891" title="cowboy pop" label="cowboy pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375818" start="47903" end="47915" title="Rubber Rodeo" label="Rubber Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529069" start="47948" end="47958" title="the Mekons" label="the Mekons"/>
<link wikidata="Q783097" start="48033" end="48045" title="college rock" label="college rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q846802" start="48096" end="48107" title="Guitar Town" label="Guitar Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q713099" start="48168" end="48181" title="Dwight Yoakam" label="Dwight Yoakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066024" start="48208" end="48224" title="The Replacements (band)" label="the Replacements"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48310" end="48320" title="Honky-tonk#Music" label="honky-tonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473092" start="48502" end="48514" title="Uncle Tupelo" label="Uncle Tupelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124500" start="48560" end="48573" title="No Depression (album)" label="No Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994499" start="48707" end="48720" title="No Depression (magazine)" label="No Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q637771" start="48883" end="48888" title="Wilco" label="Wilco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424828" start="48893" end="48901" title="Son Volt" label="Son Volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="48971" end="48981" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091995" start="49047" end="49067" title="Yankee Hotel Foxtrot" label="Yankee Hotel Foxtrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409964" start="49246" end="49264" title="the Bottle Rockets" label="the Bottle Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q60339" start="49266" end="49285" title="the Handsome Family" label="the Handsome Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929498" start="49287" end="49300" title="Blue Mountain (band)" label="Blue Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340891" start="49302" end="49314" title="Robbie Fulks" label="Robbie Fulks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927660" start="49316" end="49329" title="Blood Oranges (band)" label="Blood Oranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q915714" start="49331" end="49342" title="Bright Eyes (band)" label="Bright Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q607725" start="49344" end="49361" title="Drive-By Truckers" label="Drive-By Truckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881496" start="49363" end="49376" title="Old 97&amp;#x27;s" label="Old 97&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083804" start="49378" end="49400" title="Old Crow Medicine Show" label="Old Crow Medicine Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895390" start="49402" end="49414" title="Nickel Creek" label="Nickel Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q431591" start="49416" end="49425" title="Neko Case" label="Neko Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240650" start="49431" end="49442" title="Whiskeytown" label="Whiskeytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q437970" start="49462" end="49472" title="Ryan Adams" label="Ryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422697" start="49584" end="49606" title="Red dirt (music)" label="Red Dirt country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188245" start="49608" end="49630" title="Cross Canadian Ragweed" label="Cross Canadian Ragweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095173" start="49633" end="49641" title="jam band" label="jam band"/>
<link wikidata="Q684097" start="49644" end="49661" title="My Morning Jacket" label="My Morning Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q493697" start="49666" end="49692" title="the String Cheese Incident" label="the String Cheese Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317816" start="49699" end="49709" title="indie folk" label="indie folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q123320" start="49711" end="49729" title="the Avett Brothers" label="the Avett Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073216" start="50015" end="50041" title="O Brother, Where Art Thou? (soundtrack)" label="O Brother, Where Art Thou?"/>
<link wikidata="Q504635" start="50339" end="50353" title="Crossover music" label="crossover hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142763" start="50467" end="50484" title="Passionate Kisses" label="Passionate Kisses"/>
<link wikidata="Q270765" start="50505" end="50526" title="Mary Chapin Carpenter" label="Mary Chapin Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q618337" start="50559" end="50581" title="When the Stars Go Blue" label="When the Stars Go Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q356487" start="50602" end="50612" title="Tim McGraw" label="Tim McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959653" start="50662" end="50673" title="Wagon Wheel (song)" label="Wagon Wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q445405" start="50694" end="50707" title="Darius Rucker" label="Darius Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476499" start="50719" end="50744" title="Hootie &amp;amp; The Blowfish" label="Hootie &amp;amp; The Blowfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240655" start="50891" end="50905" title="the Civil Wars" label="the Civil Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108148" start="50907" end="50922" title="Chris Stapleton" label="Chris Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16736403" start="50924" end="50940" title="Sturgill Simpson" label="Sturgill Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162757" start="50942" end="50954" title="Jason Isbell" label="Jason Isbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707651" start="50956" end="50970" title="Lydia Loveless" label="Lydia Loveless"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073688" start="50975" end="50986" title="Margo Price" label="Margo Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783855" start="50997" end="51012" title="Kacey Musgraves" label="Kacey Musgraves"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="51064" end="51074" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q904528" start="51149" end="51183" title="Grammy Award for Album of the Year" label="Grammy Award for Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q51155613" start="51204" end="51215" title="Golden Hour (Kacey Musgraves album)" label="Golden Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q311256" start="51378" end="51390" title="Richard Marx" label="Richard Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3703831" start="51419" end="51433" title="Days in Avalon" label="Days in Avalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q371782" start="51516" end="51529" title="Alison Krauss" label="Alison Krauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q259254" start="51617" end="51625" title="Bon Jovi" label="Bon Jovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599560" start="51650" end="51681" title="Who Says You Can&amp;#x27;t Go Home" label="Who Says You Can&amp;#x27;t Go Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627462" start="51694" end="51710" title="Jennifer Nettles" label="Jennifer Nettles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200415" start="51714" end="51723" title="Sugarland" label="Sugarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q158175" start="51725" end="51733" title="Kid Rock" label="Kid Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q200586" start="51760" end="51771" title="Sheryl Crow" label="Sheryl Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191144" start="51779" end="51786" title="Picture (song)" label="Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440116" start="51977" end="51992" title="All Summer Long (Kid Rock song)" label="All Summer Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155937" start="52125" end="52129" title="Easy (Sheryl Crow song)" label="Easy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15840733" start="52171" end="52186" title="Feels like Home (Sheryl Crow album)" label="Feels like Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q445405" start="52195" end="52208" title="Darius Rucker" label="Darius Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476499" start="52247" end="52272" title="Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish" label="Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896961" start="52452" end="52466" title="Unknown Hinson" label="Unknown Hinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565" start="52507" end="52516" title="Charlotte, North Carolina" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q316454" start="52701" end="52711" title="Don Henley" label="Don Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q21065448" start="52732" end="52743" title="Cass County (album)" label="Cass County"/>
<link wikidata="Q550602" start="52833" end="52839" title="Poison (American band)" label="Poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q21620939" start="53104" end="53114" title="Kane Brown" label="Kane Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q26334949" start="53119" end="53129" title="Marshmello" label="Marshmello"/>
<link wikidata="Q21622122" start="53134" end="53146" title="Maren Morris" label="Maren Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q21088" start="53151" end="53155" title="Zedd" label="Zedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="53231" end="53238" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="53240" end="53249" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q121507" start="53251" end="53262" title="Alicia Keys" label="Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q483379" start="53264" end="53276" title="Gwen Stefani" label="Gwen Stefani"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="53278" end="53295" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q34086" start="53297" end="53310" title="Justin Bieber" label="Justin Bieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q160009" start="53315" end="53319" title="Pink (singer)" label="Pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="53407" end="53419" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q231233" start="53421" end="53436" title="Miranda Lambert" label="Miranda Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q215546" start="53438" end="53454" title="Carrie Underwood" label="Carrie Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783855" start="53456" end="53471" title="Kacey Musgraves" label="Kacey Musgraves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235" start="53473" end="53484" title="Miley Cyrus" label="Miley Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q231259" start="53486" end="53501" title="Billy Ray Cyrus" label="Billy Ray Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16223171" start="53503" end="53511" title="Sam Hunt" label="Sam Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q952176" start="53513" end="53524" title="Chris Young (singer)" label="Chris Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q215546" start="53730" end="53746" title="Carrie Underwood" label="Carrie Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="53804" end="53817" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="53967" end="53980" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607365" start="54011" end="54029" title="Inside Your Heaven" label="Inside Your Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="54113" end="54142" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754341" start="54333" end="54344" title="Some Hearts (Carrie Underwood album)" label="Some Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="54581" end="54590" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q862771" start="54757" end="54774" title="Hot Country Songs" label="Hot Country Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="54867" end="54880" title="Guinness Book" label="Guinness Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453643" start="54929" end="54961" title="Grammy Award for Best New Artist" label="Grammy Award for Best New Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q337308" start="55143" end="55174" title="Academy of Country Music Awards" label="Academy of Country Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="55269" end="55273" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q604370" start="55315" end="55355" title="Time 100" label="100 most influential people in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988765" start="55387" end="55402" title="Country Airplay" label="Country Airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q234445" start="55674" end="55688" title="Kellie Pickler" label="Kellie Pickler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059447" start="55690" end="55701" title="Josh Gracin" label="Josh Gracin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927481" start="55703" end="55718" title="Bucky Covington" label="Bucky Covington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215799" start="55720" end="55735" title="Kristy Lee Cook" label="Kristy Lee Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015250" start="55737" end="55748" title="Danny Gokey" label="Danny Gokey"/>
<link wikidata="Q271796" start="55750" end="55763" title="Lauren Alaina" label="Lauren Alaina"/>
<link wikidata="Q255969" start="55768" end="55783" title="Scotty McCreery" label="Scotty McCreery"/>
<link wikidata="Q483507" start="55830" end="55844" title="Kelly Clarkson" label="Kelly Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336186" start="55937" end="55951" title="Nashville Star" label="Nashville Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q231233" start="56031" end="56046" title="Miranda Lambert" label="Miranda Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783855" start="56048" end="56063" title="Kacey Musgraves" label="Kacey Musgraves"/>
<link wikidata="Q952176" start="56068" end="56079" title="Chris Young (singer)" label="Chris Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646456" start="56165" end="56177" title="Buddy Jewell" label="Buddy Jewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441355" start="56179" end="56198" title="Sean Patrick McGraw" label="Sean Patrick McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537663" start="56222" end="56235" title="George Canyon" label="George Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029103" start="56243" end="56255" title="Can You Duet" label="Can You Duet"/>
<link wikidata="Q116411" start="56281" end="56295" title="Steel Magnolia" label="Steel Magnolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6214254" start="56300" end="56311" title="Joey + Rory" label="Joey + Rory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4473" start="56386" end="56402" title="Jennette McCurdy" label="Jennette McCurdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013" start="56460" end="56466" title="iCarly" label="iCarly"/>
<link wikidata="Q333010" start="56560" end="56575" title="Generation Love" label="Generation Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235" start="56617" end="56628" title="Miley Cyrus" label="Miley Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q126631" start="56661" end="56675" title="Hannah Montana" label="Hannah Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779390" start="56738" end="56747" title="The Climb (Miley Cyrus song)" label="The Climb"/>
<link wikidata="Q231259" start="56795" end="56810" title="Billy Ray Cyrus" label="Billy Ray Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046905" start="56823" end="56848" title="Ready, Set, Don&amp;#x27;t Go" label="Ready, Set, Don&amp;#x27;t Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q263670" start="56856" end="56867" title="Jana Kramer" label="Jana Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q203385" start="56904" end="56917" title="One Tree Hill (TV series)" label="One Tree Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q171571" start="57014" end="57031" title="Hayden Panettiere" label="Hayden Panettiere"/>
<link wikidata="Q235519" start="57036" end="57050" title="Connie Britton" label="Connie Britton"/>
<link wikidata="Q210676" start="57126" end="57135" title="Nashville (2012 TV series)" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q32450" start="57152" end="57171" title="Pretty Little Liars" label="Pretty Little Liars"/>
<link wikidata="Q229940" start="57183" end="57192" title="Lucy Hale" label="Lucy Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q16875423" start="57224" end="57236" title="Road Between" label="Road Between"/>
<link wikidata="Q389870" start="57272" end="57278" title="Lady A" label="Lady A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027904" start="57328" end="57344" title="Grammy Award for Song of the Year" label="Song of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q843219" start="57349" end="57367" title="Record of the Year" label="Record of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q500010" start="57378" end="57390" title="Need You Now (Lady Antebellum song)" label="Need You Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q124296467" start="57496" end="57509" title="close harmony" label="close harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q607317" start="57568" end="57583" title="Little Big Town" label="Little Big Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460017" start="57585" end="57599" title="the Band Perry" label="the Band Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q946099" start="57601" end="57609" title="Gloriana (band)" label="Gloriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q211530" start="57611" end="57626" title="Thompson Square" label="Thompson Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360355" start="57628" end="57642" title="Eli Young Band" label="Eli Young Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q139154" start="57644" end="57658" title="Zac Brown Band" label="Zac Brown Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019103" start="57675" end="57685" title="The Shires (duo)" label="the Shires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783855" start="57776" end="57791" title="Kacey Musgraves" label="Kacey Musgraves"/>
<link wikidata="Q231233" start="57796" end="57811" title="Miranda Lambert" label="Miranda Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q26876" start="57930" end="57942" title="Taylor Swift" label="Taylor Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076570" start="58013" end="58023" title="Tim McGraw (song)" label="Tim McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q845783" start="58106" end="58136" title="Taylor Swift (album)" label="self-titled debut studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="58163" end="58188" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q842214" start="58304" end="58312" title="Fearless (Taylor Swift album)" label="Fearless"/>
<link wikidata="Q23215" start="58449" end="58454" title="Adele" label="Adele"/>
<link wikidata="Q155169" start="58468" end="58470" title="21 (Adele album)" label="21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349100" start="58510" end="58522" title="52nd Annual Grammy Awards" label="2010 Grammys"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="58678" end="58685" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034298" start="58710" end="58719" title="teen idol" label="teen idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="58794" end="58803" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256838" start="58878" end="58917" title="We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together" label="We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="58976" end="58983" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q862771" start="58994" end="59011" title="Hot Country Songs" label="Hot Country Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17544553" start="59442" end="59446" title="1989 (Taylor Swift album)" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q37814092" start="59467" end="59477" title="Reputation (Taylor Swift album)" label="Reputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q64596218" start="59502" end="59507" title="Lover (album)" label="Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="59545" end="59548" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q97620733" start="59636" end="59644" title="Folklore (Taylor Swift album)" label="Folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q104092260" start="59668" end="59676" title="Evermore (Taylor Swift album)" label="Evermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q97929991" start="59713" end="59718" title="Betty (Taylor Swift song)" label="Betty"/>
<link wikidata="Q104148872" start="59735" end="59752" title="No Body, No Crime" label="No Body, No Crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="59938" end="59947" title="Pop music" label="Pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q51393" start="60358" end="60372" title="LGBT community" label="LGBT community"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="60539" end="60556" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q46855607" start="60578" end="60594" title="Man of the Woods" label="Man of the Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="60602" end="60609" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q24074881" start="60628" end="60641" title="Daddy Lessons" label="Daddy Lessons"/>
<link wikidata="Q23905116" start="60653" end="60673" title="Lemonade (Beyoncé album)" label="&amp;quot;Lemonade&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q483507" start="60675" end="60689" title="Kelly Clarkson" label="Kelly Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q483379" start="60691" end="60703" title="Gwen Stefani" label="Gwen Stefani"/>
<link wikidata="Q83020464" start="60715" end="60729" title="Nobody but You (Blake Shelton and Gwen Stefani song)" label="Nobody but You"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450" start="60737" end="60747" title="Bruno Mars" label="Bruno Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="60749" end="60758" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q121507" start="60760" end="60771" title="Alicia Keys" label="Alicia Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q160009" start="60777" end="60781" title="Pink (singer)" label="Pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="60801" end="60811" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q975911" start="60899" end="60910" title="Eric Church" label="Eric Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q195439" start="60912" end="60924" title="Jason Aldean" label="Jason Aldean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957684" start="60930" end="60946" title="Brantley Gilbert" label="Brantley Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q302280" start="60965" end="60976" title="Aaron Lewis (musician)" label="Aaron Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q266496" start="61013" end="61019" title="Staind" label="Staind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5211413" start="61099" end="61111" title="Dallas Smith" label="Dallas Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182558" start="61141" end="61148" title="Default (band)" label="Default"/>
<link wikidata="Q21622122" start="61151" end="61163" title="Maren Morris" label="Maren Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q47494729" start="61192" end="61202" title="The Middle (Zedd, Maren Morris and Grey song)" label="The Middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="61214" end="61217" title="Electronic music" label="EDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q21088" start="61227" end="61231" title="Zedd" label="Zedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q62591281" start="61323" end="61332" title="Lil Nas X" label="Lil Nas X"/>
<link wikidata="Q62587323" start="61344" end="61357" title="Old Town Road" label="Old Town Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q176752" start="61364" end="61378" title="List of Billboard Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones" label="spent 19 weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="61391" end="61420" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q392565" start="61514" end="61536" title="Billboard Music Awards" label="Billboard Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="61538" end="61560" title="MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16223171" start="61579" end="61587" title="Sam Hunt" label="Sam Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151622" start="61594" end="61612" title="Leave the Night On" label="Leave the Night On"/>
<link wikidata="Q231259" start="61748" end="61763" title="Billy Ray Cyrus" label="Billy Ray Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067041" start="61828" end="61845" title="Nielsen SoundScan" label="Nielsen SoundScan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913982" start="61890" end="61894" title="trap music" label="trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="61941" end="61948" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q65048949" start="62101" end="62111" title="The Git Up" label="The Git Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q64736729" start="62121" end="62133" title="Blanco Brown" label="Blanco Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291965" start="62261" end="62285" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Take the Girl" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Take the Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q356487" start="62297" end="62307" title="Tim McGraw" label="Tim McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901663" start="62339" end="62351" title="Just the Way" label="Just the Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139162" start="62363" end="62371" title="Parmalee" label="Parmalee"/>
<link wikidata="Q104178966" start="62410" end="62417" title="Breland (musician)" label="Breland"/>
<link wikidata="Q107292778" start="62446" end="62454" title="My Truck" label="My Truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q111962761" start="62462" end="62475" title="Throw It Back (Breland song)" label="Throw It Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q315547" start="62487" end="62498" title="Keith Urban" label="Keith Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q112109199" start="62510" end="62525" title="Praise the Lord (Breland song)" label="Praise the Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793491" start="62542" end="62554" title="Thomas Rhett" label="Thomas Rhett"/>
<link wikidata="Q12362064" start="62557" end="62564" title="Emo rap" label="Emo rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q83808746" start="62574" end="62579" title="Sueco" label="Sueco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268922" start="62592" end="62599" title="cowpunk" label="cowpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q120986980" start="62642" end="62656" title="Warren Zeiders" label="Warren Zeiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954055" start="62743" end="62754" title="bro-country" label="bro-country"/>
<link wikidata="Q166197" start="62928" end="62938" title="Luke Bryan" label="Luke Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q195439" start="62940" end="62952" title="Jason Aldean" label="Jason Aldean"/>
<link wikidata="Q94831" start="62954" end="62967" title="Blake Shelton" label="Blake Shelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q453635" start="62969" end="62978" title="Jake Owen" label="Jake Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644642" start="62983" end="63003" title="Florida Georgia Line" label="Florida Georgia Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189943" start="63021" end="63027" title="Cruise (song)" label="Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q14755643" start="63363" end="63377" title="Crash My Party" label="Crash My Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q967290" start="63486" end="63515" title="Here&amp;#x27;s to the Good Times" label="Here&amp;#x27;s to the Good Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q13357797" start="63563" end="63584" title="Based on a True Story..." label="Based on a True Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157530" start="64107" end="64123" title="Maddie &amp;amp; Tae" label="Maddie &amp;amp; Tae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151648" start="64137" end="64159" title="Girl in a Country Song" label="Girl in a Country Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="64258" end="64267" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988765" start="64274" end="64289" title="Country Airplay" label="Country Airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q52004084" start="64855" end="64868" title="Billy Strings" label="Billy Strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737563" start="64870" end="64882" title="the Grascals" label="the Grascals"/>
<link wikidata="Q41694032" start="64884" end="64896" title="Molly Tuttle" label="Molly Tuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41278078" start="64898" end="64912" title="Tyler Childers" label="Tyler Childers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662265" start="64917" end="64943" title="the Infamous Stringdusters" label="the Infamous Stringdusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q188429" start="65082" end="65096" title="Rhonda Vincent" label="Rhonda Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q371782" start="65098" end="65111" title="Alison Krauss" label="Alison Krauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853874" start="65116" end="65129" title="Union Station (band)" label="Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347095" start="65131" end="65143" title="Ricky Skaggs" label="Ricky Skaggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252933" start="65148" end="65159" title="Del McCoury" label="Del McCoury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058599" start="65192" end="65209" title="Northern Kentucky" label="Northern Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="65214" end="65224" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7011593" start="65253" end="65269" title="New South (band)" label="New South (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q465636" start="65271" end="65281" title="Doc Watson" label="Doc Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522116" start="65283" end="65299" title="Osborne Brothers" label="Osborne Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407862" start="65432" end="65441" title="Americana (music)" label="Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="65511" end="65517" title="Grammy" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745577" start="65823" end="65850" title="Americana Music Association" label="Americana Music Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745579" start="65859" end="65894" title="Americana Music Honors &amp;amp; Awards" label="Americana Music Honors &amp;amp; Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41278078" start="65998" end="66012" title="Tyler Childers" label="Tyler Childers"/>
<link wikidata="Q106770023" start="66014" end="66024" title="Zach Bryan" label="Zach Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083804" start="66029" end="66051" title="Old Crow Medicine Show" label="Old Crow Medicine Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q438476" start="66110" end="66129" title="alternative country" label="alternative country"/>
<link wikidata="Q231286" start="66269" end="66283" title="Emmylou Harris" label="Emmylou Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q543637" start="66288" end="66299" title="Lyle Lovett" label="Lyle Lovett"/>
<link wikidata="Q188235" start="66773" end="66785" title="Travis Tritt" label="Travis Tritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q229430" start="66787" end="66800" title="Reba McEntire" label="Reba McEntire"/>
<link wikidata="Q366584" start="66802" end="66815" title="George Strait" label="George Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q346036" start="66817" end="66830" title="Keith Whitley" label="Keith Whitley"/>
<link wikidata="Q380927" start="66832" end="66844" title="Alan Jackson" label="Alan Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699148" start="66846" end="66859" title="John Anderson (musician)" label="John Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q455939" start="66861" end="66875" title="Patty Loveless" label="Patty Loveless"/>
<link wikidata="Q442892" start="66877" end="66889" title="Kathy Mattea" label="Kathy Mattea"/>
<link wikidata="Q467519" start="66891" end="66903" title="Randy Travis" label="Randy Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q713099" start="66905" end="66918" title="Dwight Yoakam" label="Dwight Yoakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q320264" start="66920" end="66931" title="Clint Black" label="Clint Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347095" start="66933" end="66945" title="Ricky Skaggs" label="Ricky Skaggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755990" start="66951" end="66960" title="the Judds" label="the Judds"/>
<link wikidata="Q216288" start="67284" end="67296" title="Garth Brooks" label="Garth Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q379033" start="67411" end="67423" title="arena rock" label="stadium rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q929683" start="67447" end="67462" title="Brooks and Dunn" label="Brooks and Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q464208" start="67571" end="67584" title="Lorrie Morgan" label="Lorrie Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q270765" start="67586" end="67607" title="Mary Chapin Carpenter" label="Mary Chapin Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q442892" start="67613" end="67625" title="Kathy Mattea" label="Kathy Mattea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="67750" end="67770" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993364" start="67944" end="67991" title="Where Were You (When the World Stopped Turning)" label="Where Were You (When the World Stopped Turning)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012945" start="68157" end="68175" title="New York, New York (Ryan Adams song)" label="New York, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178490" start="68505" end="68561" title="Courtesy of the Red, White and Blue (The Angry American)" label="Courtesy of the Red, White and Blue (The Angry American)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785589" start="68667" end="68707" title="This Ain&amp;#x27;t No Rag, It&amp;#x27;s a Flag" label="This Ain&amp;#x27;t No Rag, It&amp;#x27;s a Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280497" start="69074" end="69085" title="country pop" label="country pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783855" start="69100" end="69115" title="Kacey Musgraves" label="Kacey Musgraves"/>
<link wikidata="Q21622122" start="69117" end="69129" title="Maren Morris" label="Maren Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637137" start="69131" end="69147" title="Kelsea Ballerini" label="Kelsea Ballerini"/>
<link wikidata="Q16223171" start="69149" end="69157" title="Sam Hunt" label="Sam Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21620939" start="69159" end="69169" title="Kane Brown" label="Kane Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q17916987" start="69171" end="69181" title="Chris Lane" label="Chris Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959408" start="69187" end="69197" title="Dan + Shay" label="Dan + Shay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="69450" end="69459" title="Billboard charts" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q51155613" start="69486" end="69509" title="Golden Hour (Kacey Musgraves album)" label="&amp;quot;Golden Hour&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602853" start="69554" end="69579" title="61st Annual Grammy Awards" label="61st Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q337308" start="69581" end="69612" title="Academy of Country Music Awards" label="Academy of Country Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137234" start="69614" end="69646" title="Country Music Association Awards" label="Country Music Association Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407589" start="69762" end="69786" title="Australian country music" label="Australian country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001430" start="69932" end="69943" title="bush ballad" label="bush ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q453577" start="69953" end="69965" title="Henry Lawson" label="Henry Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q436699" start="69970" end="69984" title="Banjo Paterson" label="Banjo Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="70029" end="70034" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="70036" end="70042" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180095" start="70300" end="70307" title="tyranny" label="tyranny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627286" start="70325" end="70335" title="bushranger" label="bushranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017959" start="70338" end="70345" title="swagmen" label="swagmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308654" start="70347" end="70354" title="Drover (Australian)" label="drovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743503" start="70356" end="70364" title="Stockman (Australia)" label="stockmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569439" start="70369" end="70377" title="sheep shearer" label="shearers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001432" start="70546" end="70555" title="bush band" label="bush band"/>
<link wikidata="Q752873" start="70575" end="70591" title="Waltzing Matilda" label="Waltzing Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="70645" end="70660" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372058" start="70910" end="70931" title="The Wild Colonial Boy" label="The Wild Colonial Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132428" start="70945" end="70964" title="Click Go the Shears" label="Click Go the Shears"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="71150" end="71163" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519313" start="71325" end="71335" title="Tex Morton" label="Tex Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984965" start="71609" end="71623" title="Buddy Williams (country musician)" label="Buddy Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498868" start="71625" end="71638" title="Shirley Thoms" label="Shirley Thoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487050" start="71643" end="71655" title="Smoky Dawson" label="Smoky Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q607807" start="72279" end="72289" title="Slim Dusty" label="Slim Dusty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001430" start="72404" end="72415" title="bush ballad" label="bush ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q300528" start="72490" end="72508" title="A Pub with No Beer" label="A Pub with No Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q752873" start="72806" end="72822" title="Waltzing Matilda" label="Waltzing Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="72860" end="72885" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="Sydney 2000 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187205" start="72905" end="72915" title="Joy McKean" label="Joy McKean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066309" start="72959" end="72970" title="Chad Morgan" label="Chad Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="73024" end="73034" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354614" start="73070" end="73082" title="Frank Ifield" label="Frank Ifield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479941" start="73173" end="73184" title="Reg Lindsay" label="Reg Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098695" start="73249" end="73263" title="Grand Ole Opry" label="Grand Ole Opry"/>
<link wikidata="Q543737" start="73273" end="73283" title="Eric Bogle" label="Eric Bogle"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="73315" end="73333" title="Gallipoli Campaign" label="Gallipoli Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q489601" start="73340" end="73376" title="And the Band Played Waltzing Matilda" label="And the Band Played Waltzing Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q952656" start="73468" end="73478" title="Paul Kelly (Australian musician)" label="Paul Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237928" start="73558" end="73571" title="poet laureate" label="poet laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129902" start="73690" end="73704" title="James Blundell (singer)" label="James Blundell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142010" start="73709" end="73720" title="James Reyne" label="James Reyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730213" start="73735" end="73747" title="The Dingoes" label="Way Out West"/>
<link wikidata="Q462221" start="73772" end="73786" title="Kasey Chambers" label="Kasey Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653728" start="73799" end="73832" title="ARIA Award for Best Female Artist" label="ARIA Award for Best Female Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524937" start="73892" end="73906" title="Wendy Matthews" label="Wendy Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q181484" start="73911" end="73914" title="Sia" label="Sia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18210579" start="73997" end="74031" title="ARIA Award for Best Country Album" label="ARIA Awards for Best Country Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653736" start="74102" end="74119" title="ARIA Hall of Fame" label="ARIA Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415014" start="74229" end="74238" title="the Waifs" label="the Waifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442656" start="74247" end="74263" title="John Butler Trio" label="John Butler Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q192668" start="74265" end="74274" title="Nick Cave" label="Nick Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="74325" end="74336" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051182" start="74379" end="74393" title="The Mercy Seat (song)" label="The Mercy Seat"/>
<link wikidata="" start="74419" end="74445" title="American III: Solitary Man" label="American III: Solitary Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734658" start="74569" end="74584" title="The Folk Singer" label="The Folk Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089177" start="74605" end="74631" title="Kicking Against the Pricks" label="Kicking Against the Pricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q206181" start="74701" end="74714" title="Hank Williams" label="Hank Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q671197" start="74727" end="74759" title="I&amp;#x27;m So Lonesome I Could Cry" label="I&amp;#x27;m So Lonesome I Could Cry"/>
<link wikidata="" start="74788" end="74821" title="American IV: The Man Comes Around" label="American IV: The Man Comes Around"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702184" start="74911" end="74926" title="John Williamson (singer)" label="John Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847364" start="74955" end="74964" title="True Blue (John Williamson song)" label="True Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q952835" start="74973" end="74986" title="Lee Kernaghan" label="Lee Kernaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755626" start="75048" end="75064" title="The Outback Club" label="The Outback Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199661" start="75073" end="75086" title="Gina Jeffreys" label="Gina Jeffreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473291" start="75105" end="75116" title="Sara Storer" label="Sara Storer"/>
<link wikidata="Q185165" start="75131" end="75149" title="Olivia Newton-John" label="Olivia Newton-John"/>
<link wikidata="Q518612" start="75151" end="75165" title="Sherrié Austin" label="Sherrié Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q315547" start="75170" end="75181" title="Keith Urban" label="Keith Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q28382637" start="75330" end="75393" title="Country Music Association Award for Female Vocalist of the Year" label="Country Music Association Award for Female Vocalist of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q267721" start="75508" end="75514" title="Grease (film)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q28458516" start="75755" end="75780" title="Country Music Association Award for Male Vocalist of the Year" label="Male Vocalist of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149622" start="75828" end="75851" title="Country Music Association Award for Entertainer of the Year" label="Entertainer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998" start="75862" end="75875" title="Kylie Minogue" label="Kylie Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q47459695" start="75928" end="75934" title="Golden (Kylie Minogue album)" label="Golden"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="76119" end="76141" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541017" start="76143" end="76160" title="Troy Cassar-Daley" label="Troy Cassar-Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395640" start="76238" end="76249" title="Kev Carmody" label="Kev Carmody"/>
<link wikidata="Q633977" start="76254" end="76266" title="Archie Roach" label="Archie Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681921" start="76364" end="76395" title="Tamworth Country Music Festival" label="Tamworth Country Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434796" start="76468" end="76493" title="Tamworth, New South Wales" label="Tamworth, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177363" start="76624" end="76628" title="Country Music Association of Australia" label="CMAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998902" start="76639" end="76672" title="Country Music Awards of Australia" label="Country Music Awards of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579532" start="76695" end="76708" title="Golden Guitar" label="Golden Guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="76813" end="76822" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851035" start="76832" end="76862" title="Mildura Country Music Festival" label="Mildura Country Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031250" start="76926" end="76957" title="Canberra Country Music Festival" label="Canberra Country Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320761" start="77088" end="77098" title="down under" label="down under"/>
<link wikidata="Q109544472" start="77109" end="77130" title="Country Music Channel" label="Country Music Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q721830" start="77211" end="77217" title="pay TV" label="pay TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364746" start="77681" end="77698" title="Canadian Prairies" label="prairie provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153780" start="77704" end="77729" title="British Columbia Interior" label="British Columbia Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="77756" end="77771" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q854451" start="77773" end="77797" title="Celtic music" label="Celtic traditional music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="77972" end="77984" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="77986" end="77997" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="77999" end="78012" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978" start="78018" end="78038" title="Prince Edward Island" label="Prince Edward Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="78077" end="78087" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="78119" end="78132" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195253" start="78587" end="78597" title="sea shanty" label="sea shanty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378776" start="78813" end="78818" title="Music of Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293142" start="78933" end="78958" title="Don Messer&amp;#x27;s Jubilee" label="Don Messer&amp;#x27;s Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="78971" end="78991" title="Halifax Regional Municipality" label="Halifax, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081494" start="79117" end="79137" title="The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759054" start="79513" end="79525" title="Marg Osburne" label="Marg Osburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15436415" start="79530" end="79549" title="Charlie Chamberlain" label="Charlie Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802216" start="79623" end="79641" title="Till We Meet Again (1918 song)" label="Till We Meet Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499695" start="79746" end="79771" title="Stompin&amp;#x27; Tom Connors" label="Stompin&amp;#x27; Tom Connors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052826" start="79776" end="79794" title="Catherine McKinnon" label="Catherine McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q648366" start="79868" end="79877" title="Hank Snow" label="Hank Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q124670" start="79879" end="79890" title="Wilf Carter (musician)" label="Wilf Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q236543" start="79925" end="79936" title="Anne Murray" label="Anne Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437641" start="80439" end="80447" title="Scottish Canadian" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976298" start="80449" end="80458" title="Ukrainian Canadian" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030929" start="80460" end="80466" title="Canadians of German ethnicity" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="80497" end="80502" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="81151" end="81155" title="Folk music" label="folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q854451" start="81159" end="81165" title="Celtic music" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131433" start="81201" end="81213" title="Shania Twain" label="Shania Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q859266" start="81283" end="81315" title="List of best-selling music artists" label="best-selling artists of all time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="81411" end="81418" title="RIAA certification" label="Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="81556" end="81562" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823139" start="81675" end="81681" title="El Rey (song)" label="El Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q366584" start="81711" end="81724" title="George Strait" label="George Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946871" start="81738" end="81743" title="Twang (album)" label="Twang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840946" start="81767" end="81779" title="Al Hurricane" label="Al Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148685" start="81787" end="81802" title="A Tribute to Al Hurricane" label="tribute concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q547137" start="81813" end="81822" title="Latin pop" label="Latin pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680621" start="81849" end="81864" title="Lorenzo Antonio" label="Lorenzo Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217098" start="81954" end="81970" title="New Mexico music" label="New Mexico music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452648" start="82179" end="82192" title="Freddy Fender" label="Freddy Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="82256" end="82269" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880361" start="82282" end="82312" title="Before the Next Teardrop Falls (song)" label="Before the Next Teardrop Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972844" start="82329" end="82358" title="Wasted Days and Wasted Nights" label="Wasted Days and Wasted Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q919565" start="82486" end="82499" title="Marty Robbins" label="Marty Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351760" start="82512" end="82519" title="El Paso (song)" label="El Paso"/>
<link wikidata="Q206112" start="82535" end="82548" title="Willie Nelson" label="Willie Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183092" start="82553" end="82566" title="Merle Haggard" label="Merle Haggard"/>
<link wikidata="Q740729" start="82580" end="82596" title="Townes Van Zandt" label="Townes Van Zandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893091" start="82608" end="82624" title="Pancho and Lefty" label="Pancho and Lefty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812939" start="82638" end="82642" title="Toes (Zac Brown Band song)" label="Toes"/>
<link wikidata="Q139154" start="82652" end="82666" title="Zac Brown Band" label="Zac Brown Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895646" start="82678" end="82685" title="Sangria (song)" label="Sangria"/>
<link wikidata="Q94831" start="82695" end="82708" title="Blake Shelton" label="Blake Shelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309098" start="82710" end="82726" title="Regional Mexican" label="Regional Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="82763" end="82769" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q727634" start="82919" end="82935" title="Ranchera" label="Canción Ranchera"/>
<link wikidata="Q509028" start="82981" end="82986" title="ranch" label="ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q464129" start="83075" end="83083" title="Mariachi" label="Mariachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612172" start="83123" end="83130" title="Grupera" label="Grupero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2812726" start="83132" end="83137" title="Banda music" label="Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780056" start="83139" end="83146" title="Norteño (music)" label="Norteño"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801106" start="83148" end="83163" title="Tierra Caliente music" label="Tierra Caliente"/>
<link wikidata="Q907799" start="83165" end="83176" title="Duranguense" label="Duranguense"/>
<link wikidata="Q869210" start="83216" end="83223" title="Corrido" label="Corrido"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425111" start="83348" end="83355" title="Western music (North America)" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077388" start="83457" end="83463" title="Sentimental ballad" label="Ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q107740285" start="83466" end="83472" title="Cumbia" label="Cumbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15830404" start="83475" end="83482" title="Boleros" label="Boleros"/>
<link wikidata="Q458480" start="83900" end="83922" title="Neotraditional country" label="Neotraditional country"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="84037" end="84046" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q54119" start="84153" end="84176" title="San Pedro, Buenos Aires" label="San Pedro, Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="84231" end="84240" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="84288" end="84295" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="84297" end="84302" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="84304" end="84308" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629053" start="84639" end="84674" title="List of most-listened-to radio programs" label="most-listened-to stations in the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="84722" end="84731" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q19570983" start="84776" end="84795" title="BBC Radio 2 Country" label="BBC Radio 2 Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="84917" end="84928" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932701" start="84949" end="84959" title="Bob Harris (radio)" label="Bob Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604613" start="85032" end="85043" title="Ward Thomas (band)" label="Ward Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019103" start="85048" end="85058" title="The Shires (duo)" label="the Shires"/>
<link wikidata="Q22678033" start="85098" end="85103" title="Brave (The Shires album)" label="Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="85178" end="85193" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137230" start="85273" end="85298" title="Country Music Association" label="Country Music Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604613" start="85309" end="85320" title="Ward Thomas (band)" label="Ward Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="85381" end="85396" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q28452016" start="85414" end="85436" title="Cartwheels (Ward Thomas album)" label="&amp;quot;Cartwheels&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="" start="85452" end="85475" title="C2C: Country to Country" label="C2C: Country to Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="85545" end="85558" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="85587" end="85590" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820883" start="85650" end="85661" title="Mervyn Conn" label="Mervyn Conn"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="85771" end="85782" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="85784" end="85796" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q234017" start="85798" end="85811" title="Tammy Wynette" label="Tammy Wynette"/>
<link wikidata="Q711892" start="85813" end="85828" title="David Allan Coe" label="David Allan Coe"/>
<link wikidata="Q231286" start="85830" end="85844" title="Emmylou Harris" label="Emmylou Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q323534" start="85846" end="85859" title="Boxcar Willie" label="Boxcar Willie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702403" start="85861" end="85875" title="Johnny Russell (singer)" label="Johnny Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q202729" start="85880" end="85895" title="Jerry Lee Lewis" label="Jerry Lee Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="86104" end="86115" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q217160" start="86176" end="86188" title="Kenny Rogers" label="Kenny Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180850" start="86390" end="86399" title="Tom Jones (singer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="86533" end="86541" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q609672" start="86621" end="86641" title="Rest Your Love on Me" label="Rest Your Love on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163515" start="86687" end="86708" title="Islands in the Stream (song)" label="Islands in the Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q296872" start="86717" end="86727" title="Barry Gibb" label="Barry Gibb"/>
<link wikidata="Q221289" start="86877" end="86898" title="Engelbert Humperdinck (singer)" label="Engelbert Humperdinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690662" start="86963" end="86984" title="After the Lovin&amp;#x27;" label="After the Lovin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181412" start="87119" end="87129" title="Release Me (1949 song)" label="Release Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738938" start="87143" end="87167" title="Am I That Easy to Forget" label="Am I That Easy to Forget"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428153" start="87184" end="87208" title="There Goes My Everything (song)" label="There Goes My Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q156491" start="87229" end="87241" title="Bonnie Tyler" label="Bonnie Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q724859" start="87324" end="87345" title="It&amp;#x27;s a Heartache" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Heartache"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="87379" end="87395" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302066" start="87543" end="87558" title="Rocks and Honey" label="Rocks and Honey"/>
<link wikidata="Q924232" start="87592" end="87602" title="Vince Gill" label="Vince Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561880" start="87630" end="87640" title="Roger Cook (songwriter)" label="Roger Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561888" start="87645" end="87660" title="Roger Greenaway" label="Roger Greenaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q376125" start="87819" end="87853" title="Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344070" start="87896" end="87908" title="West Country" label="West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439349" start="87912" end="87931" title="Scrumpy and Western" label="Scrumpy and Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151663" start="87958" end="87970" title="novelty song" label="novelty song"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151495" start="87976" end="87988" title="comedy music" label="comedy music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439346" start="88025" end="88032" title="scrumpy" label="scrumpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994000" start="88154" end="88175" title="The Combine Harvester" label="The Combine Harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496524" start="88260" end="88272" title="Fred Wedlock" label="Fred Wedlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q298838" start="88365" end="88379" title="Billy Connolly" label="Billy Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203409" start="88419" end="88433" title="D.I.V.O.R.C.E." label="D.I.V.O.R.C.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q234017" start="88457" end="88470" title="Tammy Wynette" label="Tammy Wynette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203263" start="88482" end="88495" title="D-I-V-O-R-C-E" label="D-I-V-O-R-C-E"/>
<link wikidata="Q170377" start="88600" end="88609" title="Blackpool" label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749429" start="88817" end="88826" title="Amy Wadge" label="Amy Wadge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604613" start="88828" end="88839" title="Ward Thomas (band)" label="Ward Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027095" start="88841" end="88850" title="Tom Odell" label="Tom Odell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304958" start="88852" end="88865" title="Nathan Carter" label="Nathan Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q21003921" start="88867" end="88878" title="Lisa McHugh" label="Lisa McHugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q51830633" start="88880" end="88897" title="Catherine McGrath" label="Catherine McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642691" start="88899" end="88911" title="Wildwood Kin" label="Wildwood Kin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727232" start="88938" end="88953" title="Henry Priestman" label="Henry Priestman"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="88973" end="88980" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177472" start="88982" end="88999" title="Country and Irish" label="Country and Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7482056" start="89043" end="89059" title="Irish folk music" label="Irish folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252456" start="89102" end="89105" title="TG4" label="TG4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5573684" start="89170" end="89179" title="Glór Tíre" label="Glór Tíre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137302" start="89367" end="89380" title="James Kilbane" label="James Kilbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379958" start="89432" end="89441" title="contemporary Christian music" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161999" start="89569" end="89590" title="Daniel O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Daniel O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q959583" start="89679" end="89702" title="schlager music" label="European easy listening"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776764" start="89842" end="89855" title="Crystal Swing" label="Crystal Swing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="89883" end="89888" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434543" start="90029" end="90045" title="Far East Network" label="Far East Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q22126405" start="90235" end="90248" title="Tomi Fujiyama" label="Tomi Fujiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q117790117" start="90688" end="90700" title="Little Texas (Tokyo restaurant)" label="Little Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="90727" end="90733" title="Nagoya" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="90739" end="90744" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="90825" end="90832" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q54486340" start="91001" end="91011" title="Bobby Cash (singer)" label="Bobby Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="91175" end="91186" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234581" start="91277" end="91283" title="Igorot" label="Igorot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822" start="91461" end="91467" title="Baguio" label="Baguio"/>
<link wikidata="Q28197082" start="91521" end="91525" title="DZWR" label="DZWR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053196" start="91561" end="91583" title="Catholic Media Network" label="Catholic Media Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q65051714" start="91696" end="91700" title="DWUB" label="DWUB"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="91773" end="91784" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328743" start="91786" end="91806" title="Original Pinoy Music" label="Original Pinoy Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137230" start="91899" end="91924" title="Country Music Association" label="Country Music Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507495" start="92490" end="92508" title="George Hamilton IV" label="George Hamilton IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="92562" end="92574" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="92726" end="92739" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137230" start="92867" end="92892" title="Country Music Association" label="Country Music Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="92990" end="92994" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306436" start="93168" end="93180" title="Dream Rovers" label="Dream Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="93280" end="93286" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q559819" start="93572" end="93582" title="Toby Keith" label="Toby Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278668" start="93631" end="93642" title="Rabeh Sager" label="Rabeh Sager"/>
<link wikidata="Q21261030" start="93700" end="93716" title="Jazz ambassadors" label="Jazz ambassadors"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="93815" end="93821" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q329459" start="93823" end="93829" title="Rednex" label="Rednex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="93875" end="93886" title="synthpop" label="electro-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q314641" start="93998" end="94013" title="Cotton-Eyed Joe" label="Cotton-Eyed Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023538" start="94093" end="94110" title="Ann-Louise Hanson" label="Ann-Louise Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554749" start="94112" end="94127" title="Hasse Andersson" label="Hasse Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q235820" start="94129" end="94145" title="Kikki Danielsson" label="Kikki Danielsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q256856" start="94147" end="94167" title="Elisabeth Andreassen" label="Elisabeth Andreassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q272258" start="94172" end="94184" title="Jill Johnson" label="Jill Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="94189" end="94195" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193703" start="94246" end="94260" title="Piknik Country" label="Piknik Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q745085" start="94284" end="94291" title="Mrągowo" label="Mrągowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q815834" start="94295" end="94302" title="Masuria" label="Masuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539944" start="94407" end="94420" title="Liane Edwards" label="Liane Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="94480" end="94493" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047356" start="94501" end="94514" title="Eddy Mitchell" label="Eddy Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407862" start="94535" end="94544" title="Americana (music)" label="Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="94572" end="94583" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737611" start="95016" end="95022" title="Waylon (singer)" label="Waylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463071" start="95024" end="95034" title="Danny Vera (singer)" label="Danny Vera"/>
<link wikidata="Q463462" start="95036" end="95048" title="Ilse DeLange" label="Ilse DeLange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355665" start="95050" end="95059" title="Douwe Bob" label="Douwe Bob"/>
<link wikidata="Q685768" start="95064" end="95078" title="Henk Wijngaard" label="Henk Wijngaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="95081" end="95087" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110323" start="95192" end="95203" title="Hellbillies" label="Hellbillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9079451" start="95205" end="95217" title="Bjøro Håland" label="Bjøro Håland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14541238" start="95219" end="95232" title="Terje Tysland" label="Terje Tysland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580780" start="95234" end="95247" title="Vassendgutane" label="Vassendgutane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514021" start="95249" end="95262" title="Øystein Sunde" label="Øystein Sunde"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="95500" end="95510" title="rock music" label="rock music"/>
<link wikidata="Q833189" start="95512" end="95532" title="Norwegian folk music" label="Norwegian folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q153071" start="95538" end="95543" title="polka" label="polka"/>
<link wikidata="Q179636" start="95714" end="95738" title="CMT (American TV channel)" label="Country Music Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q179636" start="95794" end="95803" title="CMT Music" label="CMT Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q76846862" start="95819" end="95835" title="Paramount Global" label="Paramount Global"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276574" start="95838" end="95844" title="RFD-TV" label="RFD-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433011" start="95849" end="95867" title="The Cowboy Channel" label="The Cowboy Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814868" start="95903" end="95912" title="Heartland (TV network)" label="Heartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702510" start="95923" end="95941" title="Get After It Media" label="Get After It Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q81729877" start="95944" end="95958" title="Circle Country" label="Circle Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598232" start="96014" end="96029" title="Gray Television" label="Gray Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727797" start="96032" end="96051" title="The Country Network" label="The Country Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020702" start="96147" end="96171" title="California Music Channel" label="California Music Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753111" start="96175" end="96196" title="The Nashville Network" label="The Nashville Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q47460738" start="96599" end="96616" title="Paramount Network" label="Paramount Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681155" start="96672" end="96695" title="Jim Owens Entertainment" label="Jim Owens Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187760" start="96745" end="96762" title="Crook &amp;amp; Chase" label="Crook &amp;amp; Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702510" start="96806" end="96826" title="Get After It Media" label="Luken Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q903398" start="96949" end="96971" title="Great American Family" label="Great American Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q621592" start="97171" end="97186" title="Discovery, Inc." label="Discovery, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q113540927" start="97211" end="97220" title="Great American Media" label="GAC Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q124983938" start="97265" end="97272" title="Great American Living" label="Ride TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137239" start="97764" end="97767" title="CMT (Canadian TV channel)" label="CMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135686" start="97777" end="97796" title="Corus Entertainment" label="Corus Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030730" start="98018" end="98024" title="Canadian content" label="Cancom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909301" start="98112" end="98124" title="Cottage Life (TV channel)" label="Cottage Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094527" start="98292" end="98306" title="Stingray Music" label="Stingray Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255377" start="98374" end="98385" title="cable radio" label="cable radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022955" start="98491" end="98505" title="CBC Television" label="CBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293142" start="98522" end="98547" title="Don Messer&amp;#x27;s Jubilee" label="Don Messer&amp;#x27;s Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q236543" start="98649" end="98660" title="Anne Murray" label="Anne Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584712" start="98676" end="98687" title="Gordie Tapp" label="Gordie Tapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177324" start="98701" end="98716" title="Country Hoedown" label="Country Hoedown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441011" start="98748" end="98769" title="The Tommy Hunter Show" label="The Tommy Hunter Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q109544472" start="99022" end="99043" title="Country Music Channel" label="Country Music Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976628" start="99053" end="99059" title="Foxtel" label="Foxtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998901" start="99115" end="99118" title="CMT (Australian TV channel)" label="CMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="99129" end="99139" title="Network 10" label="Network 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q82947422" start="99155" end="99192" title="Paramount Networks UK &amp;amp; Australia" label="Paramount Networks UK &amp;amp; Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60787757" start="99306" end="99326" title="Music &amp;amp; Memories" label="Music &amp;amp; Memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q369820" start="99644" end="99651" title="Music of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="99767" end="99782" title="white Americans" label="white Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="99827" end="99836" title="Racial segregation" label="segregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="99859" end="99871" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="99966" end="99972" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="99977" end="99985" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098695" start="100087" end="100101" title="Grand Ole Opry" label="Grand Ole Opry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179504" start="100136" end="100149" title="DeFord Bailey" label="DeFord Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q862771" start="100345" end="100384" title="Hot Country Songs" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot Country Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="100504" end="100513" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="100639" end="100658" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative values"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254589" start="100725" end="100742" title="Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War" label="anti-war movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q183092" start="100979" end="100999" title="Merle Haggard" label="Merle Haggard&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144562" start="101011" end="101029" title="Okie from Muskogee" label="Okie from Muskogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="101140" end="101153" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921828" start="101431" end="101444" title="Mickey Guyton" label="Mickey Guyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q120907159" start="102076" end="102100" title="Try That in a Small Town" label="Try That in a Small Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q195439" start="102110" end="102122" title="Jason Aldean" label="Jason Aldean"/>
<link wikidata="Q116692901" start="102261" end="102273" title="Justin Jones (Tennessee politician)" label="Justin Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985086" start="102479" end="102488" title="Lynching in the United States" label="lynchings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298871" start="102493" end="102505" title="sundown town" label="sundown town"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="102686" end="102693" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q124504661" start="102757" end="102770" title="Cowboy Carter" label="Cowboy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q467355" start="102841" end="102850" title="Americana (culture)" label="Americana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6941899" start="102915" end="102931" title="Music history of the United States" label="American musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="102936" end="102952" title="Culture of the United States" label="cultural history"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="102970" end="103000" title="Cowboy Carter#Impact" label="cultural and commercial impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q19864075" start="103110" end="103143" title="American Country Countdown Awards" label="American Country Countdown Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032080" start="103146" end="103180" title="Canadian Country Music Association" label="Canadian Country Music Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007941" start="103183" end="103199" title="CMT Music Awards" label="CMT Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816259" start="103202" end="103220" title="Country (identity)" label="Country (identity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177472" start="103223" end="103240" title="Country and Irish" label="Country and Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q680685" start="103243" end="103280" title="Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q856284" start="103283" end="103304" title="Country-western dance" label="Country-western dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193678" start="103307" end="103344" title="Culture of the Southern United States" label="Culture of the Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q188451" start="103347" end="103358" title="Music genre" label="Music genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433923" start="103361" end="103393" title="List of country music performers" label="List of country music performers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595372" start="103396" end="103434" title="List of RPM number-one country singles" label="List of RPM number-one country singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267955" start="103437" end="103463" title="Music of the United States" label="Music of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="103466" end="103475" title="Pop music" label="Pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549530" start="103478" end="103503" title="Western Music Association" label="Western Music Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5248" wikidata="Q1052526" url="?curid=5248" title="Cold War (1948–1953)">
<text>The Cold War (1948–1953) is the period within the Cold War from the incapacitation of the Allied Control Council in 1948 to the conclusion of the Korean War in 1953.

The list of world leaders in these years is as follows:
* 1948–49: Clement Attlee (UK); Harry Truman (US); Vincent Auriol (France); Joseph Stalin (USSR); Chiang Kai-shek (China)
* 1950–51: Clement Attlee (UK); Harry Truman (US); Vincent Auriol (France); Joseph Stalin (USSR); Mao Zedong (Communist China)
* 1952–53: Winston Churchill (UK); Harry Truman (US); Vincent Auriol (France); Joseph Stalin (USSR); Mao Zedong (Communist China)

==Europe==
===Berlin Blockade===

After the Marshall Plan, the introduction of a new currency to Western Germany to replace the debased Reichsmark and massive electoral losses for communist parties in 1946, in June 1948, the Soviet Union cut off surface road access to Berlin.

On the day of the Berlin Blockade, a Soviet representative told the other occupying powers &quot;We are warning both you and the population of Berlin that we shall apply economic and administrative sanctions that will lead to circulation in Berlin exclusively of the currency of the Soviet occupation zone.&quot;

Thereafter, street and water communications were severed, rail and barge traffic was stopped and the Soviets initially stopped supplying food to the civilian population in the non-Soviet sectors of Berlin. Because Berlin was located within the Soviet-occupied zone of Germany and the other occupying powers had previously relied on Soviet good will for access to Berlin, the only available methods of supplying the city were three limited air corridors.

By February 1948, because of massive post-war military cuts, the entire United States army had been reduced to 552,000 men. Military forces in non-Soviet Berlin sectors totaled only 8,973 Americans, 7,606 British and 6,100 French. Soviet military forces in the Soviet sector that surrounded Berlin totaled one and a half million men. The two United States regiments in Berlin would have provided little resistance against a Soviet attack. Believing that Britain, France and the United States had little option other than to acquiesce, the Soviet Military Administration in Germany celebrated the beginning of the blockade. Thereafter, a massive aerial supply campaign of food, water and other goods was initiated by the United States, Britain, France and other countries. The Soviets derided &quot;the futile attempts of the Americans to save face and to maintain their untenable position in Berlin.&quot; The success of the airlift eventually caused the Soviets to lift their blockade in May 1949.

However, the Soviet Army was still capable of conquering Western Europe without much difficulty. In September 1948, US military intelligence experts estimated that the Soviets had about 485,000 troops in their German occupation zone and in Poland, and some 1.785 million troops in Europe in total. At the same time, the number of US troops in 1948 was about 140,000.

===Tito–Stalin Split===

After disagreements between Yugoslavian leader Josip Broz Tito and the Soviet Union regarding Greece and the People&#x27;s Republic of Albania, a Tito–Stalin Split occurred, followed by Yugoslavia being expelled from the Cominform in June 1948 and a brief failed Soviet putsch in Belgrade. The split created two separate communist forces in Europe. A vehement campaign against &quot;Titoism&quot; was immediately started in the Eastern Bloc, describing agents of both the West and Tito in all places engaging in subversive activity. This resulted in the persecution of many major party cadres, including those in East Germany.

was split up and dissolved in 1954 and 1975, also because of the détente between the West and Tito.

===NATO===

The United States joined Britain, France, Canada, Denmark, Portugal, Norway, Belgium, Iceland, Luxembourg, Italy, and the Netherlands in 1949 to form the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the United States&#x27; first &quot;entangling&quot; European alliance in 170 years. West Germany, Spain, Greece, and Turkey would later join this alliance. The Eastern leaders retaliated against these steps by integrating the economies of their nations in Comecon, their version of the Marshall Plan; exploding the first Soviet atomic device in 1949; signing an alliance with People&#x27;s Republic of China in February 1950; and forming the Warsaw Pact, Eastern Europe&#x27;s counterpart to NATO, in 1955. The Soviet Union, Albania, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, East Germany, Bulgaria, Romania, and Poland founded this military alliance.

===NSC 68===
U.S. officials quickly moved to escalate and expand &quot;containment.&quot; In a secret 1950 document, NSC 68, they proposed to strengthen their alliance systems, quadruple defense spending, and embark on an elaborate propaganda campaign to convince the U.S. public to fight this costly cold war. Truman ordered the development of a hydrogen bomb. In early 1950, the U.S. took its first efforts to oppose communist forces in Vietnam; planned to form a West German army, and prepared proposals for a peace treaty with Japan that would guarantee long-term U.S. military bases there.

==Outside Europe==
The Cold War took place worldwide, but it had a partially different timing and trajectory outside Europe.

In Africa, decolonization took place first; it was largely accomplished in the 1950s. The main rivals then sought bases of support in the new national political alignments. In Latin America, the first major confrontation took place in Guatemala in 1954. When the new Castro government of Cuba turned to Soviets support in 1960, Cuba became the center of the anti-American Cold War forces, supported by the Soviet Union.

===Chinese Civil War===

As Japan&#x27;s empire collapsed in 1945 the civil war resumed in China between the Kuomintang (KMT) led by Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek and the Chinese Communist Party led by Mao Zedong. The USSR had signed a Treaty of Friendship with the Kuomintang in 1945 and disavowed support for the Chinese Communists. The outcome was closely fought, with the Communists finally prevailing with superior military tactics. Although the Nationalists had an advantage in numbers of men and weapons, initially controlled a much larger territory and population than their adversaries, and enjoyed considerable international support, they were exhausted by the long war with Japan and the attendant internal responsibilities. In addition, the Chinese Communists were able to fill the political vacuum left in Manchuria after Soviet forces withdrew from the area and thus gained China&#x27;s prime industrial base. The Chinese Communists were able to fight their way from the north and northeast, and virtually all of mainland China was taken by the end of 1949. On October 1, 1949, Mao Zedong proclaimed the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC). Chiang Kai-shek and 600,000 Nationalist troops and 2 million refugees, predominantly from the government and business community, fled from the mainland to the island of Taiwan. In December 1949, Chiang proclaimed Taipei the temporary capital of the Republic of China (ROC) and continued to assert his government as the sole legitimate authority in China.

The continued hostility between the Communists on the mainland and the Nationalists on Taiwan continued throughout the Cold War. Though the United States refused to aide Chiang Kai-shek in his hope to &quot;recover the mainland,&quot; it continued supporting the Republic of China with military supplies and expertise to prevent Taiwan from falling into PRC hands. Through the support of the Western bloc (most Western countries continued to recognize the ROC as the sole legitimate government of China), the Republic of China on Taiwan retained China&#x27;s seat in the United Nations until 1971.

===Madiun Affair===
Madiun Affair took place on September 18, 1948, in the city of Madiun, East Java. This rebellion was carried out by the Front Demokrasi Rakyat (FDR, People&#x27;s Democratic Front) which united all socialist and communist groups in Indonesia. This rebellion ended 3 months later after its leaders were arrested and executed by the TNI.

This revolt began with the fall of the Amir Syarifuddin Cabinet due to the signing of the Renville Agreement which benefited the Dutch and was eventually replaced by the Hatta Cabinet which did not belong to the left wing. This led Amir Syarifuddin to declare opposition to the Hatta Cabinet government and to declare the formation of the People&#x27;s Democratic Front.

Before it, In the PKI Politburo session on August 13–14, 1948, Musso, an Indonesian communist figure, introduced a political concept called &quot;Jalan Baru&quot;. He also wanted a single Marxism party called the PKI (Communist Party of Indonesia) consisting of illegal communists, the Labour Party of Indonesia, and Partai Sosialis(Socialist Party).

On September 18, 1948, the FDR declared the formation of the Republic of Soviet-Indonesia. In addition, the communists also carried out a rebellion in the Pati Residency and the kidnapping of groups who were considered to be against communists. Even this rebellion resulted in the murder of the Governor of East Java at the time, Raden Mas Tumenggung Ario Soerjo.

The crackdown operation against this movement began. This operation was led by A.H. Nasution. The Indonesian government also applied Commander General Sudirman to the Military Operations Movement I where General Sudirman ordered Colonel Gatot Soebroto and Colonel Sungkono to mobilize the TNI and police to crush the rebellion.

On September 30, 1948, Madiun was captured again by the Republic of Indonesia. Musso was shot dead on his escape in Sumoroto and Amir Syarifuddin was executed after being captured in Central Java. In early December 1948, the Madiun Affair crackdown was declared complete.

==Korean War==
In early 1950, the United States made its first commitment to form a peace treaty with Japan that would guarantee long-term U.S. military bases. Some observers (including George Kennan) believed that the Japanese treaty led Stalin to approve a plan to invade U.S.-supported South Korea on June 25, 1950. Korea had been divided at the end of World War II along the 38th parallel into Soviet and U.S. occupation zones, in which a communist government was installed in the North by the Soviets, and an elected government in the South came to power after UN-supervised elections in 1948.

In June 1950, Kim Il Sung&#x27;s North Korean People&#x27;s Army invaded South Korea. Fearing that communist Korea under a Kim Il Sung dictatorship could threaten Japan and foster other communist movements in Asia, Truman committed U.S. forces and obtained help from the United Nations to counter the North Korean invasion. The Soviets boycotted UN Security Council meetings while protesting the council&#x27;s failure to seat the People&#x27;s Republic of China and, thus, did not veto the council&#x27;s approval of UN action to oppose the North Korean invasion. A joint UN force of personnel from South Korea, the United States, Britain, Turkey, Canada, Australia, France, the Philippines, the Netherlands, Belgium, New Zealand and other countries joined to stop the invasion. After a Chinese invasion to assist the North Koreans, fighting stabilized along the 38th parallel, which had separated the Koreas. Truman faced a hostile China, a Sino-Soviet partnership, and a defense budget that had quadrupled in eighteen months.

The Korean Armistice Agreement was signed in July 1953 after the death of Stalin, who had been insisting that the North Koreans continue fighting. In North Korea, Kim Il Sung created a highly centralized and brutal dictatorship, according himself unlimited power and generating a formidable cult of personality.

==Hydrogen bomb==
A hydrogen bomb—which produced nuclear fusion instead of nuclear fission—was first tested by the United States in November 1952 and the Soviet Union in August 1953. Such bombs were first deployed in the 1960s.

==Culture and media==

Fear of a nuclear war spurred the production of public safety films by the United States federal government&#x27;s Civil Defense branch that demonstrated ways on protecting oneself from a Soviet nuclear attack. The 1951 children&#x27;s film &quot;Duck and Cover&quot; is a prime example.

George Orwell&#x27;s classic dystopia Nineteen Eighty-Four was published in 1949. The novel explores life in an imagined future world where a totalitarian government has achieved terrifying levels of power and control. With Nineteen Eighty-Four, Orwell taps into the anti-communist fears that would continue to haunt so many in the West for decades to come. In a Cold War setting his descriptions could hardly fail to evoke comparison to Soviet communism and the seeming willingness of Stalin and his successors to control those within the Soviet bloc by whatever means necessary. Orwell&#x27;s famous allegory of totalitarian rule, Animal Farm, published in 1945, provoked similar anti-communist sentiments.

==See also==
* Western Union
* History of the Soviet Union (1927–1953)
* History of the United States (1945–1964)
* Timeline of events in the Cold War
* Animal Farm

==Notes==
==References==
* Ball, S. J. &quot;The Cold War: An International History, 1947–1991&quot; (1998). British perspective
* Brzezinski, Zbigniew. &quot;The Grand Failure: The Birth and Death of Communism in the Twentieth Century&quot; (1989);
* Brune, Lester Brune and Richard Dean Burns. &quot;Chronology of the Cold War: 1917–1992&quot; (2005) 700pp; highly detailed month-by-month summary for many countries
* 
* 
* Gaddis, John Lewis. &quot;The Cold War: A New History&quot; (2005)
* Gaddis, John Lewis. &quot;Long Peace: Inquiries into the History of the Cold War&quot; (1987)
* Gaddis, John Lewis. &quot;Strategies of Containment: A Critical Appraisal of Postwar American National Security Policy&quot; (1982)
* 
* LaFeber, Walter. &quot;America, Russia, and the Cold War, 1945–1992&quot; 7th ed. (1993)
* Lewkowicz, Nicolas (2018) &quot;The United States, the Soviet Union and the Geopolitical Implications of the Origins of the Cold War&quot;, Anthem Press, London
* 
* Mitchell, George. &quot;The Iron Curtain: The Cold War in Europe&quot; (2004)
* 
* Ninkovich, Frank. &quot;Germany and the United States: The Transformation of the German Question since 1945&quot; (1988)
* Paterson, Thomas G. &quot;Meeting the Communist Threat: Truman to Reagan&quot; (1988)
* 
* Sivachev, Nikolai and Nikolai Yakolev, &quot;Russia and the United States&quot; (1979), by Soviet historians
* 
* Ulam, Adam B. &quot;Expansion and Coexistence: Soviet Foreign Policy, 1917–1973&quot;, 2nd ed. (1974)
* Walker, J. Samuel. &quot;Historians and Cold War Origins: The New Consensus&quot;, in Gerald K. Haines and J. Samuel Walker, eds., &quot;American Foreign Relations: A Historiographical Review&quot; (1981), 207–236.
* Cumings, Bruce &quot;The Origins of the Korean War&quot; (2 vols., 1981–90), friendly to North Korea and hostile to U.S.
* Holloway, David. &quot;Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy, 1959-1956&quot; (1994)
* Goncharov, Sergei, John Lewis and Xue Litai, &quot;Uncertain Partners: Stalin, Mao and the Korean War&quot; (1993)
* Leffler, Melvyn. &quot;A Preponderance of Power: National Security, the Truman Administration and the Cold War&quot; (1992).
* Mastny, Vojtech. &quot;Russia&#x27;s Road to the Cold War: Diplomacy, Warfare, and the Politics of Communism, 1941–1945&quot; (1979)
* Zhang, Shu Guang. &quot;Beijing&#x27;s Economic Statecraft during the Cold War, 1949-1991&quot; (2014). online review

==External links==
* Draft, Report on Communist Expansion, February 28, 1947 
* The division of Europe on CVCE website
* James F. Byrnes, Speaking Frankly The division of Germany. From BYRNES, James F. Speaking Frankly. New York: Harper and Brothers Publishers, 1947. 324 p, Available on the CVCE website.
* The beginning of the Cold War on CVCE website
* The Sinews of Peace Winston Churchill speech in 5, March, 1946, warning about the advance of communism in central Europe. Sound extract on the CVCE website.
* Dividing up Europe The 1944 division of Europe between the Soviet Union and Britain into zones of influence. On CVCE website
* James Francis Byrnes and U.S. Policy towards Germany 1945–1947 Deutsch-Amerikanische Zentrum / James-F.-Byrnes-Institut e.V
* UK Policy towards Germany National Archives excerpts of Cabinet meetings.
* Royal Engineers Museum Royal Engineers and the Cold War
* Cold War overview</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1052526" start="4" end="24" title="Cold War (1948–1953)" label="Cold War (1948–1953)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="50" end="58" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="90" end="112" title="Allied Control Council" label="Allied Control Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="146" end="156" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="234" end="248" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="255" end="267" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q158772" start="274" end="288" title="Vincent Auriol" label="Vincent Auriol"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="299" end="312" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="321" end="336" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="356" end="370" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="377" end="389" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q158772" start="396" end="410" title="Vincent Auriol" label="Vincent Auriol"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="421" end="434" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="443" end="453" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="483" end="500" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="507" end="519" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q158772" start="526" end="540" title="Vincent Auriol" label="Vincent Auriol"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="551" end="564" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="573" end="583" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="647" end="660" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155009" start="739" end="749" title="Reichsmark" label="Reichsmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="872" end="878" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="3090" end="3105" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q467864" start="3152" end="3185" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Albania" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196099" start="3189" end="3206" title="Tito–Stalin Split" label="Tito–Stalin Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q183533" start="3264" end="3273" title="Cominform" label="Cominform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3938" end="3972" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q191582" start="4238" end="4245" title="Comecon" label="Comecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="4268" end="4281" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="4310" end="4323" title="nuclear weapon" label="atomic device"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4358" end="4389" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="4424" end="4435" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367946" start="4735" end="4741" title="NSC 68" label="NSC 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="4965" end="4978" title="hydrogen bomb" label="hydrogen bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="5870" end="5880" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="5908" end="5923" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="5932" end="5955" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="5963" end="5973" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="6432" end="6451" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="long war with Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="6580" end="6589" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="6788" end="6802" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="6879" end="6910" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="7087" end="7093" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="7131" end="7137" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917181" start="7820" end="7859" title="China and the United Nations" label="China&amp;#x27;s seat in the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q662844" start="7893" end="7906" title="Madiun Affair" label="Madiun Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586" start="7964" end="7973" title="East Java" label="East Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="8125" end="8134" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q855515" start="8224" end="8227" title="Indonesian National Armed Forces" label="TNI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810083" start="8269" end="8285" title="Amir Sjarifuddin" label="Amir Syarifuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q769581" start="8320" end="8338" title="Renville Agreement" label="Renville Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="8359" end="8364" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453078" start="8400" end="8413" title="First Hatta Cabinet" label="Hatta Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q309118" start="8624" end="8633" title="Politburo" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398584" start="8665" end="8670" title="Musso" label="Musso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="8790" end="8797" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q157744" start="8820" end="8848" title="Communist Party of Indonesia" label="Communist Party of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4203019" start="8888" end="8913" title="Labour Party of Indonesia" label="Labour Party of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075404" start="9015" end="9033" title="Soviet republic (system of government)" label="Republic of Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10622" start="9109" end="9113" title="Pati Regency" label="Pati"/>
<link wikidata="Q317291" start="9403" end="9411" title="Nasution" label="Nasution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367329" start="9470" end="9478" title="Sudirman" label="Sudirman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261540" start="9556" end="9570" title="Gatot Soebroto" label="Gatot Soebroto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103954" start="9616" end="9622" title="Indonesian National Police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557" start="9831" end="9843" title="Central Java" label="Central Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q156058" start="10107" end="10120" title="George F. Kennan" label="George Kennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="10210" end="10221" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="10240" end="10245" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="10406" end="10411" title="North Korea" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="10535" end="10546" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q240670" start="10554" end="10585" title="Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="North Korean People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="10792" end="10806" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="10867" end="10886" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="10952" end="10983" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11138" end="11151" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="11153" end="11160" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="11162" end="11168" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="11170" end="11176" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="11178" end="11187" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="11189" end="11195" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="11201" end="11212" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="11218" end="11229" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="11231" end="11238" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="11240" end="11251" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862267" start="11555" end="11581" title="Korean Armistice Agreement" label="Korean Armistice Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="11766" end="11778" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="11842" end="11861" title="cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="11884" end="11897" title="hydrogen bomb" label="hydrogen bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="11913" end="11927" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11429" start="11939" end="11954" title="nuclear fission" label="nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="12191" end="12230" title="Federal Government of the United States" label="United States federal government&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q10427676" start="12231" end="12244" title="Civil Defense" label="Civil Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q499144" start="12363" end="12377" title="Duck and Cover (film)" label="Duck and Cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="12443" end="12463" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="Nineteen Eighty-Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396889" start="13038" end="13049" title="Animal Farm" label="Animal Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988404" start="13130" end="13143" title="Western Union (alliance)" label="Western Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199213" start="13146" end="13185" title="History of the Soviet Union (1927–1953)" label="History of the Soviet Union (1927–1953)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137687" start="13188" end="13228" title="History of the United States (1945–1964)" label="History of the United States (1945–1964)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092324" start="13231" end="13265" title="Timeline of events in the Cold War" label="Timeline of events in the Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396889" start="13268" end="13279" title="Animal Farm" label="Animal Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939862" start="15470" end="15485" title="Vojtech Mastny (historian)" label="Mastny, Vojtech"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="16100" end="16117" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5249" wikidata="Q2937479" url="?curid=5249" title="Crony capitalism">
<text>Crony capitalism, sometimes also called simply cronyism, is a pejorative term used in political discourse to describe a situation in which businesses profit from a close relationship with state power, either through an anti-competitive regulatory environment, direct government largesse, and/or corruption. Examples given for crony capitalism include obtainment of permits, government grants, tax breaks, or other undue influence from businesses over the state&#x27;s deployment of public goods, for example, mining concessions for primary commodities or contracts for public works. In other words, it is used to describe a situation where businesses thrive not as a result of free enterprise, but rather collusion between a business class and the political class.

Wealth is then accumulated not merely by making a profit in the market, but through profiteering by rent seeking using this monopoly or oligopoly. Entrepreneurship and innovative practices that seek to reward risk are stifled since the value-added is little by crony businesses, as hardly anything of significant value is created by them, with transactions taking the form of trading. Crony capitalism spills over into the government, the politics, and the media, when this nexus distorts the economy and affects society to an extent it corrupts public-serving economic, political, and social ideals.

== Historical usage ==
The first extensive use of the term &quot;crony capitalism&quot; came about in the 1980s, to characterize the Philippine economy under the dictatorship of Ferdinand Marcos. Early uses of this term to describe the economic practices of the Marcos regime included that of Ricardo Manapat, who introduced it in his 1979 pamphlet &quot;Some are Smarter than Others&quot;, which was later published in 1991; former &quot;Time&quot; magazine business editor George M. Taber, who used the term in a &quot;Time&quot; magazine article in 1980, and activist (and later Finance Minister) Jaime Ongpin, who used the term extensively in his writing and is sometimes credited for having coined it.

The term crony capitalism made a significant impact in the public as an explanation of the Asian financial crisis.

It is also used to describe governmental decisions favoring cronies of governmental officials.

The term is used largely interchangeably with the related term corporate welfare, although the latter is by definition specific to corporations.

== In practice ==

Crony capitalism exists along a continuum. In its lightest form, crony capitalism consists of collusion among market players which is officially tolerated or encouraged by the government. While perhaps lightly competing against each other, they will present a unified front (sometimes called a trade association or industry trade group) to the government in requesting subsidies aid or regulation. For instance, newcomers to a market then need to surmount significant barriers to entry in seeking loans, acquiring shelf space, or receiving official sanction. Some such systems are very formalized, such as sports leagues and the Medallion System of the taxicabs of New York City, but often the process is more subtle, such as expanding training and certification exams to make it more expensive for new entrants to enter a market and thereby limiting potential competition. In technological fields, there may evolve a system whereby new entrants may be accused of infringing on patents that the established competitors never assert against each other. In spite of this, some competitors may succeed when the legal barriers are light. The term crony capitalism is generally used when these practices either come to dominate the economy as a whole, or come to dominate the most valuable industries in an economy. Intentionally ambiguous laws and regulations are common in such systems. Taken strictly, such laws would greatly impede practically all business activity, but in practice, they are only erratically enforced. The specter of having such laws suddenly brought down upon a business provides an incentive to stay in the good graces of political officials. Troublesome rivals who have overstepped their bounds can have these laws suddenly enforced against them, leading to fines or even jail time. Even in high-income democracies with well-established legal systems and freedom of the press in place, a larger state is generally associated with increased political corruption.

The term crony capitalism was initially applied to states involved in the 1997 Asian financial crisis such as Indonesia, South Korea and Thailand. In these cases, the term was used to point out how family members of the ruling leaders became extremely wealthy with no non-political justification. Southeast Asian nations, such as Hong Kong and Malaysia, still score very poorly in rankings measuring this. It was also used in this context as part of a broader liberal critique of economic dirigisme. The term has also been applied to the system of oligarchs in Russia. Other states to which the term has been applied include India, in particular the system after the 1990s liberalization, whereby land and other resources were given at throwaway prices in the name of public-private partnerships, the more recent coal-gate scam and cheap allocation of land and resources to Adani SEZ under the Congress and BJP governments. Similar references to crony capitalism have been made to other countries such as Argentina and Greece. Wu Jinglian, one of China&#x27;s leading economists and a longtime advocate of its transition to free markets, says that it faces two starkly contrasting futures, namely a market economy under the rule of law or crony capitalism. A dozen years later, prominent political scientist Pei Minxin concluded that the latter course had become deeply embedded in China. The anti-corruption campaign under Xi Jinping (2012–) has seen more than 100,000 high- and low-ranking Chinese officials indicted and jailed.

Many prosperous nations have also had varying amounts of cronyism throughout their history, including the United Kingdom, especially in the 1600s and 1700s, the United States and Japan.

=== Crony capitalism index ===
&quot;The Economist&quot; benchmarks countries based on a crony-capitalism index calculated via how much economic activity occurs in industries prone to cronyism. Its 2014 Crony Capitalism Index ranking listed Hong Kong, Russia and Malaysia in the top three spots.

== In finance ==
Crony capitalism in finance was found in the Second Bank of the United States. It was a private company, but its largest stockholder was the federal government which owned 20%. It was an early bank regulator and grew to be one of the most powerful organizations in the country due largely to being the depository of the government&#x27;s revenue.

The Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act in 1999 completely removed Glass–Steagall’s separation between commercial banks and investment banks. After this repeal, commercial banks, investment banks and insurance companies combined their lobbying efforts. Critics claim this was instrumental in the passage of the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005.

== In sections of an economy ==

More direct government involvement in a specific sector can also lead to specific areas of crony capitalism, even if the economy as a whole may be competitive. This is most common in natural resource sectors through the granting of mining or drilling concessions, but it is also possible through a process known as regulatory capture where the government agencies in charge of regulating an industry come to be controlled by that industry. Governments will often establish in good faith government agencies to regulate an industry. However, the members of an industry have a very strong interest in the actions of that regulatory body while the rest of the citizenry are only lightly affected. As a result, it is not uncommon for current industry players to gain control of the watchdog and use it against competitors. This typically takes the form of making it very expensive for a new entrant to enter the market. An 1824 landmark United States Supreme Court ruling overturned a New York State-granted monopoly (&quot;a veritable model of state munificence&quot; facilitated by Robert R. Livingston, one of the Founding Fathers) for the then-revolutionary technology of steamboats. Leveraging the Supreme Court&#x27;s establishment of Congressional supremacy over commerce, the Interstate Commerce Commission was established in 1887 with the intent of regulating railroad robber barons. President Grover Cleveland appointed Thomas M. Cooley, a railroad ally, as its first chairman and a permit system was used to deny access to new entrants and legalize price fixing.

The defense industry in the United States is often described as an example of crony capitalism in an industry. Connections with the Pentagon and lobbyists in Washington are described by critics as more important than actual competition due to the political and secretive nature of defense contracts. In the Airbus-Boeing WTO dispute, Airbus (which receives outright subsidies from European governments) has stated Boeing receives similar subsidies which are hidden as inefficient defense contracts. Other American defense companies were put under scrutiny for no-bid contracts for the Iraq War and Hurricane Katrina related contracts purportedly due to having cronies in the Bush administration.

Gerald P. O&#x27;Driscoll, former vice president at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, stated that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac became examples of crony capitalism as government backing let Fannie and Freddie dominate mortgage underwriting, saying: &quot;The politicians created the mortgage giants, which then returned some of the profits to the pols—sometimes directly, as campaign funds; sometimes as &quot;contributions&quot; to favored constituents&quot;.

== In developing economies ==
In its worst form, crony capitalism can devolve into simple corruption where any pretense of a free market is dispensed with, bribes to government officials are considered &quot;de rigueur&quot; and tax evasion is common. This is seen in many parts of Africa and is sometimes called plutocracy (rule by wealth) or kleptocracy (rule by theft). Kenyan economist David Ndii has repeatedly brought to light how this system has manifested over time, occasioned by the reign of Uhuru Kenyatta as president.

Corrupt governments may favor one set of business owners who have close ties to the government over others. This may also be done with, religious, or ethnic favoritism. For instance, Alawites in Syria have a disproportionate share of power in the government and business there (President Assad himself is an Alawite). This can be explained by considering personal relationships as a social network. As government and business leaders try to accomplish various things, they naturally turn to other powerful people for support in their endeavors. These people form hubs in the network. In a developing country, those hubs may be very few, thus concentrating economic and political power in a small interlocking group.

Normally, this will be untenable to maintain in business as new entrants will affect the market. However, if business and government are entwined, then the government can maintain the small-hub network.

Raymond Vernon, a specialist in economics and international affairs, wrote that the Industrial Revolution began in Great Britain because they were the first to successfully limit the power of veto groups (typically cronies of those with power in government) to block innovations, writing: &quot;Unlike most other national environments, the British environment of the early 19th century contained relatively few threats to those who improved and applied existing inventions, whether from business competitors, labor, or the government itself. In other European countries, by contrast, the merchant guilds ... were a pervasive source of veto for many centuries. This power was typically bestowed upon them by government.&quot; Vermon further stated that &quot;a steam-powered horseless carriage produced in France in 1769 was officially suppressed.&quot; James Watt began experimenting with steam in 1763, got a patent in 1769 and began commercial production in 1775.

Raghuram Rajan, former governor of the Reserve Bank of India, has said: &quot;One of the greatest dangers to the growth of developing countries is the middle income trap, where crony capitalism creates oligarchies that slow down growth. If the debate during the elections is any pointer, this is a very real concern of the public in India today&quot;. Tavleen Singh, columnist for &quot;The Indian Express&quot;, has disagreed. According to Singh, India&#x27;s corporate success is not a product of crony capitalism, but because India is no longer under the influence of crony socialism.

== Political viewpoints ==

While the problem is generally accepted across the political spectrum, ideology shades the view of the problem&#x27;s causes and therefore its solutions. Political views mostly fall into two camps which might be called the socialist and capitalist critique. The socialist position is that crony capitalism is the inevitable result of any strictly capitalist system and thus broadly democratic government must regulate economic, or wealthy, interests to restrict monopoly. The capitalist position is that natural monopolies are rare, therefore governmental regulations generally abet established wealthy interests by restricting competition.

=== Socialist critique ===
Critics of crony capitalism including socialists and anti-capitalists often assert that so-called crony capitalism is simply the inevitable result of any strictly capitalist system. Jane Jacobs described it as a natural consequence of collusion between those managing power and trade while Noam Chomsky has argued that the word crony is superfluous when describing capitalism. Since businesses make money and money leads to political power, business will inevitably use their power to influence governments. Much of the impetus behind campaign finance reform in the United States and in other countries is an attempt to prevent economic power from being used to take political power.

Ravi Batra argues that &quot;all official economic measures adopted since 1981 ... have devastated the middle class&quot; and that the Occupy Wall Street movement should push for their repeal and thus end the influence of the super wealthy in the political process which he considers a manifestation of crony capitalism.

Socialist economists, such as Robin Hahnel, have criticized the term as an ideologically motivated attempt to cast what is in their view the fundamental problems of capitalism as avoidable irregularities. Socialist economists dismiss the term as an apologetic for failures of neoliberal policy and more fundamentally their perception of the weaknesses of market allocation.

=== Capitalist critique ===
Supporters of capitalism also generally oppose crony capitalism. Further, supporters such as classical liberals, neoliberals and right-libertarians consider it an aberration brought on by governmental favors incompatible with the free market.. In the capitalist view, cronyism is the result of an excess of interference in the market which inevitably will result in a toxic combination of corporations and government officials running sectors of the economy. For instance, the &quot;Financial Times&quot; observed that, in Vietnam during the 2010s, the primary beneficiaries of cronyism were Communist party officials, noting also the &quot;common practice of employing only party members and their family members and associates to government jobs or to jobs in state-owned enterprises.&quot;

Conservative commentator Ben Shapiro prefers to equate this problem with terms such as corporatocracy or corporatism, considered &quot;a modern form of mercantilism&quot;, to emphasize that the only way to run a profitable business in such a system is to have help from corrupt government officials. Likewise, Hernando de Soto said that mercantilism &quot;is also known as &#x27;crony&#x27; or &#x27;noninclusive&#x27; capitalism&quot;.

Even if the initial regulation was well-intentioned (to curb actual abuses) and even if the initial lobbying by corporations was well-intentioned (to reduce illogical regulations), the mixture of business and government stifles competition, a collusive result called regulatory capture. Burton W. Folsom Jr. distinguishes those who engage in crony capitalism—designated by him political entrepreneurs—from those who compete in the marketplace without special aid from the government, whom he calls market entrepreneurs. The market entrepreneurs such as James J. Hill, Cornelius Vanderbilt and John D. Rockefeller succeeded by producing a quality product at a competitive price. For example, political entrepreneurs such as Edward Collins in steamships and the leaders of the Union Pacific Railroad in railroads were men who used the power of government to succeed. They tried to gain subsidies or in some way use the government to stop competitors.

== See also ==

* Actually existing capitalism
* Corporatocracy
* Cronyism
* Cronies of Ferdinand Marcos
* Economic History of the Philippines under Ferdinand Marcos
* Government failure
* Government-owned corporation
* Inverted totalitarianism
* Iron triangle (US politics)
* Licence Raj (concept in Indian political-economics)
* Mercantilism
* Patrimonialism
* Political family
* Political machine
* Regulatory capture
* Rent-seeking
* Stamocap
* State capture
* Supercapitalism
* Zhao family
== Notes ==
== References ==


== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Khatri, Naresh (2013). Anatomy of Indian Brand of Crony Capitalism. https://ssrn.com/abstract=2335201.
* http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/19626/1/WP0802.pdf</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2937479" start="0" end="16" title="Crony capitalism" label="Crony capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937479" start="47" end="55" title="Crony capitalism" label="cronyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129466" start="86" end="105" title="political discourse" label="political discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="139" end="147" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408462" start="219" end="258" title="Regulatory capture" label="anti-competitive regulatory environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="295" end="305" title="Political corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q10964327" start="326" end="331" title="crony" label="crony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689411" start="393" end="402" title="tax break" label="tax break"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="677" end="692" title="free enterprise" label="free enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q573908" start="748" end="763" title="political class" label="political class"/>
<link wikidata="Q37654" start="826" end="836" title="Market (economics)" label="the market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428800" start="866" end="878" title="Rent-seeking" label="rent seeking"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="890" end="898" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q103639" start="902" end="911" title="oligopoly" label="oligopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="913" end="929" title="Entrepreneurship" label="Entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q272458" start="1312" end="1326" title="Public good (economics)" label="public-serving"/>
<link wikidata="Q60751320" start="1501" end="1542" title="Philippine economy under Ferdinand Marcos" label="Philippine economy under the dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463" start="1546" end="1562" title="Ferdinand Marcos" label="Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279537" start="1661" end="1676" title="Ricardo Manapat" label="Ricardo Manapat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107062" start="1968" end="1980" title="Jaime Ongpin" label="Jaime Ongpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="2167" end="2189" title="Asian financial crisis" label="Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172508" start="2351" end="2368" title="corporate welfare" label="corporate welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="2419" end="2431" title="corporations" label="corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178147" start="2768" end="2788" title="industry trade group" label="industry trade group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316596" start="3106" end="3131" title="taxicabs of New York City" label="taxicabs of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163938" start="3567" end="3575" title="Barriers to entry" label="barriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="4510" end="4537" title="1997 Asian financial crisis" label="1997 Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="4896" end="4903" title="Economic liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227725" start="4925" end="4934" title="dirigisme" label="dirigisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006045" start="4984" end="4993" title="Business oligarch" label="oligarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333520" start="5103" end="5123" title="Economic liberalisation in India" label="1990s liberalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104274" start="5249" end="5258" title="coal-gate" label="coal-gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058076" start="5310" end="5319" title="Adani Ports &amp;amp; SEZ Limited" label="Adani SEZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="5330" end="5338" title="Indian National Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="5343" end="5346" title="BJP" label="BJP"/>
<link wikidata="Q837451" start="5463" end="5474" title="Wu Jinglian" label="Wu Jinglian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="5635" end="5649" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="5660" end="5671" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6871231" start="5744" end="5754" title="Minxin Pei" label="Pei Minxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10845594" start="5829" end="5870" title="anti-corruption campaign under Xi Jinping" label="anti-corruption campaign under Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q10964327" start="6025" end="6033" title="cronyism" label="cronyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="6192" end="6205" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009427" start="6244" end="6266" title="crony-capitalism index" label="crony-capitalism index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263849" start="6514" end="6546" title="Second Bank of the United States" label="Second Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613233" start="6821" end="6843" title="Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act" label="Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410030" start="6871" end="6885" title="Glass–Steagall legislation" label="Glass–Steagall"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="7039" end="7047" title="lobbying" label="lobbying"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856444" start="7115" end="7178" title="Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005" label="Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408462" start="7529" end="7547" title="regulatory capture" label="regulatory capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639780" start="7701" end="7744" title="regulatory agency" label="government agencies to regulate an industry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8133" end="8181" title="Gibbons v. Ogden#Background" label="1824 landmark United States Supreme Court ruling"/>
<link wikidata="Q283676" start="8294" end="8314" title="Robert R. Livingston (chancellor)" label="Robert R. Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="8327" end="8343" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785439" start="8386" end="8396" title="North River Steamboat" label="steamboats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647715" start="8494" end="8524" title="Interstate Commerce Commission" label="Interstate Commerce Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292195" start="8588" end="8601" title="robber baron (industrialist)" label="robber barons"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="8613" end="8629" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792035" start="8640" end="8656" title="Thomas M. Cooley" label="Thomas M. Cooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200230" start="8770" end="8782" title="price fixing" label="price fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="8913" end="8925" title="United States Department of Defense" label="the Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9092" end="9117" title="United States–European Union relations#Boeing and Airbus subsidies" label="Airbus-Boeing WTO dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q193219" start="9151" end="9160" title="subsidy" label="subsidies"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="9370" end="9378" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="9383" end="9400" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="9460" end="9479" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268621" start="9538" end="9568" title="Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas" label="Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q621096" start="9582" end="9592" title="Fannie Mae" label="Fannie Mae"/>
<link wikidata="Q935969" start="9597" end="9608" title="Freddie Mac" label="Freddie Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914671" start="9699" end="9720" title="mortgage underwriting" label="mortgage underwriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="10172" end="10183" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131708" start="10256" end="10266" title="plutocracy" label="plutocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191244" start="10287" end="10298" title="kleptocracy" label="kleptocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q196070" start="10445" end="10459" title="Uhuru Kenyatta" label="Uhuru Kenyatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q209496" start="10658" end="10666" title="Alawites" label="Alawites"/>
<link wikidata="Q44329" start="10753" end="10768" title="Bashar al-Assad" label="President Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="10858" end="10872" title="social network" label="social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134273" start="11396" end="11410" title="Raymond Vernon" label="Raymond Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="11480" end="11501" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9041" start="12249" end="12259" title="James Watt" label="James Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q981496" start="12363" end="12377" title="Raghuram Rajan" label="Raghuram Rajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q944085" start="12402" end="12423" title="Reserve Bank of India" label="Reserve Bank of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q82107" start="12514" end="12532" title="middle income trap" label="middle income trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689144" start="12715" end="12728" title="Tavleen Singh" label="Tavleen Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954843" start="12750" end="12768" title="The Indian Express" label="The Indian Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q648510" start="13484" end="13502" title="natural monopolies" label="natural monopolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="13687" end="13697" title="socialism" label="socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q389647" start="13702" end="13718" title="anti-capitalism" label="anti-capitalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q234335" start="13831" end="13842" title="Jane Jacobs" label="Jane Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="13917" end="13922" title="power (sociology)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="13939" end="13951" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027776" start="14184" end="14228" title="campaign finance reform in the United States" label="campaign finance reform in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969926" start="14334" end="14344" title="Ravi Batra" label="Ravi Batra"/>
<link wikidata="Q180654" start="14469" end="14487" title="Occupy Wall Street" label="Occupy Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352276" start="14686" end="14698" title="Robin Hahnel" label="Robin Hahnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191776" start="14905" end="14915" title="apologetic" label="apologetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="14932" end="14942" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="15152" end="15170" title="classical liberals" label="classical liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="15172" end="15183" title="neoliberals" label="neoliberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q250598" start="15188" end="15206" title="right-libertarians" label="right-libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="15289" end="15300" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886439" start="15878" end="15889" title="Ben Shapiro" label="Ben Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383947" start="15940" end="15954" title="corporatocracy" label="corporatocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="15958" end="15969" title="corporatism" label="corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="16005" end="16017" title="mercantilism" label="mercantilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q357946" start="16163" end="16179" title="Hernando de Soto (economist)" label="Hernando de Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408462" start="16558" end="16576" title="regulatory capture" label="regulatory capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000931" start="16578" end="16598" title="Burton W. Folsom Jr." label="Burton W. Folsom Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q771991" start="16844" end="16857" title="James J. Hill" label="James J. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q313721" start="16859" end="16879" title="Cornelius Vanderbilt" label="Cornelius Vanderbilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="16884" end="16903" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343967" start="17014" end="17028" title="Edward Knight Collins" label="Edward Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="17066" end="17088" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677836" start="17259" end="17287" title="Actually existing capitalism" label="Actually existing capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383947" start="17290" end="17304" title="Corporatocracy" label="Corporatocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10964327" start="17307" end="17315" title="Cronyism" label="Cronyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608583" start="17318" end="17345" title="Cronies of Ferdinand Marcos" label="Cronies of Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q60751320" start="17348" end="17406" title="Economic History of the Philippines under Ferdinand Marcos" label="Economic History of the Philippines under Ferdinand Marcos"/>
<link wikidata="Q38427" start="17409" end="17427" title="Government failure" label="Government failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="17430" end="17458" title="Government-owned corporation" label="Government-owned corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060546" start="17461" end="17485" title="Inverted totalitarianism" label="Inverted totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151934" start="17488" end="17515" title="Iron triangle (US politics)" label="Iron triangle (US politics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461789" start="17518" end="17529" title="Licence Raj" label="Licence Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="17572" end="17584" title="Mercantilism" label="Mercantilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15622229" start="17587" end="17601" title="Patrimonialism" label="Patrimonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q952037" start="17604" end="17620" title="Political family" label="Political family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218690" start="17623" end="17640" title="Political machine" label="Political machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408462" start="17643" end="17661" title="Regulatory capture" label="Regulatory capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428800" start="17664" end="17676" title="Rent-seeking" label="Rent-seeking"/>
<link wikidata="Q641887" start="17679" end="17687" title="Stamocap" label="Stamocap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603664" start="17690" end="17703" title="State capture" label="State capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446227" start="17706" end="17721" title="Supercapitalism (concept in Italian Fascism)" label="Supercapitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23861659" start="17724" end="17735" title="Zhao family (Internet slang)" label="Zhao family"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5252" wikidata="Q1846117" url="?curid=5252" title="Lists of universities and colleges">
<text>This is a list of lists of universities and colleges.

==Subject of study==
* Aerospace engineering
* Agriculture
* Art schools
* Business
* Chiropractic
* Engineering
* Forestry
* Law
* Maritime studies
* Medicine
* Music
* Nanotechnology
* Osteopathy
* Pharmaceuticals
* Social Work

==Institution type==

* Community colleges
* For-profit universities and colleges
* Land-grant universities
* Liberal arts universities
* National universities
* Postgraduate-only institutions
* Private universities
* Public universities
* Research universities
* Technical universities
* Sea-grant universities
* Space-grant universities
* State universities and colleges
* Unaccredited universities

==Location==
* Lists of universities and colleges by country
* List of largest universities

==Religious affiliation==

* Assemblies of God
* Baptist colleges and universities in the United States
* Catholic universities
:* Association of Catholic Colleges and Universities
:* Ecclesiastical universities
:* Benedictine colleges and universities
:* Jesuit institutions
:* Opus Dei universities
:* Pontifical universities
:* International Council of Universities of Saint Thomas Aquinas
:* International Federation of Catholic Universities
* Christian churches and churches of Christ
* Churches of Christ
* Church of the Nazarene
* Islamic seminaries
* Lutheran colleges and universities
* International Association of Methodist-related Schools, Colleges, and Universities
* Muslim educational institutions
* Association of Presbyterian Colleges and Universities

==Extremities==
* Endowment
* Largest universities by enrollment
* Oldest madrasahs in continuous operation
* Oldest universities in continuous operation

==Other==
* Colleges and universities named after people

==History==
* Medieval universities
* Ancient universities in Britain and Ireland

==See also==
* 
* 
* Lists of schools
* Distance education</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1846117" start="18" end="52" title="Lists of universities and colleges" label="lists of universities and colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025021" start="78" end="99" title="List of aerospace engineering schools" label="Aerospace engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11638004" start="102" end="113" title="List of agricultural universities and colleges" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q947660" start="116" end="127" title="List of art schools" label="Art schools"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="130" end="138" title="Business school#Lists of business schools" label="Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609415" start="141" end="153" title="List of chiropractic schools" label="Chiropractic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6618892" start="156" end="167" title="List of engineering schools" label="Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621074" start="170" end="178" title="List of forestry universities and colleges" label="Forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q24893901" start="181" end="184" title="Lists of law schools" label="Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q18609271" start="187" end="203" title="List of maritime colleges" label="Maritime studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627850" start="206" end="214" title="List of medical schools" label="Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777076" start="217" end="222" title="List of university and college schools of music" label="Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659547" start="225" end="239" title="Nanotechnology education" label="Nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631836" start="242" end="252" title="List of osteopathic colleges" label="Osteopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633347" start="255" end="270" title="List of pharmacy schools" label="Pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q131871145" start="273" end="284" title="List of social work schools" label="Social Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612183" start="310" end="328" title="List of community colleges" label="Community colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003872" start="331" end="367" title="List of for-profit universities and colleges" label="For-profit universities and colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624892" start="370" end="393" title="List of land-grant universities" label="Land-grant universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405416" start="396" end="421" title="List of liberal arts colleges" label="Liberal arts universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q265662" start="424" end="445" title="National university" label="National universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634581" start="448" end="478" title="List of postgraduate-only institutions" label="Postgraduate-only institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="481" end="501" title="Private university" label="Private universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="504" end="523" title="Public university" label="Public universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636494" start="526" end="547" title="List of research universities in the United States" label="Research universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152760" start="550" end="572" title="List of institutions using the term &amp;quot;institute of technology&amp;quot; or &amp;quot;polytechnic&amp;quot;" label="Technical universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978302" start="575" end="597" title="National Sea Grant College Program" label="Sea-grant universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978618" start="600" end="624" title="National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program" label="Space-grant universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423117" start="627" end="658" title="List of state universities in the United States" label="State universities and colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644196" start="661" end="686" title="List of unaccredited institutions of higher learning" label="Unaccredited universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682368" start="703" end="748" title="Lists of universities and colleges by country" label="Lists of universities and colleges by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098461" start="751" end="779" title="List of largest universities" label="List of largest universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562473" start="810" end="827" title="List of Assemblies of God schools" label="Assemblies of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563381" start="830" end="884" title="List of Baptist colleges and universities in the United States" label="Baptist colleges and universities in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q557206" start="887" end="908" title="Catholic university" label="Catholic universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809686" start="912" end="961" title="Association of Catholic Colleges and Universities" label="Association of Catholic Colleges and Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332280" start="965" end="992" title="Ecclesiastical university" label="Ecclesiastical universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6563661" start="996" end="1033" title="List of Benedictine colleges and universities" label="Benedictine colleges and universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q634614" start="1037" end="1056" title="List of Jesuit educational institutions" label="Jesuit institutions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1060" end="1081" title="Opus Dei in society#Universities" label="Opus Dei universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120466" start="1085" end="1108" title="Pontifical university" label="Pontifical universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049917" start="1112" end="1173" title="International Council of Universities of Saint Thomas Aquinas" label="International Council of Universities of Saint Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091943" start="1177" end="1226" title="International Federation of Catholic Universities" label="International Federation of Catholic Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644251" start="1229" end="1270" title="List of universities and colleges affiliated with the Christian churches and churches of Christ" label="Christian churches and churches of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644252" start="1273" end="1291" title="List of universities and colleges affiliated with the Churches of Christ" label="Churches of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567284" start="1294" end="1316" title="List of Church of the Nazarene schools" label="Church of the Nazarene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424223" start="1319" end="1337" title="List of Islamic seminaries" label="Islamic seminaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577211" start="1340" end="1374" title="List of Lutheran colleges and universities" label="Lutheran colleges and universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997151" start="1377" end="1459" title="International Association of Methodist-related Schools, Colleges, and Universities" label="International Association of Methodist-related Schools, Colleges, and Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q15832286" start="1462" end="1493" title="List of Muslim educational institutions" label="Muslim educational institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809982" start="1496" end="1549" title="Association of Presbyterian Colleges and Universities" label="Association of Presbyterian Colleges and Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647055" start="1569" end="1578" title="Lists of institutions of higher education by endowment" label="Endowment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139054" start="1581" end="1615" title="List of largest universities by enrollment" label="Largest universities by enrollment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424223" start="1618" end="1658" title="List of oldest madrasahs in continuous operation" label="Oldest madrasahs in continuous operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21027998" start="1661" end="1704" title="List of oldest universities in continuous operation" label="Oldest universities in continuous operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610678" start="1718" end="1762" title="List of colleges and universities named after people" label="Colleges and universities named after people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321313" start="1778" end="1799" title="List of medieval universities" label="Medieval universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667285" start="1802" end="1822" title="Ancient university" label="Ancient universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q20310942" start="1868" end="1884" title="Lists of schools" label="Lists of schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q159595" start="1887" end="1905" title="Distance education" label="Distance education"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5253" wikidata="Q7755" url="?curid=5253" title="Constitution">
<text>A constitution is the aggregate of fundamental principles or established precedents that constitute the legal basis of a polity, organization or other type of entity, and commonly determines how that entity is to be governed.

When these principles are written down into a single document or set of legal documents, those documents may be said to embody a &quot;written constitution&quot;; if they are encompassed in a single comprehensive document, it is said to embody a &quot;codified constitution&quot;. The Constitution of the United Kingdom is a notable example of an &quot;uncodified constitution&quot;; it is instead written in numerous fundamental acts of a legislature, court cases, and treaties.

Constitutions concern different levels of organizations, from sovereign countries to companies and unincorporated associations. A treaty that establishes an international organization is also its constitution, in that it would define how that organization is constituted. Within states, a constitution defines the principles upon which the state is based, the procedure in which laws are made, and by whom. Some constitutions, especially codified constitutions, also act as limiters of state power, by establishing lines which a state&#x27;s rulers cannot cross, such as fundamental rights. Changes to constitutions frequently require consensus or supermajority.

The Constitution of India is the longest written constitution of any country in the world, with 146,385 words in its English-language version, while the Constitution of Monaco is the shortest written constitution with 3,814 words. The Constitution of San Marino might be the world&#x27;s oldest active written constitution, since some of its core documents have been in operation since 1600, while the Constitution of the United States is the oldest active codified constitution. The historical life expectancy of a constitution since 1789 is approximately 19 years.

==Etymology==
The term &quot;constitution&quot; comes through French from the Latin word , used for regulations and orders, such as the imperial enactments (&quot;constitutiones principis&quot;: edicta, mandata, decreta, rescripta). Later, the term was widely used in canon law for an important determination, especially a decree issued by the Pope, now referred to as an &quot;apostolic constitution&quot;.

William Blackstone used the term for significant and egregious violations of public trust, of a nature and extent that the transgression would justify a revolutionary response. The term as used by Blackstone was not for a legal text, nor did he intend to include the later American concept of judicial review: &quot;for that were to set the judicial power above that of the legislature, which would be subversive of all government&quot;.

==General features==
Generally, every modern written constitution confers specific powers on an organization or institutional entity, established upon the primary condition that it abides by the constitution&#x27;s limitations. According to Scott Gordon, a political organization is constitutional to the extent that it &quot;contain[s] institutionalized mechanisms of power control for the protection of the interests and liberties of the citizenry, including those that may be in the minority&quot;.

Activities of officials within an organization or polity that fall within the constitutional or statutory authority of those officials are termed &quot;within power&quot; (or, in Latin, &quot;intra vires&quot;); if they do not, they are termed &quot;beyond power&quot; (or, in Latin, &quot;ultra vires&quot;). For example, a students&#x27; union may be prohibited as an organization from engaging in activities not concerning students; if the union becomes involved in non-student activities, these activities are considered to be &quot;ultra vires&quot; of the union&#x27;s charter, and nobody would be compelled by the charter to follow them. An example from the constitutional law of sovereign states would be a provincial parliament in a federal state trying to legislate in an area that the constitution allocates exclusively to the federal parliament, such as ratifying a treaty. Action that appears to be beyond power may be judicially reviewed and, if found to be beyond power, must cease. Legislation that is found to be beyond power will be &quot;invalid&quot; and of no force; this applies to primary legislation, requiring constitutional authorization, and secondary legislation, ordinarily requiring statutory authorization. In this context, &quot;within power&quot;, &quot;intra vires&quot;, &quot;authorized&quot; and &quot;valid&quot; have the same meaning; as do &quot;beyond power&quot;, &quot;ultra vires&quot;, &quot;not authorized&quot; and &quot;invalid&quot;.

In most but not all modern states the constitution has supremacy over ordinary statutory law (see Uncodified constitution below); in such states when an official act is unconstitutional, i.e. it is not a power granted to the government by the constitution, that act is &quot;null and void&quot;, and the nullification is &quot;ab initio&quot;, that is, from inception, not from the date of the finding. It was never &quot;law&quot;, even though, if it had been a statute or statutory provision, it might have been adopted according to the procedures for adopting legislation. Sometimes the problem is not that a statute is unconstitutional, but that the application of it is, on a particular occasion, and a court may decide that while there are ways it could be applied that are constitutional, that instance was not allowed or legitimate. In such a case, only that application may be ruled unconstitutional. Historically, the remedies for such violations have been petitions for common law writs, such as &quot;quo warranto&quot;.

Scholars debate whether a constitution must necessarily be autochthonous, resulting from the nation&#x27;s &quot;spirit&quot;. Hegel said &quot;A constitution...is the work of centuries; it is the idea, the consciousness of rationality so far as that consciousness is developed in a particular nation.&quot;

==History and development==
Since 1789, along with the Constitution of the United States of America (U.S. Constitution), which is the oldest and shortest written constitution still in force, close to 800 constitutions have been adopted and subsequently amended around the world by independent states.

In the late 18th century, Thomas Jefferson predicted that a period of 20 years would be the optimal time for any constitution to be still in force, since &quot;the earth belongs to the living, and not to the dead&quot;. Indeed, according to recent studies, the average life of any newly written constitution is around 19 years. However, a great number of constitutions do not last more than 10 years, and around 10% do not last more than one year, as was the case of the French Constitution of 1791. By contrast, some constitutions, notably that of the United States, have remained in force for several centuries, often without major revision for long periods.

The most common reasons for these frequent changes are the political desire for an immediate outcome and the short time devoted to the constitutional drafting process. A study in 2009 showed that the average time taken to draft a constitution is around 16 months, however there were also some extreme cases registered. For example, the Myanmar 2008 Constitution was being secretly drafted for more than 17 years, whereas at the other extreme, during the drafting of Japan&#x27;s 1946 Constitution, the bureaucrats drafted everything in no more than a week. Japan has the oldest unamended constitution in the world. The record for the shortest overall process of drafting, adoption, and ratification of a national constitution belongs to the Romania&#x27;s 1938 constitution, which installed a royal dictatorship in less than a month. Studies showed that typically extreme cases where the constitution-making process either takes too long or is extremely short were non-democracies. 

In principle, constitutional rights are not a specific characteristic of democratic countries. Autocratic states have constitutions, such as that of North Korea, which officially grants every citizen, among other things, the freedom of expression. However, the extent to which governments abide by their own constitutional provisions varies. In North Korea, for example, the Ten Principles for the Establishment of a Monolithic Ideological System are said to have eclipsed the constitution in importance as a frame of government in practice. Developing a legal and political tradition of strict adherence to constitutional provisions is considered foundational to the rule of law.

===Pre-modern constitutions===
====Ancient====

Excavations in modern-day Iraq by Ernest de Sarzec in 1877 found evidence of the earliest known code of justice, issued by the Sumerian king Urukagina of Lagash . Perhaps the earliest prototype for a law of government, this document itself has not yet been discovered; however, it is known that it allowed some rights to his citizens. For example, it is known that it relieved tax for widows and orphans, and protected the poor from the usury of the rich.

After that, many governments ruled by special codes of written laws. The oldest such document still known to exist seems to be the Code of Ur-Nammu of Ur (c. 2050 BC). Some of the better-known ancient law codes are the code of Lipit-Ishtar of Isin, the code of Hammurabi of Babylonia, the Hittite code, the Assyrian code, and Mosaic law.

In 621 BC, a scribe named Draco codified the oral laws of the city-state of Athens; this code prescribed the death penalty for many offenses (thus creating the modern term &quot;draconian&quot; for very strict rules). In 594 BC, Solon, the ruler of Athens, created the new &quot;Solonian Constitution&quot;. It eased the burden of the workers and determined that membership of the ruling class was to be based on wealth (plutocracy), rather than on birth (aristocracy). Cleisthenes again reformed the Athenian constitution and set it on a democratic footing in 508 BC.
Aristotle (c. 350 BC) was the first to make a formal distinction between ordinary law and constitutional law, establishing ideas of constitution and constitutionalism, and attempting to classify different forms of constitutional government. The most basic definition he used to describe a constitution in general terms was &quot;the arrangement of the offices in a state&quot;. In his works &quot;Constitution of Athens&quot;, &quot;Politics&quot;, and &quot;Nicomachean Ethics&quot;, he explores different constitutions of his day, including those of Athens, Sparta, and Carthage. He classified both what he regarded as good and what he regarded as bad constitutions, and came to the conclusion that the best constitution was a mixed system including monarchic, aristocratic, and democratic elements. He also distinguished between citizens, who had the right to participate in the state, and non-citizens and slaves, who did not.

The Romans initially codified their constitution in 450 BC as the &quot;Twelve Tables&quot;. They operated under a series of laws that were added from time to time, but Roman law was not reorganized into a single code until the &quot;Codex Theodosianus&quot; (438 AD); later, in the Eastern Empire, the &quot;Codex repetitæ prælectionis&quot; (534) was highly influential throughout Europe. This was followed in the east by the &quot;Ecloga&quot; of Leo III the Isaurian (740) and the &quot;Basilica&quot; of Basil I (878).

The &quot;Edicts of Ashoka&quot; established constitutional principles for the 3rd century BC Maurya king&#x27;s rule in India. For constitutional principles almost lost to antiquity, see the code of Manu.

====Early Middle Ages====

Many of the Germanic peoples that filled the power vacuum left by the Western Roman Empire in the Early Middle Ages codified their laws. One of the first of these Germanic law codes to be written was the Visigothic &quot;Code of Euric&quot; (471 AD). This was followed by the &quot;Lex Burgundionum&quot;, applying separate codes for Germans and for Romans; the &quot;Pactus Alamannorum&quot;; and the Salic Law of the Franks, all written soon after 500. In 506, the &quot;Breviarum&quot; or &quot;Lex Romana&quot; of Alaric II, king of the Visigoths, adopted and consolidated the &quot;Codex Theodosianus&quot; together with assorted earlier Roman laws. Systems that appeared somewhat later include the &quot;Edictum Rothari&quot; of the Lombards (643), the &quot;Lex Visigothorum&quot; (654), the &quot;Lex Alamannorum&quot; (730), and the &quot;Lex Frisionum&quot; (c. 785). These continental codes were all composed in Latin, while Anglo-Saxon was used for those of England, beginning with the Code of Æthelberht of Kent (602). Around 893, Alfred the Great combined this and two other earlier Saxon codes, with various Mosaic and Christian precepts, to produce the &quot;Doom book&quot; code of laws for England.

Japan&#x27;s &quot;Seventeen-article constitution&quot; written in 604, reportedly by Prince Shōtoku, is an early example of a constitution in Asian political history. Influenced by Buddhist teachings, the document focuses more on social morality than on institutions of government, and remains a notable early attempt at a government constitution.

The Constitution of Medina (, Ṣaḥīfat al-Madīna), also known as the Charter of Medina, was drafted by the Islamic prophet Muhammad after his flight (hijra) to Yathrib where he became political leader. It constituted a formal agreement between Muhammad and all of the significant tribes and families of Yathrib (later known as Medina), including Muslims, Jews, and pagans. The document was drawn up with the explicit concern of bringing to an end the bitter intertribal fighting between the clans of the Aws (Aus) and Khazraj within Medina. To this effect it instituted a number of rights and responsibilities for the Muslim, Jewish, and pagan communities of Medina bringing them within the fold of one community – the Ummah. The precise dating of the Constitution of Medina remains debated, but generally, scholars agree it was written shortly after the Hijra (622).

In Wales, the Cyfraith Hywel (Law of Hywel) was codified by Hywel Dda c. 942–950. It served as the main law code in Wales until it was superseded by the Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542.

====Middle Ages after 1000====
The &quot;Pravda Yaroslava&quot;, originally combined by Yaroslav the Wise the Grand Prince of Kiev, was granted to Great Novgorod around 1017, and in 1054 was incorporated into the &quot;Russkaya Pravda&quot;; it became the law for all of Kievan Rus&#x27;. It survived only in later editions of the 15th century.

In England, Henry I&#x27;s proclamation of the Charter of Liberties in 1100 bound the king for the first time in his treatment of the clergy and the nobility. This idea was extended and refined by the English barony when they forced King John to sign Magna Carta in 1215. The most important single article of Magna Carta, related to &quot;habeas corpus&quot;, provided that the king was not permitted to imprison, outlaw, exile or kill anyone at a whim – there must be due process of law first. This article, Article 39, of Magna Carta read:

This provision became the cornerstone of English liberty after that point. The social contract in the original case was between the king and the nobility but was gradually extended to all of the people. It led to the system of Constitutional Monarchy, with further reforms shifting the balance of power from the monarchy and nobility to the House of Commons.

The Nomocanon of Saint Sava () was the first Serbian constitution from 1219. St. Sava&#x27;s Nomocanon was the compilation of civil law, based on Roman Law, and canon law, based on Ecumenical Councils. Its basic purpose was to organize the functioning of the young Serbian kingdom and the Serbian church. Saint Sava began the work on the Serbian Nomocanon in 1208 while he was at Mount Athos, using &quot;The Nomocanon in Fourteen Titles&quot;, &quot;Synopsis of Stefan the Efesian&quot;, &quot;Nomocanon of John Scholasticus&quot;, and Ecumenical Council documents, which he modified with the canonical commentaries of Aristinos and Joannes Zonaras, local church meetings, rules of the Holy Fathers, the law of Moses, the translation of Prohiron, and the Byzantine emperors&#x27; Novellae (most were taken from Justinian&#x27;s Novellae). The Nomocanon was a completely new compilation of civil and canonical regulations, taken from Byzantine sources but completed and reformed by St. Sava to function properly in Serbia. Besides decrees that organized the life of the church, there are various norms regarding civil life; most of these were taken from Prohiron. Legal transplants of Roman-Byzantine law became the basis of the Serbian medieval law. The essence of Zakonopravilo was based on Corpus Iuris Civilis.

Stefan Dušan, emperor of Serbs and Greeks, enacted Dušan&#x27;s Code () in Serbia, in two state congresses: in 1349 in Skopje and in 1354 in Serres. It regulated all social spheres, so it was the second Serbian constitution, after St. Sava&#x27;s Nomocanon (Zakonopravilo). The Code was based on Roman-Byzantine law. The legal transplanting within articles 171 and 172 of Dušan&#x27;s Code, which regulated juridical independence, is notable. They were taken from the Byzantine code Basilika (book VII, 1, 16–17).

In 1222, Hungarian King Andrew II issued the Golden Bull of 1222.

Between 1220 and 1230, a Saxon administrator, Eike von Repgow, composed the &quot;Sachsenspiegel&quot;, which became the supreme law used in parts of Germany as late as 1900.

Around 1240, the Coptic Egyptian Christian writer, &#x27;Abul Fada&#x27;il Ibn al-&#x27;Assal, wrote the &quot;Fetha Negest&quot; in Arabic. &#x27;Ibn al-Assal took his laws partly from apostolic writings and Mosaic law and partly from the former Byzantine codes. There are a few historical records claiming that this law code was translated into Ge&#x27;ez and entered Ethiopia around 1450 in the reign of Zara Yaqob. Even so, its first recorded use in the function of a constitution (supreme law of the land) is with Sarsa Dengel beginning in 1563. The &quot;Fetha Negest&quot; remained the supreme law in Ethiopia until 1931, when a modern-style Constitution was first granted by Emperor Haile Selassie I.
In the Principality of Catalonia, the Catalan constitutions were promulgated by the Court from 1283 (or even two centuries before, if Usatges of Barcelona is considered part of the compilation of Constitutions) until 1716, when Philip V of Spain gave the Nueva Planta decrees, finishing with the historical laws of Catalonia. These Constitutions were usually made formally as a royal initiative, but required for its approval or repeal the favorable vote of the Catalan Courts, the medieval antecedent of the modern Parliaments. These laws, like other modern constitutions, had preeminence over other laws, and they could not be contradicted by mere decrees or edicts of the king.

The &quot;Kouroukan Founga&quot; was a 13th-century charter of the Mali Empire in West Africa, reconstructed from oral tradition in 1988 by Siriman Kouyaté. It included the &quot;right to life and to the preservation of physical integrity&quot; and significant protections for women.

The Golden Bull of 1356 was a decree issued by a &quot;Reichstag&quot; in Nuremberg headed by Emperor Charles IV that fixed, for a period of more than four hundred years, an important aspect of the constitutional structure of the Holy Roman Empire.

In China, the Hongwu Emperor created and refined a document he called &quot;Ancestral Injunctions&quot; (first published in 1375, revised twice more before he died in 1398). These rules served as a constitution for the Ming dynasty for the next 250 years.

The oldest written document still governing a sovereign nation today is that of San Marino. The &quot;Leges Statutae Republicae Sancti Marini&quot; was written in Latin and consists of six books. The first book, with 62 articles, establishes councils, courts, various executive officers, and the powers assigned to them. The remaining books cover criminal and civil law and judicial procedures and remedies. Written in 1600, the document was based upon the &quot;Statuti Comunali&quot; (Town Statute) of 1300, itself influenced by the &quot;Codex Justinianus&quot;, and it remains in force today.

In 1392 the &quot;Carta de Logu&quot; was legal code of the Giudicato of Arborea promulgated by the &quot;giudicessa&quot; Eleanor. It was in force in Sardinia until it was superseded by the code of Charles Felix in April 1827. The Carta was a work of great importance in Sardinian history. It was an organic, coherent, and systematic work of legislation encompassing the civil and penal law.

The &quot;Gayanashagowa&quot;, the oral constitution of the Haudenosaunee nation also known as the Great Law of Peace, established a system of governance as far back as 1190 AD (though perhaps more recently at 1451) in which the Sachems, or tribal chiefs, of the Iroquois League&#x27;s member nations made decisions based on universal consensus of all chiefs following discussions that were initiated by a single nation. The position of Sachem descends through families and are allocated by the senior female clan heads, though, prior to the filling of the position, candidacy is ultimately democratically decided by the community itself.

===Modern constitutions===
In 1634 the Kingdom of Sweden adopted the 1634 Instrument of Government, drawn up under the Lord High Chancellor of Sweden Axel Oxenstierna after the death of king Gustavus Adolphus. This can be seen as the first written constitution adopted by a modern state.

====English civil war era====
On 4 January 1649, the Rump Parliament declared &quot;that the people are, under God, the original of all just power; that the Commons of England, being chosen by and representing the people, have the supreme power in this nation&quot;.

The English Protectorate set up by Oliver Cromwell after the English Civil War promulgated the first detailed written constitution adopted by a modern state; it was called the Instrument of Government. This formed the basis of government for the short-lived republic from 1653 to 1657 by providing a legal rationale for the increasing power of Cromwell after Parliament consistently failed to govern effectively. Most of the concepts and ideas embedded into modern constitutional theory, especially bicameralism, separation of powers, the written constitution, and judicial review, can be traced back to the experiments of that period. Drafted by Major-General John Lambert in 1653, the &quot;Instrument of Government&quot; included elements incorporated from an earlier document &quot;Heads of Proposals&quot;, which had been agreed to by the Army Council in 1647, as a set of propositions intended to be a basis for a constitutional settlement after King Charles I was defeated in the First English Civil War. Charles had rejected the propositions, but before the start of the Second Civil War, the Grandees of the New Model Army had presented the &quot;Heads of Proposals&quot; as their alternative to the more radical Agreement of the People presented by the Agitators and their civilian supporters at the Putney Debates. The &quot;Instrument of Government&quot; was adopted by Parliament on 15 December 1653, and Oliver Cromwell was installed as Lord Protector on the following day. The constitution set up a state council consisting of 21 members while executive authority was vested in the office of &quot;Lord Protector of the Commonwealth.&quot; This position was designated as a non-hereditary life appointment. The &quot;Instrument&quot; also required the calling of triennial Parliaments, with each sitting for at least five months.

The &quot;Instrument of Government&quot; was replaced in May 1657 by England&#x27;s second, and last, codified constitution, the Humble Petition and Advice, proposed by Sir Christopher Packe. The Petition offered hereditary monarchy to Oliver Cromwell, asserted Parliament&#x27;s control over issuing new taxation, provided an independent council to advise the king and safeguarded &quot;Triennial&quot; meetings of Parliament. A modified version of the Humble Petition with the clause on kingship removed was ratified on 25 May. This finally met its demise in conjunction with the death of Cromwell and the Restoration of the monarchy.

====British colonies in North America====
In 1639, the Colony of Connecticut adopted the Fundamental Orders, which was the first North American constitution. It is the basis for every new Connecticut constitution since, and is also the reason for Connecticut&#x27;s nickname, &quot;the Constitution State&quot;.

All of the British colonies in North America that were to become the 13 original United States, adopted their own constitutions in 1776 and 1777, during the American Revolution (and before the later Articles of Confederation and United States Constitution), with the exceptions of Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode Island. The Commonwealth of Massachusetts adopted its Constitution in 1780, the oldest still-functioning constitution of any U.S. state; while Connecticut and Rhode Island officially continued to operate under their old colonial charters, until they adopted their first state constitutions in 1818 and 1843, respectively.

===Democratic constitutions: 18th century===

What is sometimes called the &quot;enlightened constitution&quot; model was developed by philosophers of the Age of Enlightenment such as Thomas Hobbes, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and John Locke. The model proposed that constitutional governments should be stable, adaptable, accountable, open and should represent the people (i.e., support democracy).

&quot;Agreements and Constitutions of Laws and Freedoms of the Zaporizian Host&quot; was written in 1710 by Pylyp Orlyk, &quot;hetman&quot; of the Zaporozhian Host. It was written to establish a free Zaporozhian-Ukrainian Republic, with the support of Charles XII of Sweden. It is notable in that it established a democratic standard for the separation of powers in government between the legislative, executive, and judiciary branches, well before the publication of Montesquieu&#x27;s &quot;Spirit of the Laws&quot;. This Constitution also limited the executive authority of the &quot;hetman&quot;, and established a democratically elected Cossack parliament called the General Council. However, Orlyk&#x27;s project for an independent Ukrainian State never materialized, and his constitution, written in exile, never went into effect.

Corsican Constitutions of 1755 and 1794 were inspired by Jean-Jacques Rousseau. The latter introduced universal suffrage for property owners.

The Swedish constitution of 1772 was enacted under King Gustavus III and was inspired by the separation of powers by Montesquieu. The king also cherished other enlightenment ideas (as an enlighted despot) and repealed torture, liberated agricultural trade, diminished the use of the death penalty and instituted a form of religious freedom. The constitution was commended by Voltaire.

The United States Constitution, ratified 21 June 1788, was influenced by the writings of Polybius, Locke, Montesquieu, and others. The document became a benchmark for republicanism and codified constitutions written thereafter.

The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Constitution was passed on 3 May 1791. Its draft was developed by the leading minds of the Enlightenment in Poland such as King Stanislaw August Poniatowski, Stanisław Staszic, Scipione Piattoli, Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz, Ignacy Potocki and Hugo Kołłątaj. It was adopted by the Great Sejm and is considered the first constitution of its kind in Europe and the world&#x27;s second oldest one after the American Constitution.

Another landmark document was the French Constitution of 1791.

The 1811 Constitution of Venezuela was the first Constitution of Venezuela and Latin America, promulgated and drafted by Cristóbal Mendoza and Juan Germán Roscio and in Caracas. It established a federal government but was repealed one year later.

On 19 March 1812, the Spanish Constitution of 1812 was ratified by a parliament gathered in Cadiz, the only Spanish continental city which was safe from French occupation. The Spanish Constitution served as a model for other liberal constitutions of several South European and Latin American nations, for example, the Portuguese Constitution of 1822, constitutions of various Italian states during Carbonari revolts (i.e., in the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies), the Norwegian constitution of 1814, or the Mexican Constitution of 1824.

In Brazil, the Constitution of 1824 expressed the option for the monarchy as a political system after Brazilian Independence. The leader of the national emancipation process was the Portuguese prince Pedro I, the elder son of the king of Portugal. Pedro was crowned in 1822 as the first emperor of Brazil. The country was ruled by a Constitutional Monarchy until 1889 when it adopted the Republican model.

In Denmark, as a result of the Napoleonic Wars, the absolute monarchy lost its personal possession of Norway to Sweden. Sweden had already enacted its 1809 Instrument of Government, which saw the division of power between the Riksdag, the king and the judiciary. However the Norwegians managed to infuse a radically democratic and liberal constitution in 1814, adopting many facets from the American constitution and the revolutionary French ones, but maintaining a hereditary monarch limited by the constitution, like the Spanish one.

The first Swiss Federal Constitution was put in force in September 1848 (with official revisions in 1878, 1891, 1949, 1971, 1982 and 1999).

The Serbian revolution initially led to a proclamation of a proto-constitution in 1811; the full-fledged Constitution of Serbia followed few decades later, in 1835. The first Serbian constitution (Sretenjski ustav) was adopted at the national assembly in Kragujevac on 15 February 1835.

The Constitution of Canada came into force on 1 July 1867, as the British North America Act, an act of the British Parliament. Over a century later, the BNA Act was patriated to the Canadian Parliament and augmented with the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Apart from the &quot;Constitution Acts, 1867 to 1982&quot;, Canada&#x27;s constitution also has unwritten elements based in common law and convention.

==Principles of constitutional design==
After tribal people first began to live in cities and establish nations, many of these functioned according to unwritten customs, while some developed autocratic, even tyrannical monarchs, who ruled by decree, or mere personal whim. Such rule led some thinkers to take the position that what mattered was not the design of governmental institutions and operations, as much as the character of the rulers. This view can be seen in Plato, who called for rule by &quot;philosopher-kings&quot;. Later writers, such as Aristotle, Cicero and Plutarch, would examine designs for the government from a legal and historical standpoint.

The Renaissance brought a series of political philosophers who wrote implied criticisms of the practices of monarchs and sought to identify principles of constitutional design that would be likely to yield more effective and just governance from their viewpoints. This began with revival of the Roman law of nations concept and its application to the relations among nations, and they sought to establish customary &quot;laws of war and peace&quot; to ameliorate wars and make them less likely. This led to considerations of what authority monarchs or other officials have and don&#x27;t have, from where that authority derives, and the remedies for the abuse of such authority.

A seminal juncture in this line of discourse arose in England from the Civil War, the Cromwellian Protectorate, the writings of Thomas Hobbes, Samuel Rutherford, the Levellers, John Milton, and James Harrington, leading to the debate between Robert Filmer, arguing for the divine right of monarchs, on the one side, and on the other, Henry Neville, James Tyrrell, Algernon Sidney, and John Locke. What arose from the latter was a concept of government being erected on the foundations of first, a state of nature governed by natural laws, then a state of society, established by a social contract or compact, which bring underlying natural or social laws, before governments are formally established on them as foundations.

Along the way, several writers examined how the design of government was important, even if the government were headed by a monarch. They also classified various historical examples of governmental designs, typically into democracies, aristocracies, or monarchies, and considered how just and effective each tended to be and why, and how the advantages of each might be obtained by combining elements of each into a more complex design that balanced competing tendencies. Some, such as Montesquieu, also examined how the functions of government, such as legislative, executive, and judicial, might appropriately be separated into branches. The prevailing theme among these writers was that the design of constitutions was not completely arbitrary or a matter of taste. They generally held that there are underlying principles of design that constrain all constitutions for every polity or organization. Each built on the ideas of those before concerning what those principles might be.

The later writings of Orestes Brownson would try to explain what constitutional designers were trying to do. According to Brownson there are, in a sense, three &quot;constitutions&quot; involved: The first the &quot;constitution of nature&quot; that includes all of what was called &quot;natural law&quot;. The second is the &quot;constitution of society&quot;, an unwritten and commonly understood set of rules for the society formed by a social contract before it establishes a government, by which it establishes the third, a &quot;constitution of government&quot;. The second would include such elements as the making of decisions by the public conventions called by public notice and conducted by established rules of procedure. Each constitution must be consistent with, and derive its authority from, the ones before it, as well as from a historical act of society formation or constitutional ratification. Brownson argued that a state is a society with effective dominion over a well-defined territory, that consent to a well-designed constitution of government arises from presence on that territory, and that provisions of a written constitution of government can be &quot;unconstitutional&quot; if they are inconsistent with the constitutions of nature or society. Brownson argued that it is not ratification alone that makes a written constitution of government legitimate, but that it must also be competently designed and applied.

Other writers have argued that such considerations apply not only to all national constitutions of government, but also to the constitutions of private organizations, that it is not an accident that the constitutions that tend to satisfy their members contain certain elements, as a minimum, or that their provisions tend to become very similar as they are amended after experience with their use. Provisions that give rise to certain kinds of questions are seen to need additional provisions for how to resolve those questions, and provisions that offer no course of action may best be omitted and left to policy decisions. Provisions that conflict with what Brownson and others can discern are the underlying &quot;constitutions&quot; of nature and society tend to be difficult or impossible to execute, or to lead to unresolvable disputes.

Constitutional design has been treated as a kind of metagame in which play consists of finding the best design and provisions for a written constitution that will be the rules for the game of government, and that will be most likely to optimize a balance of the utilities of justice, liberty, and security. An example is the metagame Nomic.

Political economy theory regards constitutions as coordination devices that help citizens to prevent rulers from abusing power. If the citizenry can coordinate a response to police government officials in the face of a constitutional fault, then the government have the incentives to honor the rights that the constitution guarantees. An alternative view considers that constitutions are not enforced by the citizens at-large, but rather by the administrative powers of the state. Because rulers cannot themselves implement their policies, they need to rely on a set of organizations (armies, courts, police agencies, tax collectors) to implement it. In this position, they can directly sanction the government by refusing to cooperate, disabling the authority of the rulers. Therefore, constitutions could be characterized by a self-enforcing equilibria between the rulers and powerful administrators.

==Key features==

Most commonly, the term &quot;constitution&quot; refers to a set of rules and principles that define the nature and extent of government. Most constitutions seek to regulate the relationship between institutions of the state, in a basic sense the relationship between the executive, legislature and the judiciary, but also the relationship of institutions within those branches. For example, executive branches can be divided into a head of government, government departments/ministries, executive agencies and a civil service/administration. Most constitutions also attempt to define the relationship between individuals and the state, and to establish the broad rights of individual citizens. It is thus the most basic law of a territory from which all the other laws and rules are hierarchically derived; in some territories it is in fact called &quot;Basic Law&quot;.

===Classification===

A fundamental classification is codification or lack of codification. A codified constitution is one that is contained in a single document, which is the single source of constitutional law in a state. An uncodified constitution is one that is not contained in a single document, consisting of several different sources, which may be written or unwritten; see constitutional convention.

====Codified constitution====
Most states in the world have codified constitutions.

Codified constitutions are often the product of some dramatic political change, such as a revolution. The process by which a country adopts a constitution is closely tied to the historical and political context driving this fundamental change. The legitimacy (and often the longevity) of codified constitutions has often been tied to the process by which they are initially adopted and some scholars have pointed out that high constitutional turnover within a given country may itself be detrimental to the separation of powers and the rule of law.

States that have codified constitutions normally give the constitution supremacy over ordinary statute law. That is, if there is any conflict between a legal statute and the codified constitution, all or part of the statute can be declared &quot;ultra vires&quot; by a court and struck down as unconstitutional. In addition, exceptional procedures are often required to amend a constitution. These procedures may include: the convocation of a special constituent assembly or constitutional convention, requiring a supermajority of legislators&#x27; votes, approval in two terms of parliament, the consent of regional legislatures, a referendum process, and/or other procedures that make amending a constitution more difficult than passing a simple law.

Constitutions may also provide that their most basic principles can never be abolished, even by amendment. In case a formally valid amendment of a constitution infringes these principles protected against any amendment, it may constitute a so-called &quot;unconstitutional constitutional law&quot;.

Codified constitutions normally consist of a ceremonial preamble, which sets forth the goals of the state and the motivation for the constitution, and several articles containing the substantive provisions. The preamble, which is omitted in some constitutions, may contain a reference to God and/or to fundamental values of the state such as liberty, democracy or human rights. In ethnic nation-states such as Estonia, the mission of the state can be defined as preserving a specific nation, language and culture.

====Uncodified constitution====

 only two sovereign states, New Zealand and the United Kingdom, have wholly uncodified constitutions. The Basic Laws of Israel have since 1950 been intended to be the basis for a constitution, but as of 2017 it had not been drafted. The various Laws are considered to have precedence over other laws, and give the procedure by which they can be amended, typically by a simple majority of members of the Knesset (parliament).

Uncodified constitutions are the product of an &quot;evolution&quot; of laws and conventions over centuries (such as in the Westminster System that developed in Britain). By contrast to codified constitutions, uncodified constitutions include both written sources – e.g. constitutional statutes enacted by the Parliament – and unwritten sources – constitutional conventions, observation of precedents, royal prerogatives, customs and traditions, such as holding general elections on Thursdays; together these constitute British constitutional law.

====Mixed constitutions====
Some constitutions are largely, but not wholly, codified. For example, in the Constitution of Australia, most of its fundamental political principles and regulations concerning the relationship between branches of government, and concerning the government and the individual are codified in a single document, the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Australia. However, the presence of statutes with constitutional significance, namely the Statute of Westminster, as adopted by the Commonwealth in the Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1942, and the Australia Act 1986 means that Australia&#x27;s constitution is not contained in a single constitutional document. It means the Constitution of Australia is uncodified, it also contains constitutional conventions, thus is partially unwritten.

The Constitution of Canada resulted from the passage of several British North America Acts from 1867 to the Canada Act 1982, the act that formally severed British Parliament&#x27;s ability to amend the Canadian constitution. The Canadian constitution includes specific legislative acts as mentioned in section 52(2) of the Constitution Act, 1982. However, some documents not explicitly listed in section 52(2) are also considered constitutional documents in Canada, entrenched via reference; such as the Proclamation of 1763. Although Canada&#x27;s constitution includes a number of different statutes, amendments, and references, some constitutional rules that exist in Canada are derived from unwritten sources and constitutional conventions.

The terms &quot;written constitution&quot; and &quot;codified constitution&quot; are often used interchangeably, as are &quot;unwritten constitution&quot; and &quot;uncodified constitution&quot;, although this usage is technically inaccurate. A codified constitution is a single document; states that do not have such a document have uncodified, but not entirely unwritten, constitutions, since much of an uncodified constitution is usually written in laws such as the Basic Laws of Israel and the Parliament Acts of the United Kingdom. Uncodified constitutions largely lack protection against amendment by the government of the time. For example, the U.K. Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011 legislated by simple majority for strictly fixed-term parliaments; until then the ruling party could call a general election at any convenient time up to the maximum term of five years. This change would require a constitutional amendment in most nations.

=== Amendments ===

A constitutional amendment is a modification of the constitution of a polity, organization or other type of entity. Amendments are often interwoven into the relevant sections of an existing constitution, directly altering the text. Conversely, they can be appended to the constitution as supplemental additions (), thus changing the frame of government without altering the existing text of the document.

Most constitutions require that amendments cannot be enacted unless they have passed a special procedure that is more stringent than that required of ordinary legislation.

==== Methods of amending ====

&quot;Some countries are listed under more than one method because alternative procedures may be used.&quot;

==== Entrenched clauses ====

An entrenched clause or entrenchment clause of a basic law or constitution is a provision that makes certain amendments either more difficult or impossible to pass, making such amendments inadmissible. Overriding an entrenched clause may require a supermajority, a referendum, or the consent of the minority party. For example, the U.S. Constitution has an entrenched clause that prohibits abolishing equal suffrage of the States within the Senate without their consent. The term eternity clause is used in a similar manner in the constitutions of the Czech Republic, Germany, Turkey, Greece, Italy, Morocco, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Brazil and Norway. India&#x27;s constitution does not contain specific provisions on entrenched clauses but the basic structure doctrine makes it impossible for certain basic features of the Constitution to be altered or destroyed by the Parliament of India through an amendment. The Constitution of Colombia also lacks explicit entrenched clauses, but has a similar substantive limit on amending its fundamental principles through judicial interpretations.

=== Constitutional rights and duties ===

Constitutions include various rights and duties. These include the following:
* Duty to pay taxes
* Duty to serve in the military
* Duty to work
* Right to vote
* Freedom of assembly
* Freedom of association
* Freedom of expression
* Freedom of movement
* Freedom of thought
* Freedom of the press
* Freedom of religion
* Right to dignity
* Right to civil marriage
* Right to petition
* Right to academic freedom
* Right to conscientious objection
* Right to a fair trial
* Right to personal development
* Right to start a family
* Right to information
* Right to marriage
* Right of revolution
* Right to privacy
* Right to protect one&#x27;s reputation
* Right to renounce citizenship
* Rights of children
* Rights of debtors

=== Separation of powers ===
Constitutions usually explicitly divide power between various branches of government. The standard model, described by the Baron de Montesquieu, involves three branches of government: executive, legislative and judicial. Some constitutions include additional branches, such as an auditory branch. Constitutions vary extensively as to the degree of separation of powers between these branches.

====Accountability====
In presidential and semi-presidential systems of government, department secretaries/ministers are accountable to the president, who has patronage powers to appoint and dismiss ministers. The president is accountable to the people in an election.

In parliamentary systems, Cabinet Ministers are accountable to Parliament, but it is the prime minister who appoints and dismisses them. In the case of the United Kingdom and other countries with a monarchy, it is the monarch who appoints and dismisses ministers, on the advice of the prime minister. In turn the prime minister will resign if the government loses the confidence of the parliament (or a part of it). Confidence can be lost if the government loses a vote of no confidence or, depending on the country, loses a particularly important vote in parliament, such as vote on the budget. When a government loses confidence, it stays in office until a new government is formed; something which normally but not necessarily required the holding of a general election.

==== Other independent institutions ====
Other independent institutions which some constitutions have set out include a central bank, an anti-corruption commission, an electoral commission, a judicial oversight body, a human rights commission, a media commission, an ombudsman, and a truth and reconciliation commission.

=== Power structure ===

Constitutions also establish where sovereignty is located in the state. There are three basic types of distribution of sovereignty according to the degree of centralisation of power: unitary, federal, and confederal. The distinction is not absolute.

In a unitary state, sovereignty resides in the state itself, and the constitution determines this. The territory of the state may be divided into regions, but they are not sovereign and are subordinate to the state. In the UK, the constitutional doctrine of Parliamentary sovereignty dictates that sovereignty is ultimately contained at the centre. Some powers have been devolved to Northern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales (but not England). Some unitary states (Spain is an example) devolve more and more power to sub-national governments until the state functions in practice much like a federal state.

A federal state has a central structure with at most a small amount of territory mainly containing the institutions of the federal government, and several regions (called &quot;states&quot;, &quot;provinces&quot;, etc.) which compose the territory of the whole state. Sovereignty is divided between the centre and the constituent regions. The constitutions of Canada and the United States establish federal states, with power divided between the federal government and the provinces or states. Each of the regions may in turn have its own constitution (of unitary nature).

A confederal state comprises again several regions, but the central structure has only limited coordinating power, and sovereignty is located in the regions. Confederal constitutions are rare, and there is often dispute to whether so-called &quot;confederal&quot; states are actually federal.

To some extent a group of states which do not constitute a federation as such may by treaties and accords give up parts of their sovereignty to a supranational entity. For example, the countries constituting the European Union have agreed to abide by some Union-wide measures which restrict their absolute sovereignty in some ways, e.g., the use of the metric system of measurement instead of national units previously used.

=== State of emergency ===

Many constitutions allow the declaration under exceptional circumstances of some form of state of emergency during which some rights and guarantees are suspended. This provision can be and has been abused to allow a government to suppress dissent without regard for human rights – see the article on state of emergency.

===Facade constitutions===

Italian political theorist Giovanni Sartori noted the existence of national constitutions which are a facade for authoritarian sources of power. While such documents may express respect for human rights or establish an independent judiciary, they may be ignored when the government feels threatened, or never put into practice. An extreme example was the Constitution of the Soviet Union that on paper supported freedom of assembly and freedom of speech; however, citizens who transgressed unwritten limits were summarily imprisoned. The example demonstrates that the protections and benefits of a constitution are ultimately provided not through its written terms but through deference by government and society to its principles. A constitution may change from being real to a facade and back again as democratic and autocratic governments succeed each other.

==Constitutional courts==
Constitutions are often, but by no means always, protected by a legal body whose job it is to interpret those constitutions and, where applicable, declare void executive and legislative acts which infringe the constitution. In some countries, such as Germany, this function is carried out by a dedicated constitutional court which performs this (and only this) function. In other countries, such as Ireland, the ordinary courts may perform this function in addition to their other responsibilities. While elsewhere, like in the United Kingdom, the concept of declaring an act to be unconstitutional does not exist.

A constitutional violation is an action or legislative act that is judged by a constitutional court to be contrary to the constitution, that is, unconstitutional. An example of constitutional violation by the executive could be a public office holder who acts outside the powers granted to that office by a constitution. An example of constitutional violation by the legislature is an attempt to pass a law that would contradict the constitution, without first going through the proper constitutional amendment process.

Some countries, mainly those with uncodified constitutions, have no such courts at all. For example, the United Kingdom has traditionally operated under the principle of parliamentary sovereignty under which the laws passed by United Kingdom Parliament could not be questioned by the courts.

==By country==

* Constitution of the Roman Republic
* Unratified European Union constitution
** Treaty of Lisbon (adopts same changes, but without constitutional name)
* United Nations Charter

==See also==

* Basic law, equivalent in some countries, often for a temporary constitution
* Apostolic constitution (a class of Catholic Church documents)
* Consent of the governed
* Constitutional amendment
* Constitutional court
* Constitutional crisis
* Constitutional documents
* Constitutional economics
* Constitutional interpretation
** Originalism
** Strict constructionism
** Textualism
* Constitutionalism
* International constitutional law
* Law
* Legal tradition
* International law 
* Justice
* Judicial activism
* Judicial restraint
* Judicial review
* Philosophy of law
* Religious law
* Rule of law
* Rule according to higher law
==Further reading==
* Zachary Elkins and Tom Ginsburg. 2021. &quot;&quot; &quot;Annual Review of Political Science&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* Constitute, an indexed and searchable database of all constitutions in force
*Amendments Project
* Dictionary of the History of Ideas Constitutionalism
* &quot;Constitutional Law&quot;, &quot;Constitutions, bibliography, links&quot;
* &quot;International Constitutional Law&quot;: English translations of various national constitutions
* United Nations Rule of Law: Constitution-making, on the relationship between constitution-making, the rule of law and the United Nations.
* constitution | Theories, Features, Practices, &amp; Facts | Britannica
* Constitutionalism | Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
* Constitutions and Constitutionalism | Encyclopedia.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="2" end="14" title="Constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q211364" start="47" end="56" title="principle" label="principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q665141" start="73" end="82" title="precedent" label="precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="104" end="109" title="legal" label="legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063239" start="121" end="127" title="polity" label="polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="129" end="141" title="organization" label="organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778211" start="159" end="165" title="Legal entity" label="entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="508" end="546" title="The Constitution of the United Kingdom" label="The Constitution of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="770" end="789" title="Sovereign state" label="sovereign countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q783794" start="793" end="802" title="Company" label="companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q988108" start="822" end="834" title="Club (organization)" label="associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="838" end="844" title="treaty" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="865" end="891" title="international organization" label="international organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="987" end="993" title="state (polity)" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237872" start="1279" end="1297" title="fundamental rights" label="fundamental rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041968" start="1343" end="1352" title="consensus democracy" label="consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="1356" end="1369" title="supermajority" label="supermajority"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="1376" end="1397" title="Constitution of India" label="Constitution of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348800" start="1489" end="1505" title="Indian English" label="English-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q63982" start="1525" end="1547" title="Constitution of Monaco" label="Constitution of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143322" start="1607" end="1633" title="Constitution of San Marino" label="Constitution of San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="1774" end="1807" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2002" end="2008" title="French (language)" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2018" end="2023" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2076" end="2084" title="Roman Empire" label="imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="2208" end="2217" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="2284" end="2288" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q620035" start="2318" end="2340" title="apostolic constitution" label="apostolic constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="2349" end="2367" title="William Blackstone" label="William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242115" start="2502" end="2515" title="revolutionary" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="2642" end="2657" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="3125" end="3136" title="institution" label="institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="3211" end="3220" title="Liberty" label="liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="3228" end="3237" title="citizenry" label="citizenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="3274" end="3282" title="Minority group" label="minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q138203" start="3581" end="3592" title="ultra vires" label="ultra vires"/>
<link wikidata="Q877998" start="3616" end="3636" title="students&amp;#x27; union" label="students&amp;#x27; union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="3978" end="3993" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="4017" end="4027" title="parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="4033" end="4046" title="federal state" label="federal state"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="4223" end="4242" title="judicial review" label="judicially reviewed"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="4854" end="4867" title="statutory law" label="statutory law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4873" end="4896" title="#Uncodified constitution" label="Uncodified constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q46310" start="5102" end="5111" title="ab initio" label="ab initio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001059" start="5767" end="5771" title="writ" label="writ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3724781" start="5788" end="5800" title="quo warranto" label="quo warranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q431113" start="5868" end="5881" title="Autochthon (ancient Greece)" label="autochthonous"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="5936" end="5941" title="Hegel" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="6173" end="6217" title="Constitution of the United States of America" label="Constitution of the United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="6446" end="6462" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q971176" start="6891" end="6918" title="French Constitution of 1791" label="French Constitution of 1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="7418" end="7425" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="7548" end="7553" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="7823" end="7830" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="8215" end="8226" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="8291" end="8312" title="freedom of expression" label="freedom of expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975555" start="8441" end="8512" title="Ten Principles for the Establishment of a Monolithic Ideological System" label="Ten Principles for the Establishment of a Monolithic Ideological System"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="8734" end="8745" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="8822" end="8826" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q990874" start="8830" end="8846" title="Ernest de Sarzec" label="Ernest de Sarzec"/>
<link wikidata="Q922203" start="8892" end="8907" title="code of justice" label="code of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="8923" end="8928" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q315698" start="8937" end="8946" title="Urukagina" label="Urukagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q207330" start="8950" end="8956" title="Lagash" label="Lagash"/>
<link wikidata="Q157188" start="9233" end="9238" title="usury" label="usury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="9270" end="9281" title="Forms of government" label="governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q705693" start="9384" end="9400" title="Code of Ur-Nammu" label="Code of Ur-Nammu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699" start="9404" end="9406" title="Ur" label="Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q502513" start="9472" end="9492" title="code of Lipit-Ishtar" label="code of Lipit-Ishtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q501259" start="9496" end="9500" title="Isin" label="Isin"/>
<link wikidata="Q93304" start="9506" end="9523" title="code of Hammurabi" label="code of Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="9527" end="9536" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035946" start="9542" end="9554" title="Hittite laws" label="Hittite code"/>
<link wikidata="Q691173" start="9560" end="9573" title="Assyrian law" label="Assyrian code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637842" start="9579" end="9589" title="613 Commandments" label="Mosaic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q28626" start="9618" end="9623" title="Draco (lawgiver)" label="Draco"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="9654" end="9664" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="9668" end="9674" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="9701" end="9714" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q133337" start="9821" end="9826" title="Solon" label="Solon"/>
<link wikidata="Q716540" start="9871" end="9892" title="Solonian Constitution" label="Solonian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q131708" start="10013" end="10023" title="plutocracy" label="plutocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="10048" end="10059" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207634" start="10062" end="10073" title="Cleisthenes of Athens" label="Cleisthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="10161" end="10170" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194747" start="10310" end="10327" title="constitutionalism" label="constitutionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q382282" start="10558" end="10580" title="Constitution of the Athenians (Aristotle)" label="Constitution of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q69539" start="10594" end="10602" title="Politics (Aristotle)" label="Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q474537" start="10620" end="10638" title="Nicomachean Ethics" label="Nicomachean Ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q211326" start="10721" end="10727" title="Lycurgus of Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="10733" end="10741" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q203686" start="11165" end="11178" title="Twelve Tables" label="Twelve Tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="11262" end="11271" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4300" start="11327" end="11345" title="Codex Theodosianus" label="Codex Theodosianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187719" start="11402" end="11429" title="Corpus Juris Civilis" label="Codex repetitæ prælectionis"/>
<link wikidata="Q31755" start="11543" end="11563" title="Leo III the Isaurian" label="Leo III the Isaurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41592" start="11602" end="11609" title="Basil I" label="Basil I"/>
<link wikidata="Q779933" start="11628" end="11644" title="Edicts of Ashoka" label="Edicts of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="11712" end="11718" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="11739" end="11744" title="History of India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q321526" start="11810" end="11822" title="code of Manu" label="code of Manu"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="11922" end="11942" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="11950" end="11967" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078683" start="12015" end="12033" title="Germanic tribal laws" label="Germanic law codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217620" start="12081" end="12086" title="Euric" label="Euric"/>
<link wikidata="Q188350" start="12134" end="12150" title="Lex Burgundionum" label="Lex Burgundionum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397990" start="12220" end="12238" title="Lex Alamannorum" label="Pactus Alamannorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q152507" start="12254" end="12263" title="Salic Law" label="Salic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="12271" end="12277" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q943866" start="12325" end="12334" title="Breviary of Alaric" label="Breviarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q110884" start="12370" end="12379" title="Alaric II" label="Alaric II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284512" start="12562" end="12577" title="Edictum Rothari" label="Edictum Rothari"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="12591" end="12599" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246455" start="12617" end="12633" title="Lex Visigothorum" label="Lex Visigothorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479119" start="12700" end="12713" title="Lex Frisionum" label="Lex Frisionum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="12788" end="12799" title="Anglo-Saxon language" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q272173" start="12858" end="12876" title="Æthelberht of Kent" label="Æthelberht of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="12896" end="12912" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241793" start="13027" end="13036" title="Doom book" label="Doom book"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="13070" end="13075" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q197248" start="13089" end="13119" title="Seventeen-article constitution" label="Seventeen-article constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q263972" start="13156" end="13170" title="Prince Shotoku" label="Prince Shōtoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="13252" end="13260" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q158687" start="13424" end="13446" title="Constitution of Medina" label="Constitution of Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="13526" end="13541" title="Islamic prophet" label="Islamic prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="13542" end="13550" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q131482" start="13569" end="13574" title="Hegira" label="hijra"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="13746" end="13752" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="13765" end="13771" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="13774" end="13777" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="13784" end="13789" title="pagan" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q777586" start="13928" end="13931" title="Banu Aus" label="Aus"/>
<link wikidata="Q581780" start="13937" end="13944" title="Khazraj" label="Khazraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q205766" start="14138" end="14143" title="Ummah" label="Ummah"/>
<link wikidata="Q131482" start="14274" end="14279" title="Hijra (Islam)" label="Hijra"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="14291" end="14296" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q63300138" start="14302" end="14316" title="Cyfraith Hywel" label="Cyfraith Hywel"/>
<link wikidata="Q422205" start="14348" end="14357" title="Hywel Dda" label="Hywel Dda"/>
<link wikidata="Q988326" start="14441" end="14473" title="Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542" label="Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542"/>
<link wikidata="Q188943" start="14564" end="14581" title="Yaroslav the Wise" label="Yaroslav the Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097003" start="14586" end="14606" title="Grand Prince of Kiev" label="Grand Prince of Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="14623" end="14637" title="Great Novgorod" label="Great Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q783761" start="14695" end="14710" title="Russkaya Pravda" label="Russkaya Pravda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="14747" end="14763" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q101384" start="14834" end="14848" title="Henry I of England" label="Henry I&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067837" start="14869" end="14889" title="Charter of Liberties" label="Charter of Liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="15055" end="15064" title="John of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="15073" end="15084" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="15161" end="15174" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="15291" end="15302" title="due process" label="due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="15444" end="15459" title="social contract" label="social contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="15592" end="15615" title="Constitutional Monarchy" label="Constitutional Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="15706" end="15722" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262834" start="15729" end="15738" title="Nomocanon" label="Nomocanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q138465" start="15742" end="15752" title="Saint Sava" label="Saint Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="15770" end="15776" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212459" start="15802" end="15827" title="St. Sava&amp;#x27;s Nomocanon" label="St. Sava&amp;#x27;s Nomocanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="15851" end="15860" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="15871" end="15880" title="Roman Law" label="Roman Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="15886" end="15895" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q51645" start="15906" end="15925" title="Ecumenical Councils" label="Ecumenical Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415003" start="15990" end="16005" title="Kingdom of Serbia (medieval)" label="Serbian kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="16014" end="16028" title="Serbian Ortodox Church" label="Serbian church"/>
<link wikidata="Q130321" start="16105" end="16116" title="Mount Athos" label="Mount Athos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266328" start="16233" end="16250" title="John Scholasticus" label="John Scholasticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q32052" start="16359" end="16374" title="Joannes Zonaras" label="Joannes Zonaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="16412" end="16424" title="Holy Fathers" label="Holy Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="16437" end="16442" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="16481" end="16499" title="Byzantine emperors" label="Byzantine emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058995" start="16506" end="16514" title="Novellae Constitutiones" label="Novellae"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="16537" end="16546" title="Justinian" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="16659" end="16668" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517623" start="16889" end="16906" title="Legal transplants" label="Legal transplants"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="16910" end="16915" title="Roman Law" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q166834" start="16916" end="16929" title="Byzantine law" label="Byzantine law"/>
<link wikidata="Q187719" start="17018" end="17038" title="Corpus Iuris Civilis" label="Corpus Iuris Civilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207303" start="17041" end="17053" title="Stefan Dušan" label="Stefan Dušan"/>
<link wikidata="Q978404" start="17092" end="17109" title="Dušan&amp;#x27;s Code" label="Dušan&amp;#x27;s Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="17116" end="17122" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q384" start="17160" end="17166" title="Skopje" label="Skopje"/>
<link wikidata="Q206957" start="17182" end="17188" title="Serres" label="Serres"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="17337" end="17342" title="Roman Law" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q166834" start="17343" end="17356" title="Byzantine law" label="Byzantine law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517623" start="17368" end="17381" title="Legal transplants" label="transplanting"/>
<link wikidata="Q810134" start="17524" end="17532" title="Basilika" label="Basilika"/>
<link wikidata="Q271104" start="17580" end="17589" title="Andrew II of Hungary" label="Andrew II"/>
<link wikidata="Q775307" start="17601" end="17620" title="Golden Bull of 1222" label="Golden Bull of 1222"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="17648" end="17653" title="Saxony" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q77737" start="17669" end="17684" title="Eike von Repgow" label="Eike von Repgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q166489" start="17705" end="17719" title="Sachsenspiegel" label="Sachsenspiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q146744" start="17816" end="17820" title="Copt" label="Copt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17850" end="17892" title="&amp;#x27;Abul Fada&amp;#x27;il Ibn al-&amp;#x27;Assal" label="&amp;#x27;Abul Fada&amp;#x27;il Ibn al-&amp;#x27;Assal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246661" start="17910" end="17922" title="Fetha Negest" label="Fetha Negest"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="17932" end="17938" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="18046" end="18055" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35667" start="18146" end="18156" title="Ge&amp;#x27;ez language" label="Ge&amp;#x27;ez"/>
<link wikidata="Q147677" start="18206" end="18216" title="Zara Yaqob" label="Zara Yaqob"/>
<link wikidata="Q887763" start="18318" end="18330" title="Sarsa Dengel" label="Sarsa Dengel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135135" start="18448" end="18460" title="Constitution of Ethiopia" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41178" start="18490" end="18504" title="Haile Selassie" label="Haile Selassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q15581" start="18515" end="18540" title="Principality of Catalonia" label="Principality of Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883547" start="18546" end="18567" title="Catalan constitutions" label="Catalan constitutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552536" start="18642" end="18662" title="Usatges of Barcelona" label="Usatges of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="18736" end="18753" title="Philip V of Spain" label="Philip V of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990620" start="18763" end="18783" title="Nueva Planta decrees" label="Nueva Planta decrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="18823" end="18832" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902969" start="18970" end="18984" title="Catalan Courts" label="Catalan Courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961226" start="19200" end="19216" title="Kouroukan Fouga" label="Kouroukan Founga"/>
<link wikidata="Q184536" start="19257" end="19268" title="Mali Empire" label="Mali Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="19272" end="19283" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19330" end="19345" title="Siriman Kouyaté" label="Siriman Kouyaté"/>
<link wikidata="Q567601" start="19479" end="19498" title="Golden Bull of 1356" label="Golden Bull of 1356"/>
<link wikidata="Q669970" start="19530" end="19539" title="Imperial Diet (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q155669" start="19577" end="19587" title="Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="19705" end="19722" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="19728" end="19733" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="19739" end="19753" title="Hongwu Emperor" label="Hongwu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925641" start="19801" end="19822" title="Huang Ming Zu Xun" label="Ancestral Injunctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="19944" end="19956" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="20062" end="20072" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143322" start="20084" end="20123" title="Constitution of San Marino" label="Leges Statutae Republicae Sancti Marini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256243" start="20598" end="20611" title="Carta de Logu" label="Carta de Logu"/>
<link wikidata="Q922203" start="20622" end="20632" title="legal code" label="legal code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241847" start="20640" end="20660" title="Giudicato of Arborea" label="Giudicato of Arborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q155244" start="20703" end="20710" title="Eleanor of Arborea" label="Eleanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="20731" end="20739" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312683" start="20779" end="20792" title="Charles Felix of Sardinia" label="Charles Felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="20852" end="20860" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122235" start="20952" end="20957" title="Civil law (area)" label="civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="20962" end="20971" title="penal law" label="penal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723596" start="20984" end="20997" title="Great Law of Peace" label="Gayanashagowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="21034" end="21047" title="Haudenosaunee" label="Haudenosaunee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433209" start="21203" end="21209" title="Sachem" label="Sachem"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="21653" end="21670" title="Kingdom of Sweden" label="Kingdom of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041873" start="21683" end="21712" title="Instrument of Government (1634)" label="1634 Instrument of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259383" start="21733" end="21763" title="Lord High Chancellor of Sweden" label="Lord High Chancellor of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q155127" start="21764" end="21780" title="Axel Oxenstierna" label="Axel Oxenstierna"/>
<link wikidata="Q52938" start="21805" end="21822" title="Gustavus Adolphus" label="Gustavus Adolphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477668" start="21956" end="21971" title="Rump Parliament" label="Rump Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987351" start="22175" end="22195" title="English Protectorate" label="English Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="22206" end="22221" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="22232" end="22249" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633961" start="22347" end="22371" title="Instrument of Government" label="Instrument of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="22670" end="22682" title="bicameralism" label="bicameralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="22684" end="22704" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="22736" end="22751" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395992" start="22818" end="22844" title="John Lambert (General)" label="Major-General John Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689990" start="22957" end="22975" title="Heads of Proposals" label="Heads of Proposals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794123" start="23015" end="23027" title="Army Council (1647)" label="Army Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="23128" end="23137" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142505" start="23158" end="23181" title="First English Civil War" label="First English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907844" start="23272" end="23280" title="Grandee (New Model Army)" label="Grandees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="23288" end="23302" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q396432" start="23393" end="23416" title="Agreement of the People" label="Agreement of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042349" start="23481" end="23495" title="Putney Debates" label="Putney Debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="23589" end="23604" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q512196" start="23622" end="23636" title="Lord Protector" label="Lord Protector"/>
<link wikidata="Q512196" start="23784" end="23818" title="Lord Protector of the Commonwealth" label="Lord Protector of the Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="23959" end="23969" title="Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845537" start="24146" end="24172" title="Humble Petition and Advice" label="Humble Petition and Advice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113019" start="24190" end="24207" title="Christopher Packe (politician)" label="Christopher Packe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="24241" end="24249" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="24253" end="24268" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="24279" end="24289" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="24322" end="24330" title="taxation" label="taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="24625" end="24636" title="Restoration (England)" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q951500" start="24710" end="24731" title="Colony of Connecticut" label="Colony of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245550" start="24744" end="24762" title="Fundamental Orders of Connecticut" label="Fundamental Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="24784" end="24797" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="24902" end="24913" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="24941" end="24959" title="Constitution State" label="Constitution State"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="25167" end="25192" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="25197" end="25223" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="25299" end="25328" title="Massachusetts" label="Commonwealth of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q196171" start="25337" end="25353" title="Constitution of Massachusetts" label="its Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="25765" end="25785" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="25794" end="25807" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="25809" end="25830" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="25836" end="25846" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="25993" end="26002" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212300" start="26012" end="26084" title="Constitution of Pylyp Orlyk" label="Agreements and Constitutions of Laws and Freedoms of the Zaporizian Host"/>
<link wikidata="Q966936" start="26114" end="26125" title="Pylyp Orlyk" label="Pylyp Orlyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q625652" start="26133" end="26139" title="hetman" label="hetman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113735" start="26153" end="26169" title="Zaporozhian Host" label="Zaporozhian Host"/>
<link wikidata="Q212439" start="26206" end="26236" title="Cossack Hetmanate" label="Zaporozhian-Ukrainian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q52934" start="26258" end="26279" title="Charles XII of Sweden" label="Charles XII of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q514727" start="26499" end="26517" title="Spirit of the Laws" label="Spirit of the Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="26744" end="26753" title="Ukraine" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q411374" start="26845" end="26866" title="Corsican Constitution" label="Corsican Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="26902" end="26923" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="26947" end="26965" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015097" start="26992" end="27020" title="Instrument of Government (1772)" label="Swedish constitution of 1772"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="27044" end="27056" title="Gustavus III" label="Gustavus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="27081" end="27101" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="27105" end="27116" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="27148" end="27161" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q219934" start="27175" end="27191" title="Enlightened absolutism" label="enlighted despot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="27271" end="27284" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="27310" end="27327" title="religious freedom" label="religious freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="27363" end="27371" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="27378" end="27404" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q131169" start="27463" end="27471" title="Polybius" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="27473" end="27478" title="John Locke" label="Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="27480" end="27491" title="Charles de Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="27541" end="27554" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="27607" end="27637" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129096" start="27638" end="27650" title="Constitution of May 3, 1791" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796477" start="27729" end="27752" title="Enlightenment in Poland" label="Enlightenment in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="27766" end="27794" title="Stanislaw August Poniatowski" label="Stanislaw August Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q708435" start="27796" end="27813" title="Stanisław Staszic" label="Stanisław Staszic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434034" start="27815" end="27832" title="Scipione Piattoli" label="Scipione Piattoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q458241" start="27834" end="27857" title="Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz" label="Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q36742" start="27859" end="27873" title="Ignacy Potocki" label="Ignacy Potocki"/>
<link wikidata="Q127345" start="27878" end="27891" title="Hugo Kołłątaj" label="Hugo Kołłątaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q883433" start="27915" end="27925" title="Great Sejm" label="Great Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q971176" start="28096" end="28123" title="French Constitution of 1791" label="French Constitution of 1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q5784582" start="28130" end="28160" title="1811 Constitution of Venezuela" label="1811 Constitution of Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q891364" start="28175" end="28187" title="Constitution of Venezuela" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="28191" end="28200" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497553" start="28247" end="28264" title="Cristóbal Mendoza" label="Cristóbal Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624511" start="28269" end="28287" title="Juan Germán Roscio" label="Juan Germán Roscio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533" start="28295" end="28302" title="Caracas" label="Caracas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421412" start="28396" end="28424" title="Spanish Constitution of 1812" label="Spanish Constitution of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="28443" end="28453" title="Cortes Generales" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="28466" end="28471" title="Cadiz" label="Cadiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="28527" end="28544" title="Peninsular War" label="French occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="28632" end="28644" title="South Europe" label="South Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="28651" end="28664" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822923" start="28692" end="28723" title="Liberal Revolution of 1820" label="Portuguese Constitution of 1822"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="28750" end="28757" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q749325" start="28772" end="28781" title="Carbonari" label="Carbonari"/>
<link wikidata="Q180393" start="28804" end="28831" title="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies" label="Kingdom of the Two Sicilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q642673" start="28834" end="28868" title="Constitution of Norway" label="the Norwegian constitution of 1814"/>
<link wikidata="Q771159" start="28877" end="28905" title="1824 Constitution of Mexico" label="Mexican Constitution of 1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="28911" end="28917" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995067" start="28923" end="28943" title="Brazilian Constitution of 1824" label="Constitution of 1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q939" start="29108" end="29115" title="Pedro I of Brazil" label="Pedro I"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="29318" end="29325" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="29346" end="29361" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="29367" end="29384" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="29417" end="29423" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="29427" end="29433" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255302" start="29466" end="29495" title="Instrument of Government (1809)" label="1809 Instrument of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="29541" end="29548" title="Riksdag of Sweden" label="Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="29567" end="29576" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q642673" start="29654" end="29666" title="Constitution of Norway" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="29792" end="29799" title="Constitutional monarchy" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q30921" start="29862" end="29888" title="Swiss Federal Constitution" label="Swiss Federal Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092429" start="29997" end="30015" title="Serbian revolution" label="Serbian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q167394" start="30248" end="30258" title="Kragujevac" label="Kragujevac"/>
<link wikidata="Q899061" start="30285" end="30307" title="Constitution of Canada" label="Constitution of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q784786" start="30506" end="30545" title="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146145" start="30932" end="30947" title="rule by decree" label="ruled by decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="31169" end="31174" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="31253" end="31262" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="31264" end="31270" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="31275" end="31283" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="31371" end="31382" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="31668" end="31682" title="law of nations" label="law of nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="32118" end="32127" title="English Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="32133" end="32144" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Cromwellian"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="32145" end="32157" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="32175" end="32188" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097515" start="32190" end="32207" title="Samuel Rutherford" label="Samuel Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367657" start="32213" end="32222" title="Levellers" label="Levellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="32224" end="32235" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q969183" start="32241" end="32257" title="James Harrington (author)" label="James Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q707787" start="32289" end="32302" title="Robert Filmer" label="Robert Filmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238565" start="32381" end="32394" title="Henry Neville (writer)" label="Henry Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161452" start="32396" end="32409" title="James Tyrrell (writer)" label="James Tyrrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034181" start="32411" end="32426" title="Algernon Sidney" label="Algernon Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="32432" end="32442" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="33258" end="33269" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850093" start="33781" end="33797" title="Orestes Brownson" label="Orestes Brownson"/>
<link wikidata="Q625994" start="34408" end="34419" title="Convention (meeting)" label="conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004391" start="34430" end="34443" title="public notice" label="public notice"/>
<link wikidata="Q221911" start="34473" end="34491" title="Parliamentary procedure" label="rules of procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="34696" end="34701" title="state (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822514" start="36101" end="36109" title="metagame" label="metagame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449443" start="36383" end="36388" title="Nomic" label="Nomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="37826" end="37839" title="civil service" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q390689" start="38168" end="38177" title="Basic Law" label="Basic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="38568" end="38593" title="constitutional convention (political custom)" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q10931" start="38771" end="38781" title="revolution" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999817" start="39123" end="39131" title="Wiki-constitutionalism" label="turnover"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="39326" end="39333" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515622" start="39525" end="39541" title="Constitutionality" label="unconstitutional"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="39601" end="39621" title="constitutional amendment" label="amend a constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900755" start="39682" end="39702" title="constituent assembly" label="constituent assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="39745" end="39758" title="supermajority" label="supermajority"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="39812" end="39822" title="parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="39864" end="39874" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17990855" start="40027" end="40090" title="Entrenched clause" label="most basic principles can never be abolished, even by amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129448" start="40341" end="40349" title="preamble" label="preamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538970" start="40560" end="40576" title="Constitutional references to God" label="reference to God"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="40627" end="40634" title="liberty" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="40636" end="40645" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="40649" end="40661" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="40695" end="40702" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="40861" end="40872" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="40881" end="40895" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368137" start="40939" end="40959" title="Basic Laws of Israel" label="Basic Laws of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="41383" end="41401" title="Westminster System" label="Westminster System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="41606" end="41632" title="Constitutional convention (political custom)" label="constitutional conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q665141" start="41649" end="41658" title="precedent" label="precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="41661" end="41678" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="41681" end="41688" title="convention (norm)" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767862" start="41779" end="41805" title="British constitutional law" label="British constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="41914" end="41939" title="Constitution of Australia" label="Constitution of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q719883" start="42276" end="42298" title="Statute of Westminster 1931" label="Statute of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604669" start="42338" end="42378" title="Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1942" label="Statute of Westminster Adoption Act 1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q584627" start="42388" end="42406" title="Australia Act 1986" label="Australia Act 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720142" start="42573" end="42599" title="Constitutional convention (political custom)" label="constitutional conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q899061" start="42635" end="42657" title="Constitution of Canada" label="Constitution of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q919906" start="42695" end="42721" title="British North America Acts" label="British North America Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q736882" start="42739" end="42754" title="Canada Act 1982" label="Canada Act 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q868875" start="42954" end="42976" title="Constitution Act, 1982" label="Constitution Act, 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q209573" start="43135" end="43155" title="Proclamation of 1763" label="Proclamation of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q16679410" start="43202" end="43260" title="List of Canadian constitutional documents" label="a number of different statutes, amendments, and references"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368137" start="43846" end="43866" title="Basic Laws of Israel" label="Basic Laws of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414408" start="43875" end="43890" title="Parliament Acts 1911 and 1949" label="Parliament Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456334" start="44034" end="44065" title="Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011" label="Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456339" start="44109" end="44131" title="Fixed-term election" label="fixed-term parliaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063239" start="44413" end="44419" title="polity" label="polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="44421" end="44433" title="organization" label="organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778211" start="44451" end="44457" title="Legal entity" label="entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q390689" start="45142" end="45151" title="basic law" label="basic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362323" start="45341" end="45354" title="supermajority" label="supermajority"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="45358" end="45368" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45473" end="45562" title="Article Five of the United States Constitution#Constitutional clauses shielded from amendment" label="prohibits abolishing equal suffrage of the States within the Senate without their consent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948382" start="45645" end="45659" title="Constitution of the Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="45661" end="45668" title="Constitution of Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q646519" start="45670" end="45676" title="Constitution of Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573466" start="45678" end="45684" title="Constitution of Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q719967" start="45686" end="45691" title="Constitution of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616245" start="45693" end="45700" title="Constitution of Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388932" start="45702" end="45730" title="Constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran" label="the Islamic Republic of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386422" start="45732" end="45738" title="Constitution of Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q642673" start="45743" end="45749" title="Constitution of Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="45751" end="45776" title="Constitution of India" label="India&amp;#x27;s constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867055" start="45844" end="45868" title="basic structure doctrine" label="basic structure doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q695252" start="45970" end="45989" title="Parliament of India" label="Parliament of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633724" start="46001" end="46010" title="amendment of the Constitution of India" label="amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837647" start="46016" end="46040" title="Colombian Constitution of 1991" label="Constitution of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="46325" end="46328" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="46333" end="46362" title="Conscription" label="Duty to serve in the military"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="46380" end="46393" title="Suffrage" label="Right to vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="46396" end="46415" title="Freedom of assembly" label="Freedom of assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q688503" start="46418" end="46440" title="Freedom of association" label="Freedom of association"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="46443" end="46464" title="Freedom of speech" label="Freedom of expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344824" start="46467" end="46486" title="Freedom of movement" label="Freedom of movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q277569" start="46489" end="46507" title="Freedom of thought" label="Freedom of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="46510" end="46530" title="Freedom of the press" label="Freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="46533" end="46552" title="Freedom of religion" label="Freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625153" start="46600" end="46617" title="Right to petition" label="Right to petition"/>
<link wikidata="Q414706" start="46629" end="46645" title="academic freedom" label="academic freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="46657" end="46680" title="Conscientious objector" label="conscientious objection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757432" start="46694" end="46704" title="Right to a fair trial" label="fair trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998095" start="46716" end="46736" title="personal development" label="personal development"/>
<link wikidata="Q329497" start="46765" end="46785" title="Freedom of information laws by country" label="Right to information"/>
<link wikidata="Q112079417" start="46808" end="46827" title="Right of revolution" label="Right of revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354932" start="46830" end="46846" title="Right to privacy" label="Right to privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313593" start="46899" end="46919" title="Renunciation of citizenship" label="renounce citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354948" start="46922" end="46940" title="Children&amp;#x27;s rights" label="Rights of children"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="47114" end="47134" title="Charles de Secondat, baron de Montesquieu" label="Baron de Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="47175" end="47184" title="executive branch" label="executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="47186" end="47197" title="legislature" label="legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="47202" end="47210" title="judiciary" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q181487" start="47271" end="47286" title="audit" label="auditory branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="47411" end="47423" title="Presidential system" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="47428" end="47445" title="semi-presidential" label="semi-presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q30461" start="47525" end="47534" title="President (government title)" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="47658" end="47671" title="parliamentary" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="47718" end="47728" title="Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="47744" end="47758" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="48120" end="48141" title="vote of no confidence" label="vote of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="48550" end="48562" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774348" start="48567" end="48593" title="List of anti-corruption agencies" label="anti-corruption commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q935741" start="48598" end="48618" title="Election commission" label="electoral commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511443" start="48649" end="48672" title="human rights commission" label="human rights commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q169180" start="48697" end="48706" title="ombudsman" label="ombudsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501336" start="48714" end="48749" title="truth and reconciliation commission" label="truth and reconciliation commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813642" start="49286" end="49311" title="Parliamentary sovereignty" label="Parliamentary sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139955" start="49399" end="49407" title="devolution" label="devolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="49411" end="49427" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="49429" end="49437" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="49443" end="49448" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="49458" end="49465" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="49489" end="49494" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="50585" end="50593" title="treaty" label="treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335818" start="50646" end="50659" title="Supranational union" label="supranational"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="50712" end="50726" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="50853" end="50881" title="metric system of measurement" label="metric system of measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="51254" end="51272" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q358529" start="51330" end="51346" title="Giovanni Sartori" label="Giovanni Sartori"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="51493" end="51505" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515553" start="51658" end="51690" title="Constitution of the Soviet Union" label="Constitution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q162254" start="51715" end="51734" title="freedom of assembly" label="freedom of assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="51739" end="51756" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="51825" end="51835" title="Political prisoner" label="imprisoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="52443" end="52450" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="52591" end="52598" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="52720" end="52734" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q32766" start="52887" end="52907" title="constitutional court" label="constitutional court"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="53294" end="53318" title="constitutional amendment" label="constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="53434" end="53448" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813642" start="53499" end="53524" title="parliamentary sovereignty" label="parliamentary sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="53556" end="53581" title="United Kingdom Parliament" label="United Kingdom Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576746" start="53640" end="53674" title="Constitution of the Roman Republic" label="Constitution of the Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189066" start="53677" end="53715" title="Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe" label="Unratified European Union constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q52843" start="53719" end="53735" title="Treaty of Lisbon" label="Treaty of Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="53793" end="53815" title="United Nations Charter" label="United Nations Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q390689" start="53833" end="53842" title="Basic law" label="Basic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q620035" start="53911" end="53933" title="Apostolic constitution" label="Apostolic constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="53946" end="53961" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="53975" end="53998" title="Consent of the governed" label="Consent of the governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q53463" start="54001" end="54025" title="Constitutional amendment" label="Constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q32766" start="54028" end="54048" title="Constitutional court" label="Constitutional court"/>
<link wikidata="Q380552" start="54051" end="54072" title="Constitutional crisis" label="Constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q680655" start="54075" end="54099" title="Constitutional documents" label="Constitutional documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489796" start="54102" end="54126" title="Constitutional economics" label="Constitutional economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331848" start="54129" end="54158" title="Judicial interpretation" label="Constitutional interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q453503" start="54162" end="54173" title="Originalism" label="Originalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623615" start="54177" end="54199" title="Strict constructionism" label="Strict constructionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708515" start="54203" end="54213" title="Textualism" label="Textualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194747" start="54216" end="54233" title="Constitutionalism" label="Constitutionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054545" start="54236" end="54268" title="International constitutional law" label="International constitutional law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="54271" end="54274" title="Law" label="Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q19978988" start="54277" end="54292" title="Legal tradition" label="Legal tradition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54295" end="54313" title="International law " label="International law "/>
<link wikidata="Q13189320" start="54316" end="54323" title="Justice" label="Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330176" start="54326" end="54343" title="Judicial activism" label="Judicial activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151311" start="54346" end="54364" title="Judicial restraint" label="Judicial restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="54367" end="54382" title="Judicial review" label="Judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="54385" end="54402" title="Philosophy of law" label="Philosophy of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q670732" start="54405" end="54418" title="Religious law" label="Religious law"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="54421" end="54432" title="Rule of law" label="Rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q113161979" start="54435" end="54463" title="Rule according to higher law" label="Rule according to higher law"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="55063" end="55074" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
</links>
</doc>
