<doc id="3383" wikidata="Q155" url="?curid=3383" title="Brazil">
<text>Brazil, officially the Federative Republic of Brazil, is the largest and easternmost country in South America. It is the world&#x27;s fifth-largest country by area and the seventh largest by population, with over 212 million people. The country is a federation composed of 26 states and a Federal District, which hosts the capital, Brasília. Its most populous city is São Paulo, followed by Rio de Janeiro. Brazil has the most Portuguese speakers in the world and is the only country in the Americas where Portuguese is an official language.

Bounded by the Atlantic Ocean on the east, Brazil has a coastline of . Covering roughly half of South America&#x27;s land area, it borders all other countries and territories on the continent except Ecuador and Chile. Brazil encompasses a wide range of tropical and subtropical landscapes, as well as wetlands, savannas, plateaus, and low mountains. It contains most of the Amazon basin, including the world’s largest river system and most extensive virgin tropical forest. Brazil has a diverse wildlife, a variety of ecological systems, and extensive natural resources spanning numerous protected habitats. The country ranks first among 17 megadiverse countries, with its natural heritage being the subject of significant global interest, as environmental degradation (through processes such as deforestation) directly affect global issues such as climate change and biodiversity loss.

Brazil was inhabited by various indigenous peoples prior to the landing of Portuguese explorer Pedro Álvares Cabral in 1500. It was claimed and settled by Portugal, which forcibly imported enslaved Africans to work on plantations. Brazil remained a colony until 1815, when it was elevated to the rank of kingdom upon the formation of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves after the transfer of the Portuguese court to Rio de Janeiro. Prince Pedro of Braganza declared the country&#x27;s independence in 1822, establishing the Empire of Brazil, a unitary state governed under a parliamentary constitutional monarchy. Brazil&#x27;s first constitution in 1824 established a bicameral legislature, now called the National Congress, and enshrined principles such as freedom of religion and the press, but retained slavery, which was gradually abolished throughout the 19th century until its final abolition in 1888. Brazil became a presidential republic following a military coup d&#x27;état in 1889. An authoritarian military dictatorship emerged in 1964 and ruled until 1985, after which civilian governance resumed. Brazil&#x27;s current constitution, enacted in 1988, defines it as a democratic federal republic. 

Brazil is a regional and middle power and rising global power. It is an emerging, upper-middle income economy and newly industrialized country, with one of the 10 largest economies in the world in both nominal and PPP terms, the largest economy in Latin America and the Southern Hemisphere, and the largest share of wealth in South America. With a complex and highly diversified economy, Brazil is one of the world&#x27;s major or primary exporters of various agricultural goods, mineral resources, and manufactured products. Due to its rich culture and history, the country ranks thirteenth in the world by number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Brazil is a founding member of the United Nations, the G20, BRICS, G4, Mercosur, Organization of American States, Organization of Ibero-American States, and the Community of Portuguese Language Countries; it is also an observer state of the Arab League and a major non-NATO ally of the United States.

== Etymology ==

The word &quot;Brazil&quot; probably comes from the Portuguese word for brazilwood, a tree that once grew plentifully along the Brazilian coast. In Portuguese, brazilwood is called &quot;pau-brasil&quot;, with the word &quot;brasil&quot; commonly given the etymology &quot;red like an ember&quot;, formed from &quot;brasa&quot; (&#x27;ember&#x27;) and the suffix &quot;-il&quot; (from &quot;-iculum&quot; or &quot;-ilium&quot;). It has alternatively been suggested that this is a folk etymology for a word for the plant related to an Arabic or Asian word for a red plant. As brazilwood produces a deep red dye, it was highly valued by the European textile industry and was the earliest commercially exploited product from Brazil. Throughout the 16th century, massive amounts of brazilwood were harvested by indigenous peoples (mostly Tupi) along the Brazilian coast, who sold the timber to European traders (mostly Portuguese, but also French) in return for assorted European consumer goods.

The official Portuguese name of the land, in original Portuguese records, was the &quot;Land of the Holy Cross&quot; (&quot;Terra da Santa Cruz&quot;), but European sailors and merchants commonly called it the &quot;Land of Brazil&quot; (&quot;Terra do Brasil&quot;) because of the brazilwood trade. The popular appellation eclipsed and eventually supplanted the official Portuguese name. Some early sailors called it the &quot;Land of Parrots&quot;.

In the Guaraní language, an official language of Paraguay, Brazil is called &quot;Pindorama&quot;, meaning &#x27;land of the palm trees&#x27;.

== History ==

=== Pre-Cabraline era ===


Some of the earliest human remains found in the Americas, Luzia Woman, were found in the area of Pedro Leopoldo, Minas Gerais and provide evidence of human habitation going back at least 11,000 years.
The earliest pottery ever found in the Western Hemisphere was excavated in the Amazon basin of Brazil and radiocarbon dated to over 8,000 years ago (6000 BC). The pottery was found near Santarém and provides evidence that the region supported a complex prehistoric culture. The Marajoara culture flourished on Marajó in the Amazon delta from AD 400 to 1400, developing sophisticated pottery, social stratification, large populations, mound building, and complex social formations such as chiefdoms.

Around the time of the Portuguese arrival, the territory of current day Brazil had an estimated indigenous population of 7 million people, mostly semi-nomadic, who subsisted on hunting, fishing, gathering, and migrant agriculture. The population comprised several large indigenous ethnic groups (e.g., the Tupis, Guaranis, Gês, and Arawaks). The Tupi people were subdivided into the Tupiniquins and Tupinambás.

Before the arrival of the Europeans, the boundaries between these groups and their subgroups were marked by wars that arose from differences in culture, language and moral beliefs. These wars also involved large-scale military actions on land and water, with cannibalistic rituals on prisoners of war. While heredity had some weight, leadership was a status more won over time than assigned in succession ceremonies and conventions. Slavery among the indigenous groups had a different meaning than it had for Europeans, since it originated from a diverse socioeconomic organization, in which asymmetries were translated into kinship relations.

=== Portuguese colonization ===


Following the 1494 Treaty of Tordesillas, the land now called Brazil was claimed for the Portuguese Empire on 22 April 1500, with the arrival of the Portuguese fleet commanded by Pedro Álvares Cabral. The Portuguese encountered indigenous peoples divided into several ethnic societies, most of whom spoke languages of the Tupi–Guarani family and fought among themselves. Though the first settlement was founded in 1532, colonization effectively began in 1534, when King John III of Portugal divided the territory into the fifteen private and autonomous captaincies.

However, the decentralized and unorganized tendencies of the captaincies proved problematic, and in 1549 the Portuguese king restructured them into the Governorate General of Brazil in the city of Salvador, which became the capital of a single and centralized Portuguese colony in South America. In the first two centuries of colonization, Indigenous and European groups lived in constant war, establishing opportunistic alliances in order to gain advantages against each other.

By the mid-16th century, cane sugar had become Brazil&#x27;s most important export, while slaves purchased in Sub-Saharan Africa in the slave market of Western Africa (not only those from Portuguese allies of their colonies in Angola and Mozambique), had become its largest import, to cope with sugarcane plantations, due to increasing international demand for Brazilian sugar. Brazil received more than 2.8 million slaves from Africa between the years 1500 and 1800.

By the end of the 17th century, sugarcane exports began to decline and the discovery of gold by bandeirantes in the 1690s would become the new backbone of the colony&#x27;s economy, fostering a gold rush which attracted thousands of new settlers to Brazil from Portugal and all Portuguese colonies around the world. This increased level of immigration in turn caused some conflicts between newcomers and old settlers.

Portuguese expeditions known as &quot;bandeiras&quot; gradually expanded Brazil&#x27;s original colonial frontiers in South America to its approximately current borders. In this era, other European powers tried to colonize parts of Brazil, in incursions that the Portuguese had to fight, notably the French in Rio during the 1560s, in Maranhão during the 1610s, and the Dutch in Bahia and Pernambuco, during the Dutch–Portuguese War, after the end of Iberian Union.

The Portuguese colonial administration in Brazil had two objectives that would ensure colonial order and the monopoly of Portugal&#x27;s wealthiest and largest colony: to keep under control and eradicate all forms of slave rebellion and resistance, such as the Quilombo of Palmares, and to repress all movements for autonomy or independence, such as the Minas Gerais Conspiracy.

=== Elevation to kingdom ===

In late 1807, Spanish and Napoleonic forces threatened the security of continental Portugal, causing Prince Regent John, in the name of Queen Maria I, to move the royal court from Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro. There they established some of Brazil&#x27;s first financial institutions, such as its local stock exchanges and its National Bank, additionally ending the Portuguese monopoly on Brazilian trade and opening Brazil&#x27;s ports to other nations. In 1809, in retaliation for being forced into exile, the Prince Regent ordered the conquest of French Guiana.

With the end of the Peninsular War in 1814, the courts of Europe demanded that Queen Maria I and Prince Regent John return to Portugal, deeming it unfit for the head of an ancient European monarchy to reside in a colony. In 1815, to justify continuing to live in Brazil, where the royal court had thrived for six years, the Crown established the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves, thus creating a pluricontinental transatlantic monarchic state. However, the leadership in Portugal, resentful of the new status of its larger colony, continued to demand the return of the court to Lisbon (see Liberal Revolution of 1820). In 1821, acceding to the demands of revolutionaries who had taken the city of Porto, John VI departed for Lisbon. There he swore an oath to the new constitution, leaving his son, Prince Pedro de Alcântara, as Regent of the Kingdom of Brazil.

=== Independent empire ===
Tensions between Portuguese and Brazilians increased and the Portuguese Cortes, guided by the new political regime imposed by the Liberal Revolution, tried to re-establish Brazil as a colony. The Brazilians refused to yield, and Prince Pedro decided to stand with them, declaring the country&#x27;s independence from Portugal on 7 September 1822. A month later, Prince Pedro was declared the first Emperor of Brazil, with the royal title of Dom Pedro I, resulting in the founding of the Empire of Brazil.

The Brazilian War of Independence, which had already begun along this process, spread through the northern, northeastern regions and in the Cisplatina province. The last Portuguese soldiers surrendered on 8 March 1824; Portugal officially recognized Brazilian independence on 29 August 1825.

On 7 April 1831, worn down by years of administrative turmoil and political dissent with both liberal and conservative sides of politics, including an attempt of republican secession and unreconciled to the way that absolutists in Portugal had given in the succession of King John VI, Pedro I departed for Portugal to reclaim his daughter&#x27;s crown after abdicating the Brazilian throne in favor of his five-year-old son and heir (Dom Pedro II).
As the new Emperor could not exert his constitutional powers until he came of age, a regency was set up by the National Assembly. In the absence of a charismatic figure who could represent a moderate face of power, during this period a series of localized rebellions took place, such as the Cabanagem in Grão-Pará, the Malê Revolt in Salvador, the Balaiada (Maranhão), the Sabinada (Bahia), and the Ragamuffin War, which began in Rio Grande do Sul and was supported by Giuseppe Garibaldi. These emerged from the provinces&#x27; dissatisfaction with the central power, coupled with old and latent social tensions peculiar to a vast, slaveholding and newly independent nation state. This period of internal political and social upheaval, which included the Praieira revolt in Pernambuco, was overcome only at the end of the 1840s, years after the end of the regency, which occurred with the premature coronation of Pedro II in 1841.

During the last phase of the monarchy, internal political debate centered on the issue of slavery. The Atlantic slave trade was abandoned in 1850, as a result of the British Aberdeen Act and the Eusébio de Queirós Law, but only in May 1888, after a long process of internal mobilization and debate for an ethical and legal dismantling of slavery in the country, was the institution formally abolished with the approval of the Golden Law.

The foreign-affairs policies of the monarchy dealt with issues with the countries of the Southern Cone with whom Brazil had borders. Long after the Cisplatine War that resulted in the independence of Uruguay, Brazil won three international wars during the 58-year reign of Pedro II: the Platine War, the Uruguayan War and the devastating Paraguayan War, the largest war effort in Brazilian history.

Although there was no desire among the majority of Brazilians to change the country&#x27;s form of government, on 15 November 1889, in disagreement with the majority of the Imperial Army officers, as well as with rural and financial elites (for different reasons), the monarchy was overthrown by a military coup. A few days later, the national flag was replaced with a new design that included the national motto &quot;Ordem e Progresso&quot;, influenced by positivism. 15 November is now Republic Day, a national holiday.

=== Early republic ===

The early republican government was a military dictatorship, with the army dominating affairs both in Rio de Janeiro and in the states. Freedom of the press disappeared and elections were controlled by those in power. Not until 1894, following an economic crisis and a military one, did civilians take power, remaining there until October 1930.

In relation to its foreign policy, the country in this first republican period maintained a relative balance characterized by a success in resolving border disputes with neighboring countries, only broken by the Acre War (1899–1902) and its involvement in World War I (1914–1918), followed by a failed attempt to exert a prominent role in the League of Nations; Internally, from the crisis of &quot;Encilhamento&quot; and the Navy Revolts, a prolonged cycle of financial, political and social instability began until the 1920s, keeping the country besieged by various rebellions, both civilian and military.

Little by little, a cycle of general instability sparked by these crises undermined the regime to such an extent that in the wake of the murder of his running mate, the defeated opposition presidential candidate Getúlio Vargas, supported by most of the military, successfully led the Revolution of 1930. Vargas and the military were supposed to assume power temporarily, but instead closed down Congress, extinguished the Constitution, ruled with emergency powers and replaced the states&#x27; governors with his own supporters.

In the 1930s, three attempts to remove Vargas and his supporters from power failed. The first was the Constitutionalist Revolution in 1932, led by São Paulo&#x27;s oligarchy. The second was a Communist uprising in November 1935, and the last one a &quot;putsch&quot; attempt by local fascists in May 1938. The 1935 uprising created a security crisis in which Congress transferred more power to the executive branch. The 1937 &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot; resulted in the cancellation of the 1938 election and formalized Vargas as dictator, beginning the Estado Novo era. During this period, government brutality and censorship of the press increased.

During World War II, Brazil remained neutral until August 1942, when the country suffered retaliation by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy in a strategic dispute over the South Atlantic, and, therefore, entered the war on the allied side. In addition to its participation in the battle of the Atlantic, Brazil also sent an expeditionary force to fight in the Italian campaign.

With the Allied victory in 1945 and the end of the fascist regimes in Europe, Vargas&#x27;s position became unsustainable, and he was swiftly overthrown in another military coup, with democracy &quot;reinstated&quot; by the same army that had ended it 15 years earlier. Vargas committed suicide in August 1954 amid a political crisis, after having returned to power by election in 1950.

=== Contemporary era ===

Several brief interim governments followed Vargas&#x27;s suicide. Juscelino Kubitschek became president in 1956 and assumed a conciliatory posture towards the political opposition that allowed him to govern without major crises. The economy and industrial sector grew remarkably, but his greatest achievement was the construction of the new capital city of Brasília, inaugurated in 1960. Kubitschek&#x27;s successor, Jânio Quadros, resigned in 1961 less than a year after taking office. His vice-president, João Goulart, assumed the presidency, but aroused strong political opposition and was deposed in April 1964 by a coup that resulted in a military dictatorship.
The new regime was intended to be transitory but gradually closed in on itself and became a full dictatorship with the promulgation of the Fifth Institutional Act in 1968. Oppression was not limited to those who resorted to guerrilla tactics to fight the regime, but also reached institutional opponents, artists, journalists and other members of civil society, inside and outside the country through the infamous &quot;Operation Condor&quot;. Like other brutal authoritarian regimes, due to an economic boom, known as the &quot;economic miracle&quot;, the regime reached a peak in popularity in the early 1970s.

Slowly, however, the wear and tear of years of dictatorial power had not slowed the repression, even after the defeat of the leftist guerrillas. The inability to deal with the economic crises of the period and popular pressure made an opening policy inevitable, which from the regime side was led by Generals Ernesto Geisel and Golbery do Couto e Silva. With the enactment of the Amnesty Law in 1979, Brazil began a slow return to democracy, which was completed during the 1980s.
Civilians returned to power in 1985 when José Sarney assumed the presidency. He became unpopular during his tenure through failure to control the economic crisis and hyperinflation he inherited from the military regime. Sarney&#x27;s unsuccessful government led to the election in 1989 of the almost-unknown Fernando Collor, who was subsequently impeached by the National Congress in 1992. Collor was succeeded by his vice-president, Itamar Franco, who appointed Fernando Henrique Cardoso Minister of Finance. In 1994, Cardoso produced a highly successful Plano Real, that, after decades of failed economic plans made by previous governments attempting to curb hyperinflation, finally stabilized the Brazilian economy. Cardoso won the 1994 election, and again in 1998.

The peaceful transition of power from Cardoso to his main opposition leader, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (elected in 2002 and re-elected in 2006), was seen as proof that Brazil had achieved a long-sought political stability. However, sparked by indignation and frustrations accumulated over decades from corruption, police brutality, inefficiencies of the political establishment and public service, numerous peaceful protests erupted in Brazil in the middle of the first term of Dilma Rousseff, who had succeeded Lula after winning election in 2010 and again in 2014 by narrow margins.

Rousseff was impeached by the Brazilian Congress in 2016, halfway into her second term, and replaced by her Vice-president Michel Temer, who assumed full presidential powers after Rousseff&#x27;s impeachment was accepted on 31 August. Large street protests for and against her took place during the impeachment process. The charges against her were fueled by political and economic crises along with evidence of involvement with politicians from all the primary political parties. In 2017, the Supreme Court requested the investigation of 71 Brazilian lawmakers and nine ministers of President Michel Temer&#x27;s cabinet who were allegedly linked to the Petrobras corruption scandal. President Temer himself was also accused of corruption. According to a 2018 poll, 62% of the population said that corruption was Brazil&#x27;s biggest problem.

In the fiercely disputed 2018 elections, the controversial conservative candidate Jair Bolsonaro of the Social Liberal Party (PSL) was elected president, winning in the second round against Fernando Haddad, of the Workers Party (PT), with the support of 55.13% of the valid votes. In the early 2020s, Brazil became one of the hardest hit countries during the COVID-19 pandemic, receiving the second-highest death toll worldwide after the United States. In May 2021, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva stated that he would run for a third term in the 2022 Brazilian general election against Bolsonaro. In October 2022, Lula was in first place in the first round, with 48.43% of the support from the electorate, and received 50.90% of the votes in the second round. On 8 January 2023, a week after Lula&#x27;s inauguration, a mob of Bolsonaro&#x27;s supporters attacked Brazil&#x27;s federal government buildings in the capital, Brasília, after several weeks of unrest.

== Geography ==
Brazil occupies a large area along the eastern coast of South America and includes much of the continent&#x27;s interior, sharing land borders with Uruguay to the south; Argentina and Paraguay to the southwest; Bolivia and Peru to the west; Colombia to the northwest; and Venezuela, Guyana, Suriname and France (French overseas region of French Guiana) to the north. It shares a border with every South American country except Ecuador and Chile.

The Brazilian territory also encompasses a number of oceanic archipelagos, such as Fernando de Noronha, Rocas Atoll, Saint Peter and Saint Paul Archipelago, and the islands of Trindade and Martim Vaz. Its size, relief, climate, and natural resources make Brazil geographically diverse. Including its Atlantic islands, Brazil lies between latitudes 6°N and 34°S, and longitudes 28° and 74°W.

Brazil is the fifth largest country in the world, and third largest in the Americas, with a total area of , including of water. North to South, Brazil is also the longest country in the world, spanning 4,395 km (2,731 mi) from north to south, and the only country in the world that has the equator and the Tropic of Capricorn running through it. It spans four time zones; from UTC−5 comprising the state of Acre and the westernmost portion of Amazonas, to UTC−4 in the western states, to UTC−3 in the eastern states (the national time) and UTC−2 in the Atlantic islands.

=== Climate ===

The climate of Brazil comprises a wide range of weather conditions across a large area and varied topography, but most of the country is tropical. According to the Köppen system, Brazil hosts six major climatic subtypes: desert, equatorial, tropical, semiarid, oceanic and subtropical. The different climatic conditions produce environments ranging from equatorial rainforests in the north and semiarid deserts in the northeast, to temperate coniferous forests in the south and tropical savannas in central Brazil. 

In Brazil, forest cover is around 59% of the total land area, equivalent to 496,619,600 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 588,898,000 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 485,396,000 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 11,223,600 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest, 44% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 30% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For 2015, 56.% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership and 44% private ownership.

Many regions have starkly different microclimates. An equatorial climate characterizes much of northern Brazil. There is no real dry season, but there are some variations in the period of the year when most rain falls. Temperatures average , with more significant temperature variation between night and day than between seasons. Over central Brazil, rainfall is more seasonal, characteristic of a savanna climate. This region is as extensive as the Amazon basin but has a very different climate as it lies farther south at a higher altitude. In the interior northeast, seasonal rainfall is even more extreme. South of Bahia, near the coasts, and more southerly most of the state of São Paulo, the distribution of rainfall changes, with rain falling throughout the year. The south enjoys subtropical conditions, with cool winters and average annual temperatures not exceeding ; winter frosts and snowfall are not rare in the highest areas.

The semiarid climatic region generally receives less than of rain, most of which generally falls in a period of three to five months of the year and occasionally less than this, creating long periods of drought. Brazil&#x27;s 1877–78 &quot;Grande Seca&quot; (Great Drought), the worst in Brazil&#x27;s history, caused approximately half a million deaths. A similarly devastating drought occurred in 1915. In 2024, for the first time, &quot;a drought has covered all the way from the North to the country’s Southeast&quot;. It is the strongest drought in Brazil since the beginning of measurement in the 1950s, covering almost 60% of the country&#x27;s territory. The drought is linked to deforestation and climate change.
Climate change in Brazil is causing higher temperatures and longer-lasting heatwaves, changing precipitation patterns, more intense wildfires and heightened fire risk. Brazil&#x27;s hydropower, agriculture and urban water supplies will be affected. Brazil&#x27;s rainforests, and the Amazon, are particularly at risk to climate change. At worst, large areas of the Amazon River basin could turn into savannah, with severe consequences for global climate and local livelihoods. Extreme weather events like droughts and flash floods are causing annual losses of around R$13 billion (US$2.6 billion), equivalent to 0.1% of the country’s 2022 GDP. Climate impacts could exacerbate poverty.

Brazil&#x27;s greenhouse gas emissions per person are higher than the global average, and Brazil is among the top 10 highest emitting countries. Greenhouse gas emissions by Brazil are over 4% of the annual world total. In 2024 Brazil revised its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), setting a goal to cut greenhouse emissions by 59% to 67% compared to 2005 levels by 2035. It has an indicative target of reaching carbon neutrality by 2060 if the country receives 10 billion dollars per year.

=== Topography and hydrography ===

Brazilian topography is also diverse and includes hills, mountains, plains, highlands, and scrublands. Much of the terrain lies between and in elevation. The main upland area occupies most of the southern half of the country. The northwestern parts of the plateau consist of broad, rolling terrain broken by low, rounded hills.

The southeastern section is more rugged, with a complex mass of ridges and mountain ranges reaching elevations of up to . These ranges include the Mantiqueira and Espinhaço mountains and the Serra do Mar. In the north, the Guiana Highlands form a major drainage divide, separating rivers that flow south into the Amazon Basin from rivers that empty into the Orinoco River system, in Venezuela, to the north. The highest point in Brazil is the Pico da Neblina at , and the lowest is the Atlantic Ocean.

Brazil has a dense and complex system of rivers, one of the world&#x27;s most extensive, with eight major drainage basins, all of which drain into the Atlantic. Major rivers include the Amazon (the world&#x27;s second-longest river and the largest in terms of volume of water), the Paraná and its major tributary the Iguaçu (which includes the Iguazu Falls), the Negro, São Francisco, Xingu, Madeira and Tapajós rivers.

=== Biodiversity and conservation ===

The wildlife of Brazil comprises all naturally occurring animals, plants, and fungi in the South American country. Home to 60% of the Amazon rainforest, which accounts for approximately one-tenth of all species in the world, Brazil is considered to have the greatest biodiversity of any country on the planet, containing over 70% of all animal and plant species catalogued. Brazil has the most known species of plants (55,000), freshwater fish (3,000) and mammals (over 689). It also ranks third on the list of countries with the most bird species (1,832) and second with the most reptile species (744). The number of fungal species is unknown but is large. Brazil is second only to Indonesia as the country with the most endemic species.

Brazil&#x27;s large territory comprises different ecosystems, such as the Amazon rainforest, recognized as having the greatest biological diversity in the world, with the Atlantic Forest and the Cerrado sustaining the greatest biodiversity. In the south, the Araucaria moist forests grow under temperate conditions. The rich wildlife of Brazil reflects the variety of natural habitats. Scientists estimate that the total number of plant and animal species in Brazil could approach four million, mostly invertebrates. Larger mammals include carnivores pumas, jaguars, ocelots, rare bush dogs, and foxes, and herbivores peccaries, tapirs, anteaters, sloths, opossums and armadillos. Deer are plentiful in the south, and many species of New World monkeys are found in the northern rain forests.

More than one-fifth of the Amazon rainforest in Brazil has been completely destroyed, and more than 70 mammals are endangered. The threat of extinction comes from several sources, including deforestation and poaching. Extinction is even more problematic in the Atlantic Forest, where nearly 93% of the forest has been cleared. Of the 202 endangered animals in Brazil, 171 are in the Atlantic Forest. The Amazon rainforest has been under direct threat of deforestation since the 1970s because of rapid economic and demographic expansion. Extensive legal and illegal logging destroy forests the size of a small country per year, and with it a diverse series of species through habitat destruction and habitat fragmentation. Since 1970, over of the Amazon rainforest have been cleared by logging.

In 2017, preserved native vegetation occupied 61% of the Brazilian territory. Agriculture occupied only 8% of the national territory and pastures 19.7%. For comparison, in 2019, although 43% of the entire European continent has forests, only 3% of the total forest area in Europe is of native forest. Brazil has a strong interest in conservation, as its agriculture sector directly depends on its forests.

== Government and politics ==


The form of government is a democratic federative republic, with a presidential system. The president is both head of state and head of government of the Union and is elected for a four-year term, with the possibility of re-election for a second successive term. The current president is Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. The President appoints the Ministers of State, who assist in government.

Legislative houses in each political entity are the main source of law in Brazil. The National Congress is the Federation&#x27;s bicameral legislature, consisting of the Chamber of Deputies and the Federal Senate. Judiciary authorities exercise jurisdictional duties almost exclusively. In 2021, the Economist Intelligence Unit&#x27;s Democracy Index categorized Brazil as a &quot;flawed democracy&quot;, ranking 46th in the report, and Freedom House classified it as a free country at &quot;Freedom in the World&quot; report.

The political-administrative organization of the Federative Republic of Brazil comprises the Union, the states, the Federal District, and the municipalities. The Union, the states, the Federal District, and the municipalities, are the &quot;spheres of government&quot;. The federation is set on five fundamental principles: sovereignty, citizenship, dignity of human beings, the social values of labor and freedom of enterprise, and political pluralism.

The classic tripartite branches of government (executive, legislative and judicial under a checks and balances system) are formally established by the Constitution. The executive and legislative are organized independently in all three spheres of government, while the judiciary is organized only at the federal and state and Federal District spheres. All members of the executive and legislative branches are directly elected.

For most of its democratic history, Brazil has had a multi-party system, with proportional representation. Voting is compulsory for the literate between 18 and 70 years old and optional for illiterates and those between 16 and 18 or beyond 70. The country has around 30 registered political parties. Twenty political parties are represented in Congress. It is common for politicians to switch parties, and thus the proportion of congressional seats held by particular parties changes regularly.

=== Law ===


Brazilian law is based on the civil law legal system and civil law concepts prevail over common law practice. Most of Brazilian law is codified, although non-codified statutes also represent a substantial part, playing a complementary role. Court decisions set out interpretive guidelines; however, they are seldom binding on other specific cases. Doctrinal works and the works of academic jurists have strong influence in law creation and in law cases. Judges and other judicial officials are appointed after passing entry exams.

The legal system is based on the Federal Constitution, promulgated on 5 October 1988, and the fundamental law of Brazil. All other legislation and court decisions must conform to its rules. , there have been 124 amendments. The highest court is the Supreme Federal Court. States have their own constitutions, which must not contradict the Federal Constitution. Municipalities and the Federal District have &quot;organic laws&quot; (), which act in a similar way to constitutions. Legislative entities are the main source of statutes, although in certain matters judiciary and executive bodies may enact legal norms. Jurisdiction is administered by the judiciary entities, although in rare situations the Federal Constitution allows the Federal Senate to pass on legal judgments. There are also specialized military, labor and electoral courts.

=== Military ===
The armed forces of Brazil are the largest in Latin America by active personnel and the largest in terms of military equipment. The country was considered the 9th largest military power on the planet in 2021. It consists of the Brazilian Army (including the Army Aviation Command), the Brazilian Navy (including the Marine Corps and Naval Aviation) and the Brazilian Air Force. Brazil&#x27;s conscription policy gives it one of the world&#x27;s largest military forces, estimated at more than 1.6 million reservists annually. The Air Force is the largest in Latin America and has about 700 crewed aircraft in service and effective about 67,000 personnel.

Numbering close to 236,000 active personnel, the Brazilian Army has the largest number of armored vehicles in South America, including armored transports and tanks. The states&#x27; Military Police and the Military Firefighters Corps are described as an ancillary forces of the Army by the constitution, but are under the control of each state&#x27;s governor.

Brazil&#x27;s navy once operated some of the most powerful warships in the world with the two dreadnoughts, sparking a naval arms race between Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. Today, it is a green water force and has a group of specialized elite in retaking ships and naval facilities, GRUMEC, unit specially trained to protect Brazilian oil platforms along its coast. , it is the only navy in Latin America that operates a helicopter carrier, NAM &quot;Atlântico&quot; and one of twelve navies in the world to operate or have one under construction.

=== Foreign policy ===

Brazil&#x27;s international relations are based on Article 4 of the Federal Constitution, which establishes non-intervention, self-determination, international cooperation and the peaceful settlement of conflicts as the guiding principles of Brazil&#x27;s relationship with other countries and multilateral organizations. According to the Constitution, the President has ultimate authority over foreign policy, while the Congress is tasked with reviewing and considering all diplomatic nominations and international treaties, as well as legislation relating to Brazilian foreign policy.

Brazil&#x27;s foreign policy is a by-product of the country&#x27;s position as a regional power in Latin America, a leader among developing countries, and an emerging world power. Brazilian foreign policy has generally been based on the principles of multilateralism, peaceful dispute settlement, and non-intervention in the affairs of other countries. Brazil is a founding member state of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP), also known as the Lusophone Commonwealth, an international organization and political association of Lusophone nations.

An increasingly well-developed tool of Brazil&#x27;s foreign policy is providing aid as a donor to other developing countries. Brazil does not just use its growing economic strength to provide financial aid, but it also provides high levels of expertise and most importantly of all, a quiet non-confrontational diplomacy to improve governance levels. Total aid is estimated to be around $1 billion per year, which includes. In addition, Brazil already managed a peacekeeping mission in Haiti ($350 million) and makes in-kind contributions to the World Food Programme ($300 million). The scale of this aid places it on par with China and India. The Brazilian South-South aid has been described as a &quot;global model in waiting&quot;.

=== Law enforcement and crime ===

In Brazil, the Constitution establishes six different police agencies for law enforcement: Federal Police Department, Federal Highway Police, Federal Railroad Police, Federal, District and State Penal Police (included by the Constitutional Amendment No. 104, of 2019), Military Police and Civil Police. Of these, the first three are affiliated with federal authorities, the last two are subordinate to state governments and the Penal Police can be subordinated to the federal or state/district government. All police forces are overseen by the executive branch of the federal or state government. The National Public Security Force also can act in public disorder situations arising anywhere in the country.

The country has high levels of violent crime, such as gun violence and homicides. In 2012, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimated the number of 32 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants, one of the highest rates of homicide of the world. The number considered acceptable by the WHO is about 10 homicides per 100,000 inhabitants. In 2018, Brazil had a record 63,880 murders. However, there are differences between the crime rates in the Brazilian states. While in São Paulo the homicide rate registered in 2013 was 10.8 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants, in Alagoas it was 64.7 homicides per 100,000 inhabitants.

Brazil also has high levels of incarceration. It had the third largest prison population in the world of approximately 700,000 prisoners as of June 2014, which put it only behind the United States (2,228,424) and China (1,701,344). The high number of prisoners eventually overloaded the Brazilian prison system, leading to a shortfall of about 200,000 accommodations.

=== Human rights ===

Same-sex couples in Brazil have held nationwide marriage rights since May 2013.

=== Political subdivisions ===
Brazil is a federation composed of 26 states, one federal district, and the 5,571 municipalities. States have autonomous administrations, collect their own taxes and receive a share of taxes collected by the Federal government. They have a governor and a unicameral legislative body elected directly by their voters. They also have independent Courts of Law for common justice. Despite this, states have much less autonomy to create their own laws than in other federal states such as the United States. For example, criminal and civil laws can be voted by only the federal bicameral Congress and are uniform throughout the country.

Municipalities, as the states, have autonomous administrations, collect their own taxes and receive a share of taxes collected by the federal and state government. Each has an elected mayor and legislative body, but no separate Court of Law. Indeed, a Court of Law organized by the state can encompass many municipalities in a single justice administrative division called &quot;comarca&quot; (county).

Brazil&#x27;s constitution also provides for the creation of federal territories, which are administrative divisions directly controlled by the federal government. However, there are currently no federal territories in the country, as the 1988 Constitution abolished the last three: Amapá and Roraima (which gained statehood status) and Fernando de Noronha, which became a state district of Pernambuco.

== Economy ==



Brazil is a developing country with an upper-middle income mixed market economy that is rich in natural resources. It has the largest national economy in Latin America, the eighth largest economy in the world by nominal GDP, and the eighth largest by PPP. After rapid growth in preceding decades, Brazil entered an ongoing recession in 2014 amid a political corruption scandal and nationwide protests; in 2024, the economy began showing consistent significant growth. Brazil has a labor force of roughly 100 million, which is the world&#x27;s fifth largest, albeit with a high unemployment rate of 14.4% . Its foreign exchange reserves are the tenth-highest in the world. The B3 in São Paulo is the largest stock exchange of Latin America by market capitalization. Roughly one-fifth of Brazilians live in poverty: about 1.9% of the total population lives at $2.15 a day, while about 19% live at $6.85 a day. Brazil&#x27;s economy suffers from endemic corruption and high income inequality. The Brazilian real is the national currency.

Brazil&#x27;s diversified economy includes agriculture, industry and a wide range of services. The large service sector accounts for about 72.7% of total GDP, followed by the industrial sector (20.7%), while the agriculture sector is by far the smallest, making up 6.6% of total GDP.

Brazil is one of the largest producers of various agricultural commodities, and also has a large cooperative sector that provides 50% of the food in the country. It has been the world&#x27;s largest producer of coffee for the last 150 years and is the world&#x27;s largest producer of sugarcane, soy, coffee and orange; is one of the top fve producers of maize, cotton, lemon, tobacco, pineapple, banana, beans, coconut, watermelon and papaya; and is one of the top 10 world producers of cocoa, cashew, mango, rice, tomato, sorghum, tangerine, avocado, persimmon, and guava, among others. Regarding livestock, it is one of the five largest producers of chicken meat, beef, pork and cow&#x27;s milk in the world. In the mining sector, Brazil is among the largest producers of iron ore, copper, gold, bauxite, manganese, tin, niobium, and nickel. In terms of precious stones, Brazil is the world&#x27;s largest producer of amethyst, topaz, agate and one of the main producers of tourmaline, emerald, aquamarine, garnet and opal. The country is a major exporter of soy, iron ore, pulp (cellulose), maize, beef, chicken meat, soybean meal, sugar, coffee, tobacco, cotton, orange juice, footwear, airplanes, cars, vehicle parts, gold, ethanol and semi-finished iron, among other products.

Brazil is the world&#x27;s 24th-largest exporter and 26th-largest importer . China is its largest trading partner, accounting for 32% of the total trade. Other large trading partners include the United States, Argentina, the Netherlands and Canada. Its automotive industry is the eighth-largest in the world. In the food industry, Brazil was the second-largest exporter of processed foods in the world in 2019. The country was the second-largest producer of pulp in the world and the eighth-largest producer of paper in 2016. In the footwear industry, Brazil was the fourth-largest producer in 2019. It was also the ninth-largest producer of steel in the world. In 2018, the chemical industry of Brazil was the eighth-largest in the world. Although it was among the five largest world producers in 2013, Brazil&#x27;s textile industry is very little integrated into world trade.

The tertiary sector (trade and services) represented 75.8% of the country&#x27;s GDP in 2018, according to the IBGE. The service sector was responsible for 60% of GDP and trade for 13%. It covers commerce, transport, education, social and health services, research and development, sports activities, etc. Micro and small businesses represent 30% of the country&#x27;s GDP. In the commercial sector, for example, they represent 53% of the GDP within the activities of the sector.

=== Tourism ===


Tourism in Brazil is a growing sector and key to the economies of several regions of the country. The country had 6.36 million visitors in 2015, ranking in terms of the international tourist arrivals as the main destination in South America and second in Latin America after Mexico. Revenues from international tourists reached billion in 2010, showing a recovery from the 2008–2009 economic crisis. Historical records of 5.4 million visitors and billion in receipts were reached in 2011. In the list of world tourist destinations, in 2018, Brazil was the 48th most visited country, with 6.6 million tourists (and revenues of 5.9 billion dollars).

Natural areas are its most popular tourism product, a combination of ecotourism with leisure and recreation, mainly sun and beach, and adventure travel, as well as cultural tourism. Among the most popular destinations are the Amazon Rainforest, beaches and dunes in the Northeast Region, the Pantanal in the Center-West Region, beaches at Rio de Janeiro and Santa Catarina, cultural tourism in Minas Gerais and business trips to São Paulo.

In terms of the 2015 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index (TTCI), which is a measurement of the factors that make it attractive to develop business in the travel and tourism industry of individual countries, Brazil ranked in the 28th place at the world&#x27;s level, third in the Americas, after Canada and United States. Domestic tourism is a key market segment for the tourism industry in Brazil. In 2005, 51 million Brazilian nationals made ten times more trips than foreign tourists and spent five times more money than their international counterparts. The main destination states in 2023 were São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, and Rio Grande do Sul. The main source of tourists for the entire country is São Paulo state. In terms of tourism revenues, the top earners by state were São Paulo and Bahia. For 2005, the three main trip purposes were visiting friends and family (53.1%), sun and beach (40.8%), and cultural tourism (12.5%).

=== Science and technology ===


Technological research in Brazil is largely carried out in public universities and research institutes, with the majority of funding for basic research coming from various government agencies. Brazil&#x27;s most esteemed technological hubs are the Oswaldo Cruz Institute, the Butantan Institute, the Air Force&#x27;s Aerospace Technical Center, the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation and the National Institute for Space Research.

The Brazilian Space Agency has the most advanced space program in Latin America, with significant resources to launch vehicles, and manufacture of satellites. The country develops submarines and aircraft, as well as being involved in space research, having a Vehicle Launch Center Light and being the only country in the Southern Hemisphere to integrate a team building the well-known International Space Station (ISS).

The country is also a pioneer in the search for oil in deep water, from where it extracts 73% of its reserves. Uranium is enriched at the Resende Nuclear Fuel Factory, mostly for research purposes (as Brazil obtains 88% of its electricity from hydroelectricity) and the country&#x27;s first nuclear submarine is expected to be launched in 2029.

Brazil is one of the three countries in Latin America with an operational Synchrotron Laboratory, a research facility on physics, chemistry, material science and life sciences, and Brazil is the only Latin American country to have a semiconductor company with its own fabrication plant, the CEITEC. According to the Global Information Technology Report 2009–2010 of the World Economic Forum, Brazil is the world&#x27;s 61st largest developer of information technology. Brazil was ranked 50th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024, up from 66th in 2019.

Among the most renowned Brazilian inventors are priests Bartolomeu de Gusmão, Landell de Moura and Francisco João de Azevedo, besides Alberto Santos-Dumont, Evaristo Conrado Engelberg, Manuel Dias de Abreu, Andreas Pavel and Nélio José Nicolai. Brazilian science is represented by the likes of César Lattes (Brazilian physicist Pathfinder of &quot;Pi Meson&quot;), Mário Schenberg (considered the greatest theoretical physicist of Brazil), José Leite Lopes (the only Brazilian physicist holder of the &quot;UNESCO Science Prize&quot;), Artur Avila (the first Latin American winner of the Fields Medal) and Fritz Müller (pioneer in factual support of the theory of evolution by Charles Darwin).

=== Energy ===


Brazil is the world&#x27;s ninth-largest energy consumer. Much of its energy comes from renewable sources, particularly hydroelectricity and ethanol; the Itaipu Dam is the world&#x27;s largest hydroelectric plant by energy generation, and the country has other large plants such as Belo Monte and Tucuruí. The first car with an ethanol engine was produced in 1978 and the first airplane engine running on ethanol in 2005.

At the end of 2021 Brazil was the 2nd country in the world in terms of installed hydroelectric power (109.4 GW) and biomass (15.8 GW), the 7th country in the world in terms of installed wind power (21.1 GW) and the 14th country in the world in terms of installed solar power (13.0 GW)—on track to also become one of the top 10 in the world in solar energy. At the end of 2021, Brazil was the 4th largest producer of wind energy in the world (72 TWh), behind only China, the United States and Germany, and the 11th largest producer of solar energy in the world (16.8 TWh).

The main characteristic of the Brazilian energy matrix is that it is much more renewable than that of the world. While in 2019, the world matrix was only 14% made up of renewable energy, Brazil&#x27;s was at 45%. Petroleum and oil products made up 34.3% of the matrix; sugar cane derivatives, 18%; hydraulic energy, 12.4%; natural gas, 12.2%; firewood and charcoal, 8.8%; varied renewable energies, 7%; mineral coal, 5.3%; nuclear, 1.4%, and other non-renewable energies, 0.6%.

In the electric energy matrix, the difference between Brazil and the world is even greater: while the world only had 25% of renewable electric energy in 2019, Brazil had 83%. The Brazilian electric matrix was composed of: hydraulic energy, 64.9%; biomass, 8.4%; wind energy, 8.6%; solar energy, 1%; natural gas, 9.3%; oil products, 2%; nuclear, 2.5%; coal and derivatives, 3.3%. Brazil has the largest electricity sector in Latin America. Its capacity at the end of 2021 was 181,532 MW.

As for oil, the Brazilian government has embarked on a program over the decades to reduce dependence on imported oil, which previously accounted for more than 70% of the country&#x27;s oil needs. Brazil became self-sufficient in oil in 2006–2007. In 2021, the country closed the year as the 7th oil producer in the world, with an average of close to three million barrels per day, becoming an exporter of the product.

=== Transportation ===


Brazilian roads are the primary carriers of freight and passenger traffic. The road system totaled in 2019. The total of paved roads increased from in 1967 to in 2018.

Brazil&#x27;s railway system has been declining since 1945, when emphasis shifted to highway construction. The country&#x27;s total railway track length was in 2015, as compared with in 1970, making it the ninth largest network in the world. Most of the railway system belonged to the Federal Railroad Network Corporation (RFFSA), which was privatized in 2007. The São Paulo Metro began operating on 14 September 1974 as the first underground transit system in Brazil.

There are about 2,500 airports in Brazil, including landing fields: the second-largest number in the world, after the United States. São Paulo–Guarulhos International Airport, near São Paulo, is the largest and busiest airport with nearly 43 million passengers annually, while handling the vast majority of commercial traffic for the country.

For freight transport, waterways are of importance. The industrial zones of Manaus can be reached only by means of the Solimões–Amazonas waterway ( in length, with a minimum depth of ). The country also has of waterways. Coastal shipping links widely separated parts of the country. Bolivia and Paraguay have been given free ports at Santos. Of the 36 deep-water ports, Santos, Itajaí, Rio Grande, Paranaguá, Rio de Janeiro, Sepetiba, Vitória, Suape, Manaus and São Francisco do Sul are the most important. Bulk carriers have to wait up to 18 days before being serviced; container ships take 36.3 hours on average.

== Demographics ==

According to the latest official projection, it is estimated that Brazil’s population was 210,862,983 on July 1, 2022—an adjustment of 3.9% from the initial figure of 203 million reported by the 2022 census. The population of Brazil, as recorded by the 2008 PNAD, was approximately 190 million (), with a ratio of men to women of 0.95:1 and 83.75% of the population defined as urban. The population is heavily concentrated in the Southeastern (79.8 million inhabitants) and Northeastern (53.5 million inhabitants) regions, while the two most extensive regions, the Center-West and the North, which together make up 64.12% of the Brazilian territory, have a total of only 29.1 million inhabitants.

The first census in Brazil was carried out in 1872 and recorded a population of 9,930,478. From 1880 to 1930, 4 million Europeans arrived. Brazil&#x27;s population increased significantly between 1940 and 1970, because of a decline in the mortality rate, even though the birth rate underwent a slight decline. In the 1940s the annual population growth rate was 2.4%, rising to 3.0% in the 1950s and remaining at 2.9% in the 1960s, as life expectancy rose from 44 to 54 years and to 72.6 years in 2007. It has been steadily falling since the 1960s, from 3.04% per year between 1950 and 1960 to 1.05% in 2008 and is expected to fall to a negative value of –0.29% by 2050 thus completing the demographic transition.

In 2008, the illiteracy rate was 11.48%.

=== Race and ethnicity ===

According to the 2022 Brazilian census, 45.3% of the population (92.1 million) described themselves as Pardo (meaning brown or multiracial), 43.5% (88.2 million) as White, 10.2% (20.7 million) as Black, 0.6% (1.2 million) as Indigenous and 0.4% (850 thousand) as East Asian (officially called &quot;yellow&quot; or &quot;amarela&quot;).

Since the arrival of the Portuguese in 1500, considerable genetic mixing between Amerindians, Europeans, and Africans has taken place in all regions of the country: 

* European ancestry being dominant according to all autosomal studies undertaken covering the population, accounting for between 60% and 65% of the average genetic makeup of the Brazilian population.
* African ancestry among the Brazilians is estimated at 20% to 25% of the average genetic makeup 
* Indigenous ancestry is significant and present in all regions of Brazil, accounting for around 15% to 20% of the average genetic ancestry of Brazilians.

From the 19th century, Brazil opened its borders to immigration. About five million people from over 60 countries migrated to Brazil between 1808 and 1972, most of them of Portuguese, Italian, Spanish, German, English, Ukrainian, Polish, Jewish, African, Armenian, Russian, Chinese, Japanese, Korean and Arab origin. Brazil has the second-largest Jewish community in both Latin and South America after Argentina making up 0.06% of its population. Outside of the Arab world, Brazil also has the largest population of Arab ancestry in the world, with 15–20 million people. According to Brazil&#x27;s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Brazil is home to a Lebanese diaspora of 7 million to 10 million, surpassing the population of Lebanese individuals residing in Lebanon.

Brazilian society is more markedly divided by social class lines, although a high income disparity is found between race groups, so racism and classism often overlap. The brown population (officially called &quot;pardo&quot; in Portuguese, also colloquially &quot;&quot;) is a broad category that includes &quot;caboclos&quot; (assimilated Amerindians in general, and descendants of Whites and Natives), &quot;mulatos&quot; (descendants of primarily Whites and Afro-Brazilians) and &quot;cafuzos&quot; (descendants of Afro-Brazilians and Natives). Higher percents of Blacks, mulattoes and tri-racials can be found in the eastern coast of the Northeastern region from Bahia to Paraíba and also in northern Maranhão, southern Minas Gerais and eastern Rio de Janeiro.

People of considerable Amerindian ancestry form the majority of the population in the Northern, Northeastern and Center-Western regions. In 2007, the National Indian Foundation estimated that Brazil has 67 different uncontacted tribes, up from their estimate of 40 in 2005. Brazil is believed to have the largest number of uncontacted peoples in the world.

=== Religion ===

Christianity is the country&#x27;s predominant faith, with Roman Catholicism being its largest denomination. Brazil has the world&#x27;s largest Catholic population. According to the 2010 demographic census (the PNAD survey does not inquire about religion), 64.63% of the population followed Roman Catholicism; 22.2% Protestantism; 2.0% Kardecist spiritism; 3.2% other religions, undeclared or undetermined; while 8.0% had no religion. In 2019, it was estimated that 50% were Roman Catholic; 31% Protestant; 11% irreligious; 3% Spiritist; 2% practitioners of Afro-Brazilian faiths; and 0.3% Jewish. In another 2020 study by the Association of Religion Data Archives (ARDA), Christians made up 90.77% of the population; among Christians, 70.57% were Roman Catholic; 15.12% Protestant; 12.23% Independents, 0.12% Orthodox, and 0.09% unaffiliated Christian. Kardecist spiritism was the second-largest religion practiced in Brazil as ARDA&#x27;s 2020 study, with 4.83% of the population. Of its 3.03% irreligious population, 2.59% were agnostic and 0.44% atheist.

Religion in Brazil was formed from the meeting of the Roman Catholic Church with the religious traditions of enslaved African peoples and indigenous peoples. This confluence of faiths during the Portuguese colonization of Brazil led to the development of a diverse array of syncretistic practices within the overarching umbrella of Brazilian Catholic Church, characterized by traditional Portuguese festivities.

Religious pluralism increased during the 20th century, and the Protestant community had grown to include over 22% of the population by 2010. The most common Protestant denominations are Evangelical Pentecostal ones. Other Protestant branches with a notable presence in the country include the Baptists, Seventh-day Adventists, Lutherans and the Reformed tradition. In recent decades, Protestantism, particularly in forms of Pentecostalism and Evangelicalism, has spread in Brazil, while the proportion of Catholics had dropped significantly during the 2010s. As they have spread throughout Brazil, many have even been deeply involved in Brazilian and international politics, and Evangelical Protestant influence has been implicated in the 2022 Brazilian coup plot.

After Protestantism, individuals professing no religion are also a significant group, having exceeded 8% of the population according to the 2010 census. The cities of Boa Vista, Salvador, and Porto Velho have the greatest proportion of Irreligious residents in Brazil. Teresina, Fortaleza, and Florianópolis were the most Roman Catholic in the country. Greater Rio de Janeiro, not including the city proper, is the most irreligious and least Roman Catholic Brazilian periphery, while Greater Porto Alegre and Greater Fortaleza are on the opposite sides of the lists, respectively.

In October 2009, the Brazilian Senate approved and enacted by the President of Brazil in February 2010, an agreement with the Vatican, in which the Legal Statute of the Catholic Church in Brazil is recognized.

=== Health ===

The Brazilian public health system, the Unified Health System (&quot;Sistema Único de Saúde&quot; – SUS), is managed and provided by all levels of government, being the largest system of this type in the world. On the other hand, private healthcare systems play a complementary role. Public health services are universal and offered to all citizens of the country for free. However, the construction and maintenance of health centers and hospitals are financed by taxes, and the country spends about 9% of its GDP on expenditures in the area. In 2012, Brazil had 1.85 doctors and 2.3 hospital beds for every 1,000 inhabitants.

Despite all the progress made since the creation of the universal health care system in 1988, there are still several public health problems in Brazil. In 2006, the main points to be solved were the high infant (2.51%) and maternal mortality rates (73.1 deaths per 1000 births).

The number of deaths from noncommunicable diseases, such as cardiovascular diseases (151.7 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants) and cancer (72.7 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants), also has a considerable impact on the health of the Brazilian population. Finally, external but preventable factors such as car accidents, violence and suicide caused 14.9% of all deaths in the country. The Brazilian health system was ranked 125th among the 191 countries evaluated by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2000.

=== Education ===

The Federal Constitution and the Law of Guidelines and Bases of National Education determine that the Union, the states, the Federal District and the municipalities must manage and organize their respective education systems. Each of these public educational systems is responsible for its own maintenance, which manages funds as well as the mechanisms and funding sources. The constitution reserves 25% of the state budget and 18% of federal taxes and municipal taxes for education.

According to the IBGE, in 2019, the literacy rate of the population was 93.4%, meaning that 11.3 million (6.6% of population) people are still illiterate in the country, with some states such as Rio de Janeiro and Santa Catarina reaching around 97% of literacy rate; functional illiteracy has reached 21.6% of the population. Illiteracy is higher in the Northeast, where 13.87% of the population is illiterate, while the South, has 3.3% of its population illiterate.

Brazil&#x27;s private institutions tend to be more exclusive and offer better quality education, so many high-income families send their children there. The result is a segregated educational system that reflects extreme income disparities and reinforces social inequality. However, efforts to change this are making impacts. The University of São Paulo is often considered the best in Brazil and Latin America. Of the top 20 Latin American universities, eight are Brazilian. Most of them are public. Attending an institution of higher education is required by Law of Guidelines and Bases of Education. Kindergarten, elementary and medium education are required of all students.

=== Language ===


The official language of Brazil is Portuguese (Article 13 of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Brazil), which almost all of the population speaks and is virtually the only language used in newspapers, radio, television, and for business and administrative purposes. Brazil is the only Portuguese-speaking nation in the Americas, making the language an important part of Brazilian national identity and giving it a national culture distinct from those of its Spanish-speaking neighbors.

Brazilian Portuguese has had its own development, mostly similar to 16th-century Central and Southern dialects of European Portuguese (despite a very substantial number of Portuguese colonial settlers, and more recent immigrants, coming from Northern regions, and in minor degree Portuguese Macaronesia), with a few influences from the Amerindian and African languages, especially West African and Bantu restricted to the vocabulary only. As a result, the language is somewhat different, mostly in phonology, from the language of Portugal and other Portuguese-speaking countries (the dialects of the other countries, partly because of the more recent end of Portuguese colonialism in these regions, have a closer connection to contemporary European Portuguese). These differences are comparable to those between American and British English.

The 2002 sign language law requires government authorities and public agencies to accept and provide information in &quot;Língua Brasileira dos Sinais&quot; or &quot;LIBRAS&quot;, the Brazilian Sign Language, while a 2005 presidential edict extends this to require teaching of the language as a part of the education and speech and language pathology curricula. LIBRAS teachers, instructors and translators are recognized professionals. Schools and health services must provide access (&quot;inclusion&quot;) to deaf people.

Minority languages are spoken throughout the nation. One hundred and eighty Amerindian languages are spoken in remote areas and a significant number of other languages are spoken by immigrants and their descendants. In the municipality of São Gabriel da Cachoeira, Nheengatu (a currently endangered creole language with Tupi lexicon and Portuguese-based grammar that, together with its southern relative língua geral paulista, once was a major lingua franca in Brazil), Baniwa and Tucano languages had been granted co-official status with Portuguese.

There are significant communities of German (mostly the Brazilian Hunsrückisch, a High German language dialect) and Italian (mostly the Talian, a Venetian dialect) origins in the Southern and Southeastern regions, whose ancestors&#x27; native languages were carried along to Brazil, and which, still alive there, are influenced by the Portuguese language. Talian is officially a historic patrimony of Rio Grande do Sul, and two German dialects possess co-official status in a few municipalities. Italian is also recognized as &quot;ethnic language&quot; in Santa Teresa and Vila Velha, in the state of Espírito Santo, and is taught as mandatory second language at school.

=== Urbanization ===
According to IBGE (Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics) urban areas already concentrate 84.35% of the population, while the Southeast region remains the most populated one, with over 80 million inhabitants.
The largest urban agglomerations in Brazil are São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, and Belo Horizonte—all in the Southeastern Region—with 21.1, 12.3, and 5.1 million inhabitants respectively. The majority of state capitals are the largest cities in their states, except for Vitória, the capital of Espírito Santo, and Florianópolis, the capital of Santa Catarina.
== Culture ==
The core culture of Brazil is derived from Portuguese culture, because of its strong colonial ties with the Portuguese Empire. Among other influences, the Portuguese introduced the Portuguese language, Roman Catholicism and colonial architectural styles. The culture was also strongly influenced by African, indigenous and non-Portuguese European cultures and traditions.

Some aspects of Brazilian culture were influenced by the contributions of Italian, German and other European as well as Japanese, Jewish and Arab immigrants who arrived in large numbers in the South and Southeast of Brazil during the 19th and 20th centuries. The indigenous Amerindians influenced Brazil&#x27;s language and cuisine; and the Africans influenced language, cuisine, music, dance and religion.

Brazilian art has developed since the 16th century into different styles that range from Baroque (the dominant style in Brazil until the early 19th century) to Romanticism, Modernism, Expressionism, Cubism, Surrealism and Abstractionism. Brazilian cinema dates back to the birth of the medium in the late 19th century and has gained a new level of international acclaim since the 1960s.

=== Architecture ===

The architecture of Brazil is influenced by Europe, especially Portugal. It has a history that goes back 500 years to the time, when Pedro Álvares Cabral landed in Brazil in 1500. Portuguese colonial architecture was the first wave of architecture to go to Brazil. It is the basis for all Brazilian architecture of later centuries. In the 19th century, during the time of the Empire of Brazil, the country followed European trends and adopted Neoclassical and Gothic Revival architecture. Then, in the 20th century, especially in Brasília, Brazil experimented with modernist architecture.

The colonial architecture of Brazil dates to the early 16th century, when Brazil was first explored, conquered and settled by the Portuguese. The Portuguese built architecture familiar to them in Europe in their aim to colonize Brazil. They built Portuguese colonial architecture, which included churches and civic architecture, including houses and forts, in Brazilian cities and the countryside.

During the 19th century, Brazilian architecture saw the introduction of more European styles to Brazil, such as Neoclassical and Gothic Revival architecture. This was usually mixed with Brazilian influences from their own heritage. In the 1950s modernist architecture was introduced when Brasília was built as a new federal capital in the interior of Brazil to help develop the interior. The architect Oscar Niemeyer idealized and built government buildings, churches and civic buildings in the modernist style.

=== Music ===

The music of Brazil was formed mainly from the fusion of European, Native Indigenous, and African elements. Until the nineteenth century, Portugal was the gateway to most of the influences that built Brazilian music, although many of these elements were not of Portuguese origin, but generally European. The first was José Maurício Nunes Garcia, author of sacred pieces with an influence of Viennese classicism. The major contribution of the African element was the rhythmic diversity and some dances and instruments.

Popular music since the late eighteenth century, samba was considered the most typical and on the UNESCO cultural heritage list. Samba-reggae, Maracatu, Frevo and Afoxê are four music traditions that have been popularized by their appearance in the annual Brazilian Carnivals. Capoeira is usually played with its own music referred to as capoeira music, which is usually considered to be a call-and-response type of folk music. Forró is a type of folk music prominent during the Festa Junina in northeastern Brazil. Jack A. Draper III, a professor of Portuguese at the University of Missouri, argues that Forró was used as a way to subdue feelings of nostalgia for a rural lifestyle.

Choro is a popular musical instrumental style. Its origins are in 19th-century Rio de Janeiro. The style often has a fast and happy rhythm, characterized by subtle modulations and full of syncopation and counterpoint. Bossa nova is also a well-known style of Brazilian music developed and popularized in the 1950s and 1960s. The phrase &quot;bossa nova&quot; means literally &#x27;new trend&#x27;. A lyrical fusion of samba and jazz, bossa nova acquired a large following starting in the 1960s. Some international Brazilian music artists are, for example: Villa-Lobos, Tom Jobim, João Gilberto, Sergio Mendes, Eumir Deodato, Kaoma, Sepultura, Olodum and CSS.

=== Literature ===

Brazilian literature dates back to the 16th century, to the writings of the first Portuguese explorers in Brazil, such as Pero Vaz de Caminha, filled with descriptions of fauna, flora and commentary about the indigenous population that fascinated European readers.

Brazil produced significant works in Romanticism—novelists such as Joaquim Manuel de Macedo and José de Alencar wrote novels about love and pain. Alencar, in his long career, also treated indigenous people as heroes in the Indigenist novels &quot;O Guarani&quot;, &quot;Iracema&quot; and &quot;Ubirajara&quot;. Machado de Assis, one of his contemporaries, wrote in virtually all genres and continues to gain international prestige from critics worldwide.

Brazilian Modernism, evidenced by the Modern Art Week in 1922, was concerned with a nationalist avant-garde literature, while Post-Modernism brought a generation of distinct poets such as João Cabral de Melo Neto, Carlos Drummond de Andrade, Vinicius de Moraes, Cora Coralina, Graciliano Ramos, Cecília Meireles, and internationally known writers dealing with universal and regional subjects such as Jorge Amado, João Guimarães Rosa, Clarice Lispector and Manuel Bandeira.

Brazil&#x27;s most significant literary award is the Camões Prize, which it shares with the rest of the Portuguese-speaking world. As of 2016, Brazil has eleven recipients of the prize. Brazil also holds its own literary academy, the Brazilian Academy of Letters, a non-profit cultural organization aimed at perpetuating the care of the national language and literature.

=== Cinema ===
The Brazilian film industry began in the late 19th century, during the early days of the Belle Époque. While there were national film productions during the early 20th century, American films such as &quot;Rio the Magnificent&quot; were made in Rio de Janeiro to promote tourism in the city. The films &quot;Limite&quot; (1931) and &quot;Ganga Bruta&quot; (1933), the latter being produced by Adhemar Gonzaga through the prolific studio Cinédia, were poorly received at release and failed at the box office, but are acclaimed nowadays and placed among the finest Brazilian films of all time. The 1941 unfinished film &quot;It&#x27;s All True&quot; was divided into four segments, two of which were filmed in Brazil and directed by Orson Welles; it was originally produced as part of the United States&#x27; Good Neighbor Policy during Getúlio Vargas&#x27; Estado Novo government.

During the 1960s, the Cinema Novo movement rose to prominence with directors such as Glauber Rocha, Nelson Pereira dos Santos, Paulo Cesar Saraceni and Arnaldo Jabor. Rocha&#x27;s films &quot;Deus e o Diabo na Terra do Sol&quot; (1964) and &quot;Terra em Transe&quot; (1967) are considered to be some of the greatest and most influential in Brazilian film history.

During the 1990s, Brazil saw a surge of critical and commercial success with films such as &quot;O Quatrilho&quot; (Fábio Barreto, 1995), &quot;O Que É Isso, Companheiro?&quot; (Bruno Barreto, 1997) and &quot;Central do Brasil&quot; (Walter Salles, 1998), all of which were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, the latter receiving a Best Actress nomination for Fernanda Montenegro. The 2002 crime film &quot;City of God&quot;, directed by Fernando Meirelles, was critically acclaimed, scoring 90% on Rotten Tomatoes, being placed in Roger Ebert&#x27;s Best Films of the Decade list and receiving four Academy Award nominations in 2004, including Best Director. Notable film festivals in Brazil include the São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro International Film Festivals and the Gramado Festival.

=== Visual arts ===

Brazilian painting emerged in the late 16th century, influenced by Baroque, Rococo, Neoclassicism, Romanticism, Realism, Modernism, Expressionism, Surrealism, Cubism and Abstracionism making it a major art style called Brazilian academic art.

The French Artistic Mission arrived in Brazil in 1816 proposing the creation of an art academy modeled after the respected Académie des Beaux-Arts, with graduation courses both for artists and craftsmen for activities such as modeling, decorating, carpentry and others and bringing artists such as Jean-Baptiste Debret.

Upon the creation of the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts, new artistic movements spread across the country during the 19th century and later the event called Modern Art Week broke with academic tradition in 1922 and started a nationalist trend which was influenced by modernist arts.

Among the best-known Brazilian painters are Ricardo do Pilar and Manuel da Costa Ataíde (baroque and rococo), Victor Meirelles, Pedro Américo and Almeida Júnior (romanticism and realism), Anita Malfatti, Ismael Nery, Lasar Segall, Emiliano di Cavalcanti, Vicente do Rego Monteiro, and Tarsila do Amaral (expressionism, surrealism and cubism), Aldo Bonadei, José Pancetti and Cândido Portinari (modernism).

=== Theatre ===
The theatre in Brazil has its origins in the period of Jesuit expansion, when theater was used for the dissemination of Catholic doctrine in the 16th century. In the 17th and 18th centuries, dramatists on the scene of European derivation were for court or private performances. During the 19th century, the playwrights Antônio Gonçalves Dias and Luís Carlos Martins Pena were known for their performance. There were also numerous operas and orchestras. The Brazilian conductor Antônio Carlos Gomes became internationally known with operas such as &quot;Il Guarany&quot;. At the end of the 19th century, orchestrated dramaturgias were accompanied with songs of famous artists such as the conductress Chiquinha Gonzaga.

Already in the early 20th century there was the presence of theaters, entrepreneurs and actor companies. In 1940, Paschoal Carlos Magno and his student&#x27;s theater, the comedians group and the Italian actors Adolfo Celi, Ruggero Jacobbi and Aldo Calvo, founders of the &quot;Teatro Brasileiro de Comédia&quot;, renewed the Brazilian theater. From the 1960s, it was attended by a theater dedicated to social and religious issues. The most prominent authors at this stage were Jorge Andrade and Ariano Suassuna.

=== Cuisine ===

Brazilian cuisine varies greatly by region, reflecting the country&#x27;s varying mix of indigenous and immigrant populations. This has created a national cuisine marked by the preservation of regional differences. Some of the most well known Brazilian foods are the Feijoada, considered the country&#x27;s national dish; and Churrasco, a kind of barbecue which is often served in rodízio style. Other regional foods include beijú, feijão tropeiro, vatapá, moqueca, polenta (from Italian cuisine) and acarajé (from African cuisine). The national beverage is coffee; cachaça is Brazil&#x27;s native liquor. Cachaça is distilled from sugar cane and is the main ingredient in the national cocktail, Caipirinha.

A typical meal consists mostly of rice and beans with beef, salad, french fries and a fried egg. Often, it is mixed with cassava flour (farofa). Fried potatoes, fried cassava, fried banana, fried meat and fried cheese are very often eaten in lunch and served in most typical restaurants. Popular snacks are pastel (a fried pastry); coxinha (a variation of chicken croquete); pão de queijo (cheese bread and cassava flour / tapioca); pamonha (corn and milk paste); esfirra (a variation of Lebanese pastry); kibbeh (from Arabic cuisine); empanada (pastry) and empada, little salt pies filled with shrimps or heart of palm.

Brazil has a variety of desserts such as brigadeiros (chocolate fudge balls), bolo de rolo (roll cake with goiabada), cocada (a coconut sweet), beijinhos (coconut truffles and clove) and Romeu e Julieta (cheese with goiabada). Peanuts are used to make paçoca, rapadura and pé-de-moleque. Local common fruits such as açaí, cupuaçu, mango, papaya, cocoa, cashew, guava, orange, lime, passionfruit, pineapple, and hog plum are turned in juices and used to make chocolates, ice pops and ice cream.

=== Media ===


The Brazilian press was officially born in Rio de Janeiro on 13 May 1808 with the creation of the Royal Printing National Press by the Prince Regent Dom João. The , the first newspaper published in the country, began to circulate on 10 September 1808. The largest newspapers nowadays are , &quot;Super Notícia&quot;, &quot;O Globo&quot; and &quot;O Estado de S. Paulo&quot;.

Radio broadcasting began on 7 September 1922, with a speech by then President Pessoa, and was formalized on 20 April 1923 with the creation of the &quot;Radio Society of Rio de Janeiro&quot;. Television in Brazil began officially on 18 September 1950, with the founding of TV Tupi by Assis Chateaubriand. Since then, television has grown in the country, creating large commercial broadcast networks such as Globo, SBT, RecordTV, Bandeirantes and RedeTV. Today it is the most important factor in the popular culture of Brazilian society, as indicated by research showing that as much as 67% of the general population follow the same daily telenovela broadcast.

By the mid-1960s, Brazilian universities had installed mainframe computers from IBM and Burroughs Large Systems. In the 1970s and 1980s, the Brazilian government restricted foreign imports to protect the local manufacturing of computers. In the 1980s, Brazil produced half of the computers sold in the country. By 2009, the mobile phone and Internet use in Brazil was the fifth largest in the world.

In May 2010, the Brazilian government launched TV Brasil Internacional, an international television station, initially broadcasting to 49 countries. Commercial television channels broadcast internationally include Globo Internacional, RecordTV Internacional and Band Internacional.

=== Sports ===

The most popular sport in Brazil is football. The Brazilian men&#x27;s national team is ranked among the best in the world according to the FIFA World Rankings, and has won the World Cup tournament a record five times.

Volleyball, basketball, auto racing and martial arts also has large audiences. The Brazil men&#x27;s national volleyball team, for example, currently holds the titles of the World League, World Grand Champions Cup, World Championship and the World Cup. In auto racing, three Brazilian drivers have won the Formula One world championship eight times. The country has also produced significant achievements in other sports such as sailing, swimming, tennis, surfing, skateboarding, MMA, gymnastics, boxing, judo, athletics and table tennis.

Some sport variations have their origins in Brazil: beach football, futsal (indoor football) and footvolley emerged in Brazil as variations of football. In martial arts, Brazilians developed Capoeira, Vale tudo and Brazilian jiu-jitsu.

Brazil has hosted several high-profile international sporting events, such as the 1950 FIFA World Cup, and recently has hosted the 2014 FIFA World Cup, 2019 Copa América and 2021 Copa América . The São Paulo circuit, Autódromo José Carlos Pace, hosts the annual Grand Prix of Brazil. São Paulo organized the IV Pan American Games in 1963, and Rio de Janeiro hosted the XV Pan American Games in 2007. On 2 October 2009, Rio de Janeiro was selected to host the 2016 Olympic Games and 2016 Paralympic Games, making it the first South American city to host the games and second in Latin America, after Mexico City. Furthermore, the country hosted the FIBA Basketball World Cups in 1954 and 1963. At the 1963 event, the Brazil national basketball team won one of its two world championship titles.

== See also ==

* Outline of Brazil

== Notes ==

== References ==
== Bibliography ==

* Azevedo, Aroldo. &quot;O Brasil e suas regiões&quot;. São Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1971
* Barman, Roderick J. &quot;Citizen Emperor: Pedro II and the Making of Brazil, 1825–1891&quot;. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999. 
* Boxer, Charles R. &quot;The Portuguese Seaborne Empire&quot; (1969)
** &quot;O império marítimo português 1415–1825&quot;. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2002. 
* Bueno, Eduardo. &quot;Brasil: uma História&quot;. São Paulo: Ática, 2003. 
* Calmon, Pedro. &quot;História da Civilização Brasileira&quot;. Brasília: Senado Federal, 2002
* Carvalho, José Murilo de. &quot;D. Pedro II&quot;. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2007
* Coelho, Marcos Amorim. &quot;Geografia do Brasil&quot;. 4th ed. São Paulo: Moderna, 1996
* Diégues, Fernando. &quot;A revolução brasílica&quot;. Rio de Janeiro: Objetiva, 2004
* &quot;Enciclopédia Barsa&quot;. Volume 4: Batráquio – Camarão, Filipe. Rio de Janeiro: Encyclopædia Britannica do Brasil, 1987
* Fausto, Boris and Devoto, Fernando J. &quot;Brasil e Argentina: Um ensaio de história comparada (1850–2002)&quot;, 2nd ed. São Paulo: Editoria 34, 2005. 
* Gaspari, Elio. &quot;A ditadura envergonhada&quot;. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2002. 
* Janotti, Aldo. &quot;O Marquês de Paraná: inícios de uma carreira política num momento crítico da história da nacionalidade&quot;. Belo Horizonte: Itatiaia, 1990
* Lyra, Heitor. &quot;História de Dom Pedro II (1825–1891): Ascenção (1825–1870). v. 1&quot;. Belo Horizonte: Itatiaia, 1977
* Lyra, Heitor. &quot;História de Dom Pedro II (1825–1891): Declínio (1880–1891). v. 3&quot;. Belo Horizonte: Itatiaia, 1977
* Lustosa, Isabel. &quot;D. Pedro I: um herói sem nenhum caráter&quot;. São Paulo: Companhia das letras, 2006. 
* Moreira, Igor A. G. &quot;O Espaço Geográfico, geografia geral e do Brasil&quot;. 18. Ed. São Paulo: Ática, 1981
* Munro, Dana Gardner. &quot;The Latin American Republics; A History&quot;. New York: D. Appleton, 1942.
* Peres, Damião (1949) &quot;O Descobrimento do Brasil por Pedro Álvares Cabral: antecedentes e intencionalidade&quot; Porto: Portucalense.
* Scheina, Robert L. &quot;Latin America: A Naval History, 1810–1987&quot;. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1987. 
* Stuart B. Schwartz &quot;Sovereignty and Society in Colonial Brazil&quot; (1973)
** &quot;Early Latin America&quot; (1983)
** &quot;Sugar Plantations in the Formation of Brazilian Society&quot; (1985)
* Skidmore, Thomas E. &quot;Brazil: Five Centuries of Change&quot; (Oxford University Press, 1999)
** &quot;Uma História do Brasil&quot;. 4th ed. São Paulo: Paz e Terra, 2003. 
* Souza, Adriana Barreto de. &quot;Duque de Caxias: o homem por trás do monumento&quot;. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 2008. .
* Vainfas, Ronaldo. &quot;Dicionário do Brasil Imperial&quot;. Rio de Janeiro: Objetiva, 2002. 
* Vesentini, José William. &quot;Brasil, sociedade e espaço – Geografia do Brasil&quot;. 7th Ed. São Paulo: Ática, 1988
* Vianna, Hélio. &quot;História do Brasil: período colonial, monarquia e república&quot;, 15th ed. São Paulo: Melhoramentos, 1994
* Zirin, Dave. &quot;Brazil&#x27;s Dance with the Devil: The World Cup, The Olympics, and the Fight for Democracy&quot; Haymarket Books 2014. 
== Further reading ==

* Alencastro Felipe, Luiz Felipe de. &quot;The Trade in the Living: The Formation of Brazil in the South Atlantic, Sixteenth to Seventeenth Centuries&quot; (SUNY Press, 2019)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Levine, Robert M. &quot;Historical Dictionary of Brazil&quot; (2019)
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
Government
* Brazilian Federal Government
* Official Tourist Guide of Brazil
* Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="0" end="6" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="23" end="52" title="Brazil" label="Federative Republic of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="96" end="109" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="134" end="163" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="fifth-largest country by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="172" end="201" title="List of countries and dependencies by population" label="seventh largest by population"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="250" end="260" title="federation" label="federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q485258" start="276" end="282" title="Federative units of Brazil" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q119158" start="289" end="305" title="Federal District (Brazil)" label="Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="332" end="340" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q499753" start="342" end="364" title="List of cities in Brazil by population" label="Its most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="368" end="377" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="391" end="405" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="427" end="446" title="Portuguese-speaking countries" label="Portuguese speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="491" end="499" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="506" end="516" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q59436982" start="523" end="540" title="Portuguese-speaking world" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="558" end="572" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138397" start="599" end="608" title="Coastline of Brazil" label="coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089245" start="674" end="717" title="Borders of Brazil" label="borders all other countries and territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="742" end="749" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="754" end="759" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q157603" start="844" end="852" title="Pantanal" label="wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q278512" start="854" end="862" title="Cerrado" label="savannas"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="917" end="929" title="Amazon basin" label="Amazon basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="945" end="973" title="Amazon River" label="world’s largest river system"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="993" end="999" title="Old-growth forest" label="virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="1000" end="1015" title="Amazon rainforest" label="tropical forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392516" start="1038" end="1046" title="Wildlife of Brazil" label="wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381053" start="1061" end="1079" title="Environment of Brazil" label="ecological systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919841" start="1131" end="1149" title="protected areas of Brazil" label="protected habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538989" start="1184" end="1205" title="megadiverse countries" label="megadiverse countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="1286" end="1311" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251680" start="1339" end="1352" title="Deforestation in Brazil" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q20056111" start="1392" end="1406" title="Climate change in Brazil" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466271" start="1411" end="1428" title="biodiversity loss" label="biodiversity loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511364" start="1455" end="1481" title="Pre-Cabraline history of Brazil" label="various indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042917" start="1495" end="1502" title="Discovery of Brazil" label="landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q174432" start="1526" end="1546" title="Pedro Álvares Cabral" label="Pedro Álvares Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="1586" end="1594" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649877" start="1620" end="1637" title="Slavery in Brazil" label="enslaved Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18465545" start="1649" end="1660" title="Brazilian sugar cycle" label="plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088324" start="1680" end="1686" title="Colonial Brazil" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932042" start="1735" end="1742" title="Kingdom of Brazil" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q903779" start="1769" end="1820" title="United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves" label="United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670007" start="1831" end="1881" title="Transfer of the Portuguese court to Brazil" label="transfer of the Portuguese court to Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q939" start="1890" end="1907" title="Pedro I of Brazil" label="Pedro of Braganza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548600" start="1936" end="1948" title="Independence of Brazil" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q217230" start="1975" end="1991" title="Empire of Brazil" label="Empire of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="1995" end="2008" title="unitary state" label="unitary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813642" start="2026" end="2039" title="Parliamentary sovereignty" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590437" start="2040" end="2063" title="Brazilian imperial family" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995067" start="2079" end="2105" title="Brazilian Constitution of 1824" label="first constitution in 1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q949699" start="2158" end="2175" title="National Congress of Brazil" label="National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821699" start="2277" end="2296" title="Abolitionism in Brazil" label="gradually abolished"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519167" start="2335" end="2358" title="Lei Áurea" label="final abolition in 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414171" start="2376" end="2397" title="First Brazilian Republic" label="presidential republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294549" start="2410" end="2435" title="Proclamation of the Republic (Brazil)" label="military coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370527" start="2462" end="2483" title="Military dictatorship in Brazil" label="military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571496" start="2492" end="2499" title="1964 Brazilian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="in 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386422" start="2585" end="2597" title="Constitution of Brazil" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="2632" end="2642" title="Democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q512187" start="2643" end="2659" title="federal republic" label="federal republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q339834" start="2675" end="2683" title="regional power" label="regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322988" start="2688" end="2700" title="middle power" label="middle power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370783" start="2705" end="2724" title="emerging power" label="rising global power"/>
<link wikidata="Q546395" start="2735" end="2744" title="Emerging market" label="emerging,"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="2745" end="2764" title="Developing country" label="upper-middle income"/>
<link wikidata="Q376860" start="2777" end="2805" title="newly industrialized country" label="newly industrialized country"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="2812" end="2843" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="one of the 10 largest economies"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="2877" end="2880" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="2911" end="2924" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="2933" end="2952" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186690" start="2962" end="2985" title="List of countries by total wealth" label="largest share of wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333445" start="3011" end="3018" title="Economic Complexity Index" label="complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827154" start="3123" end="3141" title="Agriculture in Brazil" label="agricultural goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865576" start="3143" end="3160" title="Mining in Brazil" label="mineral resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028196" start="3166" end="3187" title="Industry in Brazil" label="manufactured products"/>
<link wikidata="Q94165" start="3244" end="3267" title="List of World Heritage Sites in Brazil" label="thirteenth in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="3281" end="3287" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="3288" end="3307" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3345" end="3359" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="3365" end="3368" title="G20" label="G20"/>
<link wikidata="Q243630" start="3370" end="3375" title="BRICS" label="BRICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q838116" start="3377" end="3379" title="G4 nations" label="G4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4264" start="3381" end="3389" title="Mercosur" label="Mercosur"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="3391" end="3422" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q421023" start="3424" end="3461" title="Organization of Ibero-American States" label="Organization of Ibero-American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="3471" end="3513" title="Community of Portuguese Language Countries" label="Community of Portuguese Language Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="3551" end="3562" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q145560" start="3569" end="3588" title="major non-NATO ally" label="major non-NATO ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3596" end="3609" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q42675898" start="3701" end="3711" title="Caesalpinia echinata" label="brazilwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q177257" start="3914" end="3919" title="ember" label="ember"/>
<link wikidata="Q42675898" start="4204" end="4214" title="Paubrasilia" label="brazilwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363781" start="4436" end="4454" title="Indigenous peoples in Brazil" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q120684" start="4463" end="4467" title="Tupi people" label="Tupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35876" start="5081" end="5097" title="Guaraní language" label="Guaraní language"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="5123" end="5131" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="5309" end="5317" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815054" start="5319" end="5330" title="Luzia Woman" label="Luzia Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638732" start="5358" end="5372" title="Pedro Leopoldo" label="Pedro Leopoldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="5374" end="5386" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="5475" end="5482" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="5541" end="5553" title="Amazon basin" label="Amazon basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="5568" end="5585" title="Radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dated"/>
<link wikidata="Q659450" start="5648" end="5656" title="Santarém, Pará" label="Santarém"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624476" start="5740" end="5757" title="Marajoara culture" label="Marajoara culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q193264" start="5772" end="5778" title="Marajó" label="Marajó"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="5854" end="5875" title="social stratification" label="social stratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q262714" start="5896" end="5910" title="mound building" label="mound building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642488" start="5950" end="5958" title="chiefdom" label="chiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q120684" start="6268" end="6273" title="Tupí people" label="Tupis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46429" start="6275" end="6283" title="Guaraní people" label="Guaranis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2239203" start="6285" end="6288" title="Gê peoples" label="Gês"/>
<link wikidata="Q117244" start="6294" end="6301" title="Arawak peoples" label="Arawaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261742" start="6345" end="6356" title="Tupiniquim" label="Tupiniquins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757881" start="6361" end="6371" title="Tupinambá people" label="Tupinambás"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="6633" end="6646" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="6658" end="6674" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="6807" end="6814" title="Slavery" label="Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q171318" start="6999" end="7006" title="kinship" label="kinship"/>
<link wikidata="Q180897" start="7072" end="7093" title="Treaty of Tordesillas" label="Treaty of Tordesillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="7142" end="7159" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042917" start="7183" end="7252" title="Discovery of Brazil" label="the arrival of the Portuguese fleet commanded by Pedro Álvares Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q148610" start="7375" end="7387" title="Tupi–Guaraní" label="Tupi–Guarani"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="7473" end="7485" title="colonization" label="colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q216789" start="7523" end="7543" title="John III of Portugal" label="John III of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7468093" start="7606" end="7617" title="Captaincies of Brazil" label="captaincies"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838155" start="7772" end="7801" title="Governorate General of Brazil" label="Governorate General of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="7817" end="7825" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8125" end="8135" title="Sugar#Sugarcane" label="cane sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="8210" end="8228" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8236" end="8266" title="Slavery in Africa#Atlantic slave trade" label="slave market of Western Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826232" start="8327" end="8333" title="Portuguese Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q889394" start="8338" end="8348" title="Portuguese Mozambique" label="Mozambique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847458" start="8395" end="8416" title="Engenho" label="sugarcane plantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q806283" start="8665" end="8677" title="bandeirantes" label="bandeirantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958632" start="8763" end="8772" title="Brazilian Gold Rush" label="gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q716815" start="8806" end="8814" title="Settler colonialism" label="settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052957" start="8936" end="8950" title="War of the Emboabas" label="some conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9052" end="9102" title="Uti possidetis#The Brazilian frontier movement into Spanish-claimed lands" label="expanded Brazil&amp;#x27;s original colonial frontiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353951" start="9295" end="9318" title="France Antarctique" label="in Rio during the 1560s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440788" start="9320" end="9348" title="Equinoctial France" label="in Maranhão during the 1610s"/>
<link wikidata="Q19019163" start="9358" end="9387" title="Dutch invasions of Brazil" label="Dutch in Bahia and Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q377269" start="9400" end="9420" title="Dutch–Portuguese War" label="Dutch–Portuguese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q377350" start="9439" end="9452" title="Iberian Union" label="Iberian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q43637" start="9564" end="9572" title="monopoly" label="monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155622" start="9672" end="9687" title="slave rebellion" label="slave rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542741" start="9716" end="9736" title="Palmares (quilombo)" label="Quilombo of Palmares"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="9783" end="9795" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558843" start="9809" end="9832" title="Inconfidência Mineira" label="Minas Gerais Conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915956" start="9936" end="9956" title="continental Portugal" label="continental Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q676301" start="9966" end="9984" title="John VI of Portugal" label="Prince Regent John"/>
<link wikidata="Q773874" start="10001" end="10014" title="Maria I of Portugal" label="Queen Maria I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670007" start="10019" end="10039" title="Transfer of the Portuguese court to Brazil" label="move the royal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="10045" end="10051" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="10055" end="10069" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691" start="10164" end="10178" title="stock exchange" label="stock exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q610817" start="10188" end="10201" title="Banco do Brasil" label="National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286965" start="10399" end="10424" title="Portuguese conquest of French Guiana" label="conquest of French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="10447" end="10461" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="10640" end="10646" title="colony" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q903779" start="10773" end="10824" title="United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves" label="United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205549" start="10842" end="10858" title="pluricontinental" label="pluricontinental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822923" start="11036" end="11062" title="Liberal Revolution of 1820" label="Liberal Revolution of 1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q36433" start="11143" end="11148" title="Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q939" start="11244" end="11269" title="Pedro I of Brazil" label="Prince Pedro de Alcântara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932042" start="11288" end="11305" title="Kingdom of Brazil" label="Kingdom of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244869" start="11396" end="11413" title="Portuguese Cortes" label="Portuguese Cortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822923" start="11465" end="11483" title="Liberal Revolution of 1820" label="Liberal Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548600" start="11605" end="11660" title="Brazilian Declaration of Independence" label="declaring the country&amp;#x27;s independence from Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q617457" start="11733" end="11750" title="Emperor of Brazil" label="Emperor of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q939" start="11780" end="11787" title="Pedro I of Brazil" label="Pedro I"/>
<link wikidata="Q217230" start="11822" end="11838" title="Empire of Brazil" label="Empire of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082702" start="11845" end="11874" title="Brazilian War of Independence" label="Brazilian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q616523" start="11981" end="11991" title="Cisplatina" label="Cisplatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536871" start="12069" end="12090" title="Treaty of Rio de Janeiro (1825)" label="officially recognized"/>
<link wikidata="Q977981" start="12296" end="12316" title="Confederation of the Equator" label="republican secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237867" start="12452" end="12485" title="Liberal Wars" label="reclaim his daughter&amp;#x27;s crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q15112325" start="12492" end="12523" title="Abdication of Pedro I of Brazil" label="abdicating the Brazilian throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q156774" start="12572" end="12580" title="Pedro II of Brazil" label="Pedro II"/>
<link wikidata="Q10348842" start="12668" end="12675" title="Regency period (Empire of Brazil)" label="regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590269" start="12874" end="12883" title="Cabanagem" label="Cabanagem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141441" start="12887" end="12896" title="Grão-Pará Province" label="Grão-Pará"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745211" start="12902" end="12913" title="Malê Revolt" label="Malê Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880458" start="12931" end="12939" title="Balaiada" label="Balaiada"/>
<link wikidata="Q42362" start="12941" end="12949" title="Maranhão" label="Maranhão"/>
<link wikidata="Q4403481" start="12956" end="12964" title="Sabinada" label="Sabinada"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="12966" end="12971" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209297" start="12982" end="12996" title="Ragamuffin War" label="Ragamuffin War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="13013" end="13030" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="13052" end="13070" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="13250" end="13262" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635125" start="13338" end="13353" title="Praieira revolt" label="Praieira revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="13357" end="13367" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13472" end="13504" title="Dom Pedro II#Early coronation" label="premature coronation of Pedro II"/>
<link wikidata="Q10385186" start="13618" end="13638" title="Atlantic slave trade to Brazil" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="13681" end="13688" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903096" start="13689" end="13701" title="Aberdeen Act" label="Aberdeen Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258180" start="13710" end="13732" title="Eusébio de Queirós Law" label="Eusébio de Queirós Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649877" start="13853" end="13875" title="Slavery in Brazil" label="slavery in the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519167" start="13941" end="13951" title="Lei Áurea" label="Golden Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q236118" start="14043" end="14056" title="Southern Cone" label="Southern Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q288251" start="14102" end="14116" title="Cisplatine War" label="Cisplatine War"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="14154" end="14161" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042457" start="14241" end="14252" title="Platine War" label="Platine War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042463" start="14258" end="14271" title="Uruguayan War" label="Uruguayan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q58947" start="14292" end="14306" title="Paraguayan War" label="Paraguayan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049087" start="14320" end="14330" title="war effort" label="war effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="14445" end="14463" title="form of government" label="form of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136833" start="14527" end="14540" title="Imperial Brazilian Army" label="Imperial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q82194" start="14689" end="14702" title="Flag of Brazil" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="14812" end="14822" title="positivism" label="positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q802614" start="14843" end="14855" title="Republic Day" label="Republic Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375445" start="15149" end="15164" title="Encilhamento" label="economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500742" start="15169" end="15183" title="Revolta da Armada" label="a military one"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606574" start="15460" end="15468" title="Acre War" label="Acre War"/>
<link wikidata="Q849205" start="15485" end="15500" title="Brazil during World War I" label="its involvement"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="15504" end="15515" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="15591" end="15608" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500742" start="15674" end="15686" title="Revolta da Armada" label="Navy Revolts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15875" end="15905" title="Rebellions and revolutions in Brazil#1st Republican period (1889–1930)" label="a cycle of general instability"/>
<link wikidata="Q156844" start="16069" end="16083" title="Getúlio Vargas" label="Getúlio Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634783" start="16141" end="16159" title="Brazilian Revolution of 1930" label="Revolution of 1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592295" start="16489" end="16517" title="Constitutionalist Revolution" label="Constitutionalist Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="16551" end="16560" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027494" start="16579" end="16597" title="Brazilian uprising of 1935" label="Communist uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491721" start="16641" end="16647" title="Integralist Uprising" label="putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q899306" start="16665" end="16679" title="Brazilian Integralism" label="local fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q108543207" start="16807" end="16840" title="1937 Brazilian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1937 &amp;quot;coup d&amp;#x27;état&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394474" start="16940" end="16951" title="Estado Novo (Brazil)" label="Estado Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17045" end="17057" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17128" end="17139" title="Submarine warfare#Atlantic ocean" label="retaliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="17143" end="17155" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="17160" end="17173" title="Italy under fascism" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4095707" start="17238" end="17253" title="Brazil in World War II" label="entered the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="17261" end="17272" title="Allies of World War II" label="allied side"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17289" end="17336" title="Battle of the Atlantic#South Atlantic (May 1942 – September 1943)" label="its participation in the battle of the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291067" start="17358" end="17377" title="Brazilian Expeditionary Force" label="expeditionary force"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="17394" end="17410" title="Italian Campaign (World War II)" label="Italian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739150" start="17547" end="17565" title="1945 Brazilian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="swiftly overthrown"/>
<link wikidata="Q155824" start="17893" end="17913" title="Juscelino Kubitschek" label="Juscelino Kubitschek"/>
<link wikidata="Q192852" start="17986" end="18006" title="Opposition (politics)" label="political opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="18184" end="18192" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q310123" start="18244" end="18257" title="Jânio Quadros" label="Jânio Quadros"/>
<link wikidata="Q34982" start="18334" end="18346" title="João Goulart" label="João Goulart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571496" start="18420" end="18441" title="1964 Brazilian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="deposed in April 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370527" start="18471" end="18492" title="Military dictatorship in Brazil" label="military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642410" start="18633" end="18656" title="AI-5" label="Fifth Institutional Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q156017" start="18914" end="18930" title="Operation Condor" label="Operation Condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="18956" end="18977" title="authoritarianism" label="authoritarian regimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624469" start="19023" end="19039" title="Brazilian Miracle" label="economic miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q294241" start="19417" end="19431" title="Ernesto Geisel" label="Ernesto Geisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791088" start="19436" end="19460" title="Golbery do Couto e Silva" label="Golbery do Couto e Silva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19488" end="19499" title="Amnesty law#Brazil" label="Amnesty Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16142119" start="19529" end="19548" title="Political opening of Brazil" label="return to democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q244997" start="19629" end="19640" title="José Sarney" label="José Sarney"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="19754" end="19768" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722531" start="19857" end="19873" title="Brazilian presidential election, 1989" label="election in 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q236503" start="19896" end="19911" title="Fernando Collor de Mello" label="Fernando Collor"/>
<link wikidata="Q485946" start="20022" end="20035" title="Itamar Franco" label="Itamar Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q230578" start="20051" end="20076" title="Fernando Henrique Cardoso" label="Fernando Henrique Cardoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811698" start="20144" end="20154" title="Plano Real" label="Plano Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958829" start="20323" end="20336" title="Brazilian presidential election, 1994" label="1994 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346732" start="20342" end="20355" title="Brazilian presidential election, 1998" label="again in 1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q100235323" start="20362" end="20390" title="peaceful transition of power" label="peaceful transition of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q37181" start="20435" end="20460" title="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva" label="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722534" start="20462" end="20477" title="Brazilian presidential election, 2002" label="elected in 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164948" start="20482" end="20500" title="Brazilian presidential election, 2006" label="re-elected in 2006"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20672" end="20688" title="Police brutality by country#Brazil" label="police brutality"/>
<link wikidata="Q574562" start="20722" end="20735" title="The Establishment" label="establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="20740" end="20754" title="public service" label="public service"/>
<link wikidata="Q13454627" start="20756" end="20782" title="2013 protests in Brazil" label="numerous peaceful protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q40722" start="20836" end="20850" title="Dilma Rousseff" label="Dilma Rousseff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045449" start="20898" end="20905" title="Brazilian presidential election, 2010" label="in 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958898" start="20916" end="20923" title="Brazilian presidential election, 2014" label="in 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q23712863" start="20953" end="20966" title="Impeachment of Dilma Rousseff" label="was impeached"/>
<link wikidata="Q949699" start="20974" end="20992" title="Brazilian Congress" label="Brazilian Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q463533" start="21067" end="21079" title="Michel Temer" label="Michel Temer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595400" start="21192" end="21220" title="2015–16 protests in Brazil" label="protests for and against her"/>
<link wikidata="Q463533" start="21538" end="21550" title="Michel Temer" label="Michel Temer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18479704" start="21599" end="21627" title="Operation Car Wash" label="Petrobras corruption scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10260907" start="21673" end="21683" title="Corruption in Brazil" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220142" start="21815" end="21829" title="2018 Brazilian general election" label="2018 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q10304982" start="21872" end="21886" title="Jair Bolsonaro" label="Jair Bolsonaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366265" start="21894" end="21914" title="Social Liberal Party (Brazil)" label="Social Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069485" start="21980" end="21995" title="Fernando Haddad" label="Fernando Haddad"/>
<link wikidata="Q657089" start="22004" end="22017" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party (Brazil)" label="Workers Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q86597695" start="22105" end="22137" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Brazil" label="one of the hardest hit countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="22149" end="22166" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37181" start="22256" end="22281" title="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva" label="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053343" start="22331" end="22362" title="2022 Brazilian general election" label="2022 Brazilian general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q116142348" start="22640" end="22691" title="2023 Brazilian Congress attack" label="attacked Brazil&amp;#x27;s federal government buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="22708" end="22716" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="22914" end="22921" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="22936" end="22945" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="22950" end="22958" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="22977" end="22984" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="22989" end="22993" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="23007" end="23015" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="23038" end="23047" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="23049" end="23055" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="23057" end="23065" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="23104" end="23117" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="23193" end="23200" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="23205" end="23210" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="23274" end="23285" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q175057" start="23296" end="23315" title="Fernando de Noronha" label="Fernando de Noronha"/>
<link wikidata="Q241074" start="23317" end="23328" title="Rocas Atoll" label="Rocas Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q241357" start="23330" end="23368" title="Saint Peter and Saint Paul Archipelago" label="Saint Peter and Saint Paul Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q241478" start="23389" end="23412" title="Trindade and Martim Vaz" label="Trindade and Martim Vaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="23513" end="23521" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186300" start="23561" end="23564" title="6th parallel north" label="6°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390478" start="23569" end="23573" title="34th parallel south" label="34°S"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704737" start="23590" end="23593" title="28th meridian west" label="28°"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708840" start="23598" end="23602" title="74th meridian west" label="74°W"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="23619" end="23632" title="List of countries and outlying territories by total area" label="fifth largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="23895" end="23902" title="equator" label="equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q177440" start="23911" end="23930" title="Tropic of Capricorn" label="Tropic of Capricorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12143" start="23965" end="23974" title="time zone" label="time zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5390" start="23982" end="23987" title="UTC-05" label="UTC−5"/>
<link wikidata="Q40780" start="24012" end="24016" title="Acre (state)" label="Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q40040" start="24048" end="24056" title="Amazonas (Brazilian state)" label="Amazonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762" start="24061" end="24066" title="UTC−04" label="UTC−4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513" start="24093" end="24098" title="UTC−03" label="UTC−3"/>
<link wikidata="Q187183" start="24126" end="24139" title="Time in Brazil" label="national time"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536" start="24145" end="24150" title="UTC−02" label="UTC−2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986138" start="24158" end="24174" title="List of islands of Brazil" label="Atlantic islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="24358" end="24371" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen system"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="24415" end="24421" title="Desert climate" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="24423" end="24433" title="Tropical rainforest climate" label="equatorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="24435" end="24443" title="tropical climate" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="24445" end="24453" title="Semi-arid climate" label="semiarid"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="24455" end="24462" title="Oceanic climate" label="oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="24467" end="24478" title="Humid subtropical climate" label="subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q158579" start="24548" end="24570" title="Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests" label="equatorial rainforests"/>
<link wikidata="Q144019" start="24626" end="24653" title="temperate coniferous forest" label="temperate coniferous forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290693" start="24672" end="24689" title="tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas, and shrublands" label="tropical savannas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="24722" end="24734" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="25064" end="25078" title="primary forest" label="primary forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="25296" end="25312" title="State ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="25321" end="25338" title="Private property" label="private ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q215108" start="25377" end="25389" title="microclimate" label="microclimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="25470" end="25480" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011561" start="26237" end="26245" title="Snow in Brazil" label="snowfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12355030" start="26522" end="26533" title="Grande Seca" label="Grande Seca"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="26988" end="27002" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q20056111" start="27004" end="27028" title="Climate change in Brazil" label="Climate change in Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="27267" end="27278" title="Rainforest" label="rainforests"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="27288" end="27294" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="27369" end="27387" title="Amazon basin" label="Amazon River basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277161" start="27481" end="27496" title="Extreme weather" label="Extreme weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="27691" end="27697" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436230" start="27705" end="27775" title="List of countries by greenhouse gas emissions per capita" label="greenhouse gas emissions per person are higher than the global average"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435740" start="27808" end="27834" title="List of countries by greenhouse gas emissions" label="highest emitting countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="27836" end="27860" title="Greenhouse gas emissions" label="Greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q20051297" start="27937" end="27971" title="Nationally determined contribution" label="Nationally Determined Contribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="28001" end="28021" title="Greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="28109" end="28126" title="carbon neutrality" label="carbon neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q200635" start="28701" end="28712" title="Mantiqueira Mountains" label="Mantiqueira"/>
<link wikidata="Q958383" start="28717" end="28726" title="Espinhaço Mountains" label="Espinhaço"/>
<link wikidata="Q559784" start="28745" end="28757" title="Serra do Mar" label="Serra do Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309106" start="28777" end="28793" title="Guiana Shield" label="Guiana Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="28867" end="28879" title="Amazon Basin" label="Amazon Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131792" start="28912" end="28919" title="Orinoco" label="Orinoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q739484" start="28997" end="29012" title="Pico da Neblina" label="Pico da Neblina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="29243" end="29249" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q127892" start="29339" end="29345" title="Paraná River" label="Paraná"/>
<link wikidata="Q191635" start="29374" end="29380" title="Iguazu River" label="Iguaçu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36332" start="29401" end="29413" title="Iguazu Falls" label="Iguazu Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q118771" start="29420" end="29425" title="Rio Negro (Amazon)" label="Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q142148" start="29427" end="29440" title="São Francisco River" label="São Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q49544" start="29442" end="29447" title="Xingu River" label="Xingu"/>
<link wikidata="Q118251" start="29449" end="29456" title="Madeira River" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q752674" start="29461" end="29468" title="Tapajós" label="Tapajós"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392516" start="29521" end="29539" title="wildlife of Brazil" label="wildlife of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="29574" end="29580" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="29583" end="29588" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="29595" end="29600" title="fungus" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="29608" end="29621" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="29651" end="29668" title="Amazon Rainforest" label="Amazon rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="29720" end="29727" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="29784" end="29796" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="29928" end="29933" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="29956" end="29960" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="29973" end="29979" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="30052" end="30056" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="30098" end="30105" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="30200" end="30209" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="30239" end="30246" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="30384" end="30404" title="Biodiversity" label="biological diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q477047" start="30428" end="30443" title="Atlantic Forest" label="Atlantic Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q278512" start="30452" end="30459" title="Cerrado" label="Cerrado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429540" start="30516" end="30539" title="Araucaria moist forests" label="Araucaria moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392516" start="30688" end="30693" title="Wildlife of Brazil" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392516" start="30698" end="30712" title="Wildlife of Brazil" label="animal species"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="30808" end="30813" title="Cougar" label="pumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q35694" start="30815" end="30821" title="jaguar" label="jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33261" start="30824" end="30830" title="ocelot" label="ocelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q191737" start="30838" end="30846" title="bush dog" label="bush dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="30853" end="30856" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q232866" start="30875" end="30884" title="peccary" label="peccaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745367" start="30886" end="30891" title="tapir" label="tapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q972452" start="30894" end="30902" title="anteater" label="anteater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274076" start="30905" end="30910" title="sloth" label="sloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q21834" start="30913" end="30920" title="opossum" label="opossum"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840543" start="30926" end="30935" title="armadillo" label="armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="30938" end="30942" title="Deer" label="Deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q237157" start="30991" end="31007" title="New World monkey" label="New World monkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="31035" end="31047" title="Rainforest" label="rain forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251680" start="31240" end="31253" title="Deforestation in Brazil" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34577" start="31258" end="31266" title="poaching" label="poaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q477047" start="31311" end="31326" title="Atlantic Forest" label="Atlantic Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="31551" end="31559" title="economic" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="31564" end="31575" title="demographic" label="demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q597393" start="31607" end="31614" title="Illegal logging" label="illegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="31615" end="31622" title="logging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="31631" end="31637" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="31725" end="31744" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q913302" start="31749" end="31770" title="habitat fragmentation" label="habitat fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="32312" end="32322" title="Democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="32323" end="32333" title="Federation" label="federative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="32334" end="32342" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="32351" end="32370" title="presidential system" label="presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q37181" start="32572" end="32597" title="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva" label="Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632935" start="32626" end="32644" title="Minister of State" label="Ministers of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q949699" start="32759" end="32776" title="National Congress of Brazil" label="National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834804" start="32843" end="32862" title="Chamber of Deputies of Brazil" label="Chamber of Deputies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119413" start="32871" end="32885" title="Senate of Brazil" label="Federal Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="32973" end="33000" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q326174" start="33008" end="33023" title="Democracy Index" label="Democracy Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182575" start="33054" end="33070" title="flawed democracy" label="flawed democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="33110" end="33123" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011772" start="33143" end="33155" title="Free World" label="free country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417780" start="33165" end="33185" title="Freedom in the World" label="Freedom in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q14850164" start="33644" end="33653" title="pluralism (political theory)" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="33865" end="33913" title="Separation of powers" label="independently in all three spheres of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="34138" end="34156" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="34163" end="34190" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q573624" start="34202" end="34212" title="Compulsory voting" label="compulsory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993450" start="34352" end="34383" title="List of political parties in Brazil" label="30 registered political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="34625" end="34634" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="34652" end="34661" title="civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386422" start="35160" end="35180" title="Constitution of Brazil" label="Federal Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q519138" start="35376" end="35397" title="Supreme Federal Court" label="Supreme Federal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386422" start="35831" end="35851" title="Constitution of Brazil" label="Federal Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q821387" start="36024" end="36031" title="List of countries by number of military and paramilitary personnel" label="largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292358" start="36217" end="36231" title="Brazilian Army" label="Brazilian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16495824" start="36247" end="36268" title="Brazilian Army Aviation Command" label="Army Aviation Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750688" start="36275" end="36289" title="Brazilian Navy" label="Brazilian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066532" start="36305" end="36317" title="Brazilian Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708708" start="36322" end="36336" title="Brazilian Naval Aviation" label="Naval Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q634542" start="36346" end="36365" title="Brazilian Air Force" label="Brazilian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="36381" end="36393" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088231" start="36494" end="36504" title="Military Reserve" label="reservists"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="36803" end="36808" title="battle tank" label="tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540029" start="36827" end="36842" title="Military Police (Brazil)" label="Military Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5394077" start="36851" end="36878" title="Military Firefighters Corps" label="Military Firefighters Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q847109" start="37101" end="37112" title="dreadnought" label="dreadnought"/>
<link wikidata="Q9538" start="37126" end="37178" title="South American dreadnought race" label="naval arms race between Argentina, Brazil, and Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746790" start="37195" end="37206" title="green-water navy" label="green water"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514507" start="37290" end="37296" title="GRUMEC" label="GRUMEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q869923" start="37428" end="37446" title="helicopter carrier" label="helicopter carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q116470955" start="37448" end="37473" title="Brazilian aircraft carrier Atlântico" label="NAM &amp;quot;Atlântico&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386422" start="37648" end="37668" title="Constitution of Brazil" label="Federal Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203128" start="37688" end="37704" title="Non-interventionism" label="non-intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="37706" end="37724" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q695838" start="37726" end="37751" title="Internationalism (politics)" label="international cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632158" start="37760" end="37792" title="Peacebuilding" label="peaceful settlement of conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176750" start="37937" end="37946" title="President of Brazil" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q949699" start="38001" end="38009" title="National Congress of Brazil" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="38082" end="38104" title="Treaty" label="international treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q339834" start="38249" end="38263" title="regional power" label="regional power"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="38267" end="38280" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="38297" end="38317" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="38335" end="38346" title="world power" label="world power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413574" start="38419" end="38434" title="multilateralism" label="multilateralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203128" start="38469" end="38485" title="non-interventionism" label="non-intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="38562" end="38604" title="Community of Portuguese Language Countries" label="Community of Portuguese Language Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q59436982" start="38714" end="38723" title="Lusophone" label="Lusophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q740123" start="39196" end="39225" title="United Nations Stabilisation Mission in Haiti" label="peacekeeping mission in Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="39280" end="39300" title="World Food Programme" label="World Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q210519" start="39392" end="39403" title="South-South" label="South-South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386422" start="39520" end="39532" title="Constitution of Brazil" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289697" start="39596" end="39621" title="Federal Police Department" label="Federal Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158853" start="39623" end="39645" title="Federal Highway Police (Brazil)" label="Federal Highway Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158867" start="39647" end="39670" title="Federal Railroad Police" label="Federal Railroad Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540029" start="39774" end="39789" title="Military Police (Brazil)" label="Military Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q206882" start="39794" end="39806" title="Civil Police (Brazil)" label="Civil Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655319" start="40106" end="40136" title="National Public Security Force" label="National Public Security Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="40309" end="40334" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353188" start="40411" end="40449" title="List of countries by intentional homicide rate" label="highest rates of homicide of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q485258" start="40649" end="40665" title="States of Brazil" label="Brazilian states"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="40676" end="40685" title="São Paulo (state)" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40885" start="40767" end="40774" title="Alagoas" label="Alagoas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502" start="41262" end="41277" title="Same-sex marriage in Brazil" label="marriage rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q107390" start="41364" end="41370" title="Federated state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q475050" start="41376" end="41392" title="federal district" label="federal district"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="41408" end="41422" title="Municipality" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178386" start="41670" end="41683" title="Court of Justice (Brazil)" label="Courts of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829" start="42339" end="42346" title="comarca" label="comarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080713" start="42425" end="42444" title="Federal territories of Brazil" label="federal territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="42797" end="42815" title="developing country" label="developing country"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42824" end="42843" title="List of countries by GNI (nominal) per capita#Upper-middle income group" label="upper-middle income"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="42844" end="42849" title="mixed economy" label="mixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="42850" end="42864" title="market economy" label="market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="42939" end="42952" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="42958" end="42980" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="eighth largest economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="43018" end="43032" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="eighth largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="43036" end="43039" title="purchasing power parity" label="PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q22712744" start="43089" end="43125" title="2014–2016 Brazilian economic recession" label="entered an ongoing recession in 2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q13440398" start="43266" end="43277" title="labor force" label="labor force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235713" start="43328" end="43341" title="List of countries by labour force" label="fifth largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q317617" start="43395" end="43420" title="foreign exchange reserves" label="foreign exchange reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324629" start="43429" end="43442" title="List of countries by foreign exchange reserves" label="tenth-highest"/>
<link wikidata="Q796297" start="43461" end="43463" title="B3 (stock exchange)" label="B3"/>
<link wikidata="Q75024" start="43484" end="43548" title="List of stock exchanges" label="largest stock exchange of Latin America by market capitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q10260907" start="43728" end="43746" title="Corruption in Brazil" label="endemic corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015067" start="43751" end="43773" title="Income inequality in Brazil" label="high income inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q173117" start="43779" end="43793" title="Brazilian real" label="Brazilian real"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827154" start="44033" end="44051" title="Agriculture in Brazil" label="agriculture sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196599" start="44127" end="44180" title="List of largest producing countries of agricultural commodities" label="largest producers of various agricultural commodities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="44203" end="44214" title="cooperative" label="cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090196" start="44305" end="44323" title="Coffee production in Brazil" label="producer of coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="44391" end="44400" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="44402" end="44405" title="soy" label="soy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="44407" end="44413" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="44418" end="44424" title="Orange (fruit)" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="44461" end="44466" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="44468" end="44474" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="44476" end="44481" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="44483" end="44490" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="44492" end="44501" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="44503" end="44509" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="44511" end="44516" title="beans" label="beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="44518" end="44525" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="44527" end="44537" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34887" start="44542" end="44548" title="papaya" label="papaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="44594" end="44599" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34007" start="44601" end="44607" title="cashew" label="cashew"/>
<link wikidata="Q169" start="44609" end="44614" title="mango" label="mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="44616" end="44620" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="44622" end="44628" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="44630" end="44637" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q516494" start="44639" end="44648" title="tangerine" label="tangerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q37153" start="44650" end="44657" title="avocado" label="avocado"/>
<link wikidata="Q29526" start="44659" end="44668" title="persimmon" label="persimmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181909" start="44674" end="44679" title="guava" label="guava"/>
<link wikidata="Q864693" start="44759" end="44771" title="chicken meat" label="chicken meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="44773" end="44777" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="44779" end="44783" title="pork" label="pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="44788" end="44803" title="cow&amp;#x27;s milk" label="cow&amp;#x27;s milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865576" start="44825" end="44838" title="Mining in Brazil" label="mining sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="44881" end="44889" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="44905" end="44912" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="44914" end="44923" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="44925" end="44928" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046" start="44930" end="44937" title="niobium" label="niobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="44943" end="44949" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q79058" start="45027" end="45035" title="amethyst" label="amethyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q134985" start="45037" end="45042" title="topaz" label="topaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q123314" start="45044" end="45049" title="agate" label="agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q179911" start="45083" end="45093" title="tourmaline" label="tourmaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="45095" end="45102" title="emerald" label="emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q58959" start="45104" end="45114" title="aquamarine (gemstone)" label="aquamarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105368" start="45116" end="45122" title="garnet" label="garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q171058" start="45127" end="45131" title="opal" label="opal"/>
<link wikidata="Q383715" start="45418" end="45439" title="List of countries by exports" label="24th-largest exporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053969" start="45444" end="45465" title="List of countries by imports" label="26th-largest importer"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="45468" end="45473" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="45586" end="45599" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="45601" end="45610" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="45616" end="45627" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="45632" end="45638" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056340" start="45644" end="45663" title="Automotive industry in Brazil" label="automotive industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483418" start="45671" end="45685" title="List of countries by motor vehicle production" label="eighth-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q540912" start="45707" end="45720" title="food industry" label="food industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q672506" start="45849" end="45853" title="Pulp (paper)" label="pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q161928" start="45924" end="45941" title="footwear industry" label="footwear industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207652" start="46066" end="46083" title="chemical industry" label="chemical industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="47025" end="47038" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="47143" end="47168" title="Late-2000s recession" label="2008–2009 economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="47488" end="47498" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="47645" end="47662" title="Amazon Rainforest" label="Amazon Rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136194" start="47689" end="47705" title="Northeast Region, Brazil" label="Northeast Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q157603" start="47711" end="47719" title="Pantanal" label="Pantanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q980175" start="47727" end="47745" title="Center-West Region, Brazil" label="Center-West Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q41428" start="47758" end="47772" title="Rio de Janeiro (state)" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q41115" start="47777" end="47791" title="Santa Catarina (state)" label="Santa Catarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q39109" start="47813" end="47825" title="Minas Gerais" label="Minas Gerais"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="47848" end="47857" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835951" start="47881" end="47921" title="Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report" label="Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="48144" end="48152" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12089958" start="48186" end="48202" title="Domestic tourism" label="Domestic tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="48463" end="48472" title="São Paulo (state)" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q41428" start="48474" end="48488" title="Rio de Janeiro (state)" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="48494" end="48511" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q175" start="48644" end="48653" title="São Paulo (state)" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q40430" start="48658" end="48663" title="Bahia" label="Bahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474815" start="49081" end="49103" title="Fundação Oswaldo Cruz" label="Oswaldo Cruz Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q971299" start="49109" end="49127" title="Instituto Butantan" label="Butantan Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3683932" start="49150" end="49176" title="Brazilian General Command for Aerospace Technology" label="Aerospace Technical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339456" start="49182" end="49225" title="Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuária" label="Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108347" start="49234" end="49271" title="National Institute for Space Research" label="National Institute for Space Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q853604" start="49278" end="49300" title="Brazilian Space Agency" label="Brazilian Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="49421" end="49431" title="artificial satellite" label="satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="49454" end="49463" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="49595" end="49614" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="49659" end="49686" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="49806" end="49813" title="Uranium" label="Uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315209" start="49833" end="49861" title="Resende Nuclear Fuel Factory" label="Resende Nuclear Fuel Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="49939" end="49955" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10374574" start="49980" end="50003" title="Brazilian submarine Álvaro Alberto" label="first nuclear submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q689863" start="50115" end="50126" title="Synchrotron" label="Synchrotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="50274" end="50287" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168959" start="50309" end="50326" title="Semiconductor fabrication plant" label="fabrication plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010251" start="50332" end="50338" title="CEITEC" label="CEITEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="50540" end="50563" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q709516" start="50652" end="50672" title="Bartolomeu de Gusmão" label="Bartolomeu de Gusmão"/>
<link wikidata="Q946570" start="50674" end="50690" title="Landell de Moura" label="Landell de Moura"/>
<link wikidata="Q313211" start="50730" end="50751" title="Alberto Santos-Dumont" label="Alberto Santos-Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q10278441" start="50753" end="50779" title="Evaristo Conrado Engelberg" label="Evaristo Conrado Engelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10324089" start="50781" end="50801" title="Manuel Dias de Abreu" label="Manuel Dias de Abreu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755595" start="50803" end="50816" title="Andreas Pavel" label="Andreas Pavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q283146" start="50890" end="50902" title="César Lattes" label="César Lattes"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="50914" end="50923" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097" start="50944" end="50952" title="Pion" label="Pi Meson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797155" start="50961" end="50976" title="Mário Schenberg" label="Mário Schenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791342" start="51036" end="51052" title="José Leite Lopes" label="José Leite Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q715043" start="51132" end="51143" title="Artur Avila" label="Artur Avila"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="51184" end="51196" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q62086" start="51202" end="51214" title="Fritz Müller" label="Fritz Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="51273" end="51287" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851552" start="51335" end="51348" title="List of countries by total primary energy consumption and production" label="ninth-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="51396" end="51413" title="Renewable energy" label="renewable sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="51428" end="51444" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="51449" end="51456" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q244169" start="51462" end="51472" title="Itaipu Dam" label="Itaipu Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="51501" end="51520" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q816119" start="51590" end="51600" title="Belo Monte Dam" label="Belo Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475210" start="51605" end="51612" title="Tucuruí Dam" label="Tucuruí"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="51812" end="51831" title="hydroelectric power" label="hydroelectric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="51847" end="51854" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q43302" start="51917" end="51927" title="wind power" label="wind power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483757" start="51994" end="52005" title="solar power" label="solar power"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="53278" end="53281" title="Petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q899177" start="53794" end="53805" title="Brazilian Highway System" label="road system"/>
<link wikidata="Q849211" start="53898" end="53912" title="Rail transport in Brazil" label="railway system"/>
<link wikidata="Q592945" start="54090" end="54111" title="List of countries by rail transport network size" label="ninth largest network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516327" start="54169" end="54205" title="RFFSA" label="Federal Railroad Network Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q483343" start="54249" end="54264" title="São Paulo Metro" label="São Paulo Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q385406" start="54487" end="54528" title="São Paulo–Guarulhos International Airport" label="São Paulo–Guarulhos International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267889" start="54721" end="54730" title="waterways" label="waterways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059699" start="54754" end="54780" title="Free Economic Zone of Manaus" label="industrial zones of Manaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81882" start="55032" end="55038" title="Santos, São Paulo" label="Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="56271" end="56285" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q203516" start="56303" end="56313" title="birth rate" label="birth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="56366" end="56383" title="population growth" label="population growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q381763" start="56721" end="56743" title="demographic transition" label="demographic transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q107145742" start="56833" end="56854" title="2022 Brazilian census" label="2022 Brazilian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587830" start="56919" end="56924" title="Pardo Brazilians" label="Pardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976025" start="56934" end="56939" title="Brown (racial classification)" label="brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995285" start="56981" end="56986" title="White Brazilians" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q388315" start="57012" end="57017" title="Afro-Brazilians" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363781" start="57041" end="57051" title="Indigenous peoples in Brazil" label="Indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624751" start="57079" end="57089" title="Asian Brazilians" label="East Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207912" start="57115" end="57121" title="Mongoloid" label="yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309627" start="57827" end="57838" title="Immigration to Brazil" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615416" start="57947" end="57957" title="Portuguese Brazilian" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149102" start="57959" end="57966" title="Italian Brazilian" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958951" start="57968" end="57975" title="Brazilians of Spanish descent" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q321090" start="57977" end="57983" title="German Brazilian" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378198" start="57985" end="57992" title="English Brazilian" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737211" start="57994" end="58003" title="Ukrainian Brazilian" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209881" start="58005" end="58011" title="Polish Brazilian" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670560" start="58013" end="58019" title="Jewish Brazilian" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q388315" start="58021" end="58028" title="Afro-Brazilian" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="58030" end="58038" title="Armenians" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382298" start="58040" end="58047" title="Russians in Brazil" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100397" start="58049" end="58056" title="Chinese Brazilian" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144461" start="58058" end="58066" title="Japanese Brazilian" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431801" start="58068" end="58074" title="Korean Brazilian" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090608" start="58079" end="58083" title="Arab Brazilian" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="58237" end="58247" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017280" start="58277" end="58287" title="Arab diaspora" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551213" start="58566" end="58604" title="Social issues in Brazil" label="markedly divided by social class lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6015067" start="58622" end="58638" title="Income inequality in Brazil" label="income disparity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550947" start="58648" end="58667" title="Social apartheid in Brazil" label="between race groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="58672" end="58678" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414964" start="58683" end="58691" title="Class discrimination" label="classism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587830" start="58747" end="58764" title="Pardo Brazilians" label="&amp;quot;pardo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024920" start="58852" end="58859" title="caboclo" label="caboclo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="58950" end="58957" title="Mulatto" label="mulatos"/>
<link wikidata="Q145573" start="59028" end="59035" title="Zambo" label="cafuzos"/>
<link wikidata="Q731206" start="59456" end="59482" title="Fundação Nacional do Índio" label="National Indian Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q672979" start="59629" end="59648" title="uncontacted peoples" label="uncontacted peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="59682" end="59694" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="59741" end="59758" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575835" start="59806" end="59846" title="Catholic Church by country" label="world&amp;#x27;s largest Catholic population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426688" start="59974" end="59991" title="Roman Catholicism in Brazil" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251646" start="59999" end="60012" title="Protestantism in Brazil" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810029" start="60310" end="60347" title="Association of Religion Data Archives" label="Association of Religion Data Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="61342" end="61353" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="61354" end="61365" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="61449" end="61457" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q104319" start="61459" end="61481" title="Seventh-day Adventist Church" label="Seventh-day Adventists"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="61483" end="61492" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="61501" end="61519" title="Calvinism" label="Reformed tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="61540" end="61553" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906917" start="61895" end="61919" title="2022 Brazilian coup plot" label="2022 Brazilian coup plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q181056" start="62089" end="62098" title="Boa Vista, Roraima" label="Boa Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q36947" start="62100" end="62108" title="Salvador, Bahia" label="Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q172512" start="62114" end="62125" title="Porto Velho" label="Porto Velho"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="62158" end="62169" title="Irreligion" label="Irreligious"/>
<link wikidata="Q165341" start="62191" end="62199" title="Teresina" label="Teresina"/>
<link wikidata="Q43463" start="62201" end="62210" title="Fortaleza" label="Fortaleza"/>
<link wikidata="Q132997" start="62216" end="62229" title="Florianópolis" label="Florianópolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720540" start="62275" end="62297" title="Greater Rio de Janeiro" label="Greater Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="62317" end="62328" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="city proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460475" start="62406" end="62426" title="Greater Porto Alegre" label="Greater Porto Alegre"/>
<link wikidata="Q43463" start="62439" end="62448" title="Fortaleza" label="Fortaleza"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="62630" end="62637" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="62745" end="62758" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531056" start="62771" end="62792" title="Sistema Único de Saúde" label="Unified Health System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="63415" end="63436" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373300" start="63563" end="63569" title="List of countries by infant mortality rate" label="infant"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="63699" end="63722" title="cardiovascular diseases" label="cardiovascular diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="63766" end="63772" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="64101" end="64126" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="64166" end="64186" title="Constitution" label="Federal Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440531" start="64264" end="64269" title="Federal government of Brazil" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q485258" start="64275" end="64281" title="States of Brazil" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q119158" start="64287" end="64303" title="Federal District (Brazil)" label="Federal District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184121" start="64312" end="64326" title="Municipalities of Brazil" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q268072" start="64664" end="64668" title="Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics" label="IBGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q41428" start="64842" end="64856" title="Rio de Janeiro (state)" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q41115" start="64861" end="64875" title="Santa Catarina (state)" label="Santa Catarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136194" start="65001" end="65010" title="Northeast Region, Brazil" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060042" start="65068" end="65073" title="South Region, Brazil" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q835960" start="65445" end="65468" title="University of São Paulo" label="University of São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q847843" start="65489" end="65525" title="College and university rankings" label="the best in Brazil and Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="65608" end="65614" title="Public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q126807" start="65718" end="65730" title="Kindergarten" label="Kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="65732" end="65742" title="elementary school" label="elementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="65849" end="65859" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386422" start="65879" end="65925" title="Constitution of Brazil" label="Constitution of the Federal Republic of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q750553" start="66311" end="66331" title="Brazilian Portuguese" label="Brazilian Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615416" start="66517" end="66539" title="Portuguese Brazilian" label="more recent immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q27662" start="66553" end="66569" title="Northern Portugal" label="Northern regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q105472" start="66602" end="66613" title="Macaronesia" label="Macaronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="66647" end="66657" title="Indigenous languages of the Americas" label="Amerindian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207930" start="66662" end="66679" title="Languages of Africa" label="African languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="66692" end="66703" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="66709" end="66714" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q182500" start="66860" end="66889" title="Portuguese-speaking countries" label="Portuguese-speaking countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="66969" end="66991" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q922399" start="67051" end="67070" title="European Portuguese" label="European Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="67123" end="67131" title="American English" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="67136" end="67151" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195286" start="67163" end="67180" title="recognition of sign languages" label="sign language law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436689" start="67338" end="67361" title="Brazilian Sign Language" label="Brazilian Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120173" start="67461" end="67470" title="school of education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q33226" start="67475" end="67504" title="speech and language pathology" label="speech and language pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055771" start="67646" end="67655" title="inclusion (education)" label="inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498636" start="67666" end="67677" title="Deaf community" label="deaf people"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="67756" end="67776" title="Indigenous languages of the Americas" label="Amerindian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q694840" start="67919" end="67943" title="São Gabriel da Cachoeira" label="São Gabriel da Cachoeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q34333" start="67945" end="67954" title="Nheengatu language" label="Nheengatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="67979" end="67994" title="creole language" label="creole language"/>
<link wikidata="Q56944" start="68000" end="68004" title="Old Tupi" label="Tupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669239" start="68084" end="68105" title="língua geral paulista" label="língua geral paulista"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="68124" end="68137" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501735" start="68150" end="68156" title="Baniwa of Içana" label="Baniwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q304049" start="68288" end="68310" title="Riograndenser Hunsrückisch" label="Brazilian Hunsrückisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248654" start="68368" end="68374" title="Talian dialect" label="Talian"/>
<link wikidata="Q32724" start="68378" end="68386" title="Venetian language" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40030" start="68633" end="68650" title="Rio Grande do Sul" label="Rio Grande do Sul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039418" start="68789" end="68801" title="Santa Teresa, Espírito Santo" label="Santa Teresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q334197" start="68806" end="68816" title="Vila Velha" label="Vila Velha"/>
<link wikidata="Q43233" start="68834" end="68848" title="Espírito Santo" label="Espírito Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="69192" end="69201" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="69203" end="69217" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q42800" start="69223" end="69237" title="Belo Horizonte" label="Belo Horizonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q168376" start="69410" end="69417" title="Vitória, Brazil" label="Vitória"/>
<link wikidata="Q43233" start="69434" end="69448" title="Espírito Santo" label="Espírito Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132997" start="69454" end="69467" title="Florianópolis" label="Florianópolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746216" start="69557" end="69575" title="Culture of Portugal" label="Portuguese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="69695" end="69714" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="69716" end="69733" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q751878" start="69738" end="69767" title="Manueline" label="colonial architectural styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183734" start="69813" end="69820" title="Ethnic groups of Africa" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363781" start="69822" end="69832" title="Indigenous peoples in Brazil" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149102" start="69961" end="69968" title="Italian Brazilian" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q321090" start="69970" end="69976" title="German Brazilian" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144461" start="70007" end="70015" title="Japanese Brazilian" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670560" start="70017" end="70023" title="Jewish Brazilian" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090608" start="70028" end="70032" title="Arab Brazilian" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q614394" start="70211" end="70218" title="Brazilian cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q899215" start="70267" end="70272" title="Music of Brazil" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958788" start="70295" end="70308" title="Brazilian art" label="Brazilian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q899271" start="70384" end="70391" title="Baroque in Brazil" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q189772" start="70455" end="70466" title="Brazilian academic art" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="70468" end="70477" title="Modern art" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="70479" end="70492" title="Expressionism" label="Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="70494" end="70500" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="70502" end="70512" title="Surrealism" label="Surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="70517" end="70531" title="Abstract art" label="Abstractionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189739" start="70533" end="70549" title="Cinema of Brazil" label="Brazilian cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q174432" start="70838" end="70858" title="Pedro Álvares Cabral" label="Pedro Álvares Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232704" start="70885" end="70917" title="Portuguese colonial architecture" label="Portuguese colonial architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q217230" start="71081" end="71097" title="Empire of Brazil" label="Empire of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="71148" end="71160" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="71165" end="71192" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="71270" end="71292" title="modernist architecture" label="modernist architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="71939" end="71961" title="modernist architecture" label="modernist architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="71982" end="71990" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q134165" start="72096" end="72110" title="Oscar Niemeyer" label="Oscar Niemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q636408" start="72540" end="72566" title="José Maurício Nunes Garcia" label="José Maurício Nunes Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11403" start="72790" end="72795" title="Samba (music)" label="samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q455686" start="72870" end="72882" title="Samba-reggae" label="Samba-reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753071" start="72884" end="72892" title="Maracatu" label="Maracatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455932" start="72894" end="72899" title="Frevo" label="Frevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q383530" start="72904" end="72909" title="Afoxê" label="Afoxê"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390665" start="72997" end="73015" title="Brazilian Carnival" label="Brazilian Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q159452" start="73018" end="73026" title="Capoeira" label="Capoeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q4306588" start="73079" end="73093" title="capoeira music" label="capoeira music"/>
<link wikidata="Q586110" start="73169" end="73174" title="Forró" label="Forró"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115066" start="73220" end="73232" title="Festa Junina" label="Festa Junina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136194" start="73236" end="73255" title="Northeast Region, Brazil" label="northeastern Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q579968" start="73310" end="73332" title="University of Missouri" label="University of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076539" start="73426" end="73431" title="Choro" label="Choro"/>
<link wikidata="Q750240" start="73590" end="73601" title="Modulation (music)" label="modulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="73614" end="73625" title="syncopation" label="syncopation"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="73630" end="73642" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q486263" start="73644" end="73654" title="Bossa nova" label="Bossa nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="73854" end="73858" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q203514" start="73982" end="73993" title="Villa-Lobos" label="Villa-Lobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q200131" start="73995" end="74004" title="Tom Jobim" label="Tom Jobim"/>
<link wikidata="Q192359" start="74006" end="74019" title="João Gilberto" label="João Gilberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q337359" start="74021" end="74034" title="Sergio Mendes" label="Sergio Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q571260" start="74036" end="74049" title="Eumir Deodato" label="Eumir Deodato"/>
<link wikidata="Q500613" start="74051" end="74056" title="Kaoma" label="Kaoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q239074" start="74058" end="74067" title="Sepultura" label="Sepultura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021108" start="74069" end="74075" title="Olodum" label="Olodum"/>
<link wikidata="Q617007" start="74080" end="74083" title="CSS (band)" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q849186" start="74106" end="74126" title="Brazilian literature" label="Brazilian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361936" start="74228" end="74247" title="Pero Vaz de Caminha" label="Pero Vaz de Caminha"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="74277" end="74282" title="fauna" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="74284" end="74289" title="flora" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="74409" end="74420" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q727148" start="74439" end="74463" title="Joaquim Manuel de Macedo" label="Joaquim Manuel de Macedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q455703" start="74468" end="74483" title="José de Alencar" label="José de Alencar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368408" start="74595" end="74605" title="Indianism (arts)" label="Indigenist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008330" start="74619" end="74628" title="The Guarani" label="O Guarani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472368" start="74642" end="74649" title="Iracema" label="Iracema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876558" start="74666" end="74675" title="Ubirajara (novel)" label="Ubirajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q311145" start="74683" end="74699" title="Machado de Assis" label="Machado de Assis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74828" end="74847" title="Brazilian literature#Modernism" label="Brazilian Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633080" start="74866" end="74881" title="Modern Art Week" label="Modern Art Week"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74954" end="74968" title="Brazilian literature#Post-Modernism" label="Post-Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152840" start="75016" end="75040" title="João Cabral de Melo Neto" label="João Cabral de Melo Neto"/>
<link wikidata="Q379745" start="75042" end="75068" title="Carlos Drummond de Andrade" label="Carlos Drummond de Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q333856" start="75070" end="75088" title="Vinicius de Moraes" label="Vinicius de Moraes"/>
<link wikidata="Q642674" start="75090" end="75103" title="Cora Coralina" label="Cora Coralina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392121" start="75105" end="75121" title="Graciliano Ramos" label="Graciliano Ramos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607615" start="75123" end="75139" title="Cecília Meireles" label="Cecília Meireles"/>
<link wikidata="Q184440" start="75228" end="75239" title="Jorge Amado" label="Jorge Amado"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012" start="75241" end="75260" title="João Guimarães Rosa" label="João Guimarães Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q235955" start="75262" end="75279" title="Clarice Lispector" label="Clarice Lispector"/>
<link wikidata="Q558615" start="75284" end="75299" title="Manuel Bandeira" label="Manuel Bandeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q752134" start="75355" end="75367" title="Camões Prize" label="Camões Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q59436982" start="75406" end="75431" title="Lusophone" label="Portuguese-speaking world"/>
<link wikidata="Q337224" start="75536" end="75564" title="Brazilian Academy of Letters" label="Brazilian Academy of Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q466887" start="75778" end="75790" title="Belle Époque" label="Belle Époque"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="75934" end="75948" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549483" start="75997" end="76003" title="Limite" label="Limite"/>
<link wikidata="Q976815" start="76027" end="76038" title="Ganga Bruta" label="Ganga Bruta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582671" start="76082" end="76097" title="Adhemar Gonzaga" label="Adhemar Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155779" start="76312" end="76330" title="It&amp;#x27;s All True (film)" label="It&amp;#x27;s All True"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="76420" end="76432" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515876" start="76496" end="76516" title="Good Neighbor Policy" label="Good Neighbor Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092442" start="76592" end="76603" title="Cinema Novo" label="Cinema Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55426" start="76655" end="76668" title="Glauber Rocha" label="Glauber Rocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q737762" start="76670" end="76695" title="Nelson Pereira dos Santos" label="Nelson Pereira dos Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q10346528" start="76697" end="76717" title="Paulo Cesar Saraceni" label="Paulo Cesar Saraceni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789327" start="76722" end="76735" title="Arnaldo Jabor" label="Arnaldo Jabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884859" start="76762" end="76792" title="Deus e o Diabo na Terra do Sol" label="Deus e o Diabo na Terra do Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848967" start="76816" end="76831" title="Terra em Transe" label="Terra em Transe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675632" start="77033" end="77044" title="O Quatrilho" label="O Quatrilho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790984" start="77052" end="77065" title="Fábio Barreto" label="Fábio Barreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q137703" start="77080" end="77106" title="O Que É Isso, Companheiro?" label="O Que É Isso, Companheiro?"/>
<link wikidata="Q82275" start="77114" end="77127" title="Bruno Barreto" label="Bruno Barreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054036" start="77145" end="77162" title="Central Station (film)" label="Central do Brasil"/>
<link wikidata="Q458696" start="77170" end="77183" title="Walter Salles" label="Walter Salles"/>
<link wikidata="Q105304" start="77228" end="77272" title="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film" label="Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="77297" end="77309" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q335455" start="77325" end="77344" title="Fernanda Montenegro" label="Fernanda Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q220741" start="77372" end="77383" title="City of God (2002 film)" label="City of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q343293" start="77403" end="77421" title="Fernando Meirelles" label="Fernando Meirelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="77464" end="77479" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="77497" end="77508" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="77565" end="77578" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="77610" end="77623" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721837" start="77670" end="77679" title="São Paulo International Film Festival" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182911" start="77684" end="77726" title="Rio de Janeiro International Film Festival" label="Rio de Janeiro International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414683" start="77736" end="77752" title="Festival de Gramado" label="Gramado Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="77843" end="77850" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q122960" start="77852" end="77858" title="Rococo" label="Rococo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="77860" end="77873" title="Neoclassicism" label="Neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="77875" end="77886" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="77888" end="77895" title="Realism (arts)" label="Realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="77897" end="77906" title="Modernism" label="Modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="77908" end="77921" title="Expressionism" label="Expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="77923" end="77933" title="Surrealism" label="Surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="77935" end="77941" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128115" start="77946" end="77959" title="Abstract art" label="Abstracionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792644" start="77978" end="77987" title="Style (visual arts)" label="art style"/>
<link wikidata="Q189772" start="77995" end="78017" title="Brazilian academic art" label="Brazilian academic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316787" start="78024" end="78047" title="Missão Artística Francesa" label="French Artistic Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q281998" start="78318" end="78338" title="Jean-Baptiste Debret" label="Jean-Baptiste Debret"/>
<link wikidata="Q9570723" start="78366" end="78395" title="Academia Imperial de Belas Artes" label="Imperial Academy of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633080" start="78497" end="78512" title="Modern Art Week" label="Modern Art Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322864" start="78668" end="78684" title="Ricardo do Pilar" label="Ricardo do Pilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742" start="78689" end="78711" title="Manuel da Costa Ataíde" label="Manuel da Costa Ataíde"/>
<link wikidata="Q727060" start="78734" end="78750" title="Victor Meirelles" label="Victor Meirelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q540219" start="78752" end="78765" title="Pedro Américo" label="Pedro Américo"/>
<link wikidata="Q569859" start="78770" end="78784" title="José Ferraz de Almeida Júnior" label="Almeida Júnior"/>
<link wikidata="Q465919" start="78812" end="78826" title="Anita Malfatti" label="Anita Malfatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674197" start="78828" end="78839" title="Ismael Nery" label="Ismael Nery"/>
<link wikidata="Q692098" start="78841" end="78853" title="Lasar Segall" label="Lasar Segall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793637" start="78855" end="78877" title="Emiliano di Cavalcanti" label="Emiliano di Cavalcanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q281090" start="78879" end="78903" title="Vicente do Rego Monteiro" label="Vicente do Rego Monteiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q466627" start="78909" end="78926" title="Tarsila do Amaral" label="Tarsila do Amaral"/>
<link wikidata="Q8193934" start="78967" end="78979" title="Aldo Bonadei" label="Aldo Bonadei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624721" start="78981" end="78994" title="José Pancetti" label="José Pancetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q319532" start="78999" end="79016" title="Cândido Portinari" label="Cândido Portinari"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="79102" end="79108" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q611997" start="79366" end="79388" title="Gonçalves Dias" label="Antônio Gonçalves Dias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797180" start="79393" end="79417" title="Martins Pena" label="Luís Carlos Martins Pena"/>
<link wikidata="Q263855" start="79524" end="79544" title="Antônio Carlos Gomes" label="Antônio Carlos Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735143" start="79600" end="79610" title="Il Guarany" label="Il Guarany"/>
<link wikidata="Q465902" start="79746" end="79763" title="Chiquinha Gonzaga" label="Chiquinha Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q365044" start="79977" end="79988" title="Adolfo Celi" label="Adolfo Celi"/>
<link wikidata="Q656292" start="80262" end="80277" title="Ariano Suassuna" label="Ariano Suassuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q878189" start="80564" end="80572" title="Feijoada" label="Feijoada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089959" start="80623" end="80632" title="Churrasco" label="Churrasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820721" start="80678" end="80685" title="rodízio" label="rodízio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8961074" start="80729" end="80744" title="feijão tropeiro" label="feijão tropeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544629" start="80746" end="80752" title="vatapá" label="vatapá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929676" start="80754" end="80761" title="moqueca" label="moqueca"/>
<link wikidata="Q131607" start="80763" end="80770" title="polenta" label="polenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q392935" start="80798" end="80805" title="acarajé" label="acarajé"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="80855" end="80861" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q744729" start="80863" end="80870" title="cachaça" label="cachaça"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139" start="80895" end="80901" title="Distilled beverage" label="liquor"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="80929" end="80939" title="Sugarcane" label="sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q625152" start="80993" end="81003" title="Caipirinha" label="Caipirinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916401" start="81040" end="81054" title="rice and beans" label="rice and beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="81060" end="81064" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q9266" start="81066" end="81071" title="salad" label="salad"/>
<link wikidata="Q152088" start="81073" end="81085" title="french fries" label="french fries"/>
<link wikidata="Q274151" start="81092" end="81101" title="fried egg" label="fried egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397036" start="81142" end="81148" title="farofa" label="farofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003644" start="81313" end="81319" title="pastel (food)" label="pastel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634653" start="81338" end="81345" title="coxinha" label="coxinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065278" start="81381" end="81394" title="pão de queijo" label="pão de queijo"/>
<link wikidata="Q873761" start="81429" end="81436" title="tapioca" label="tapioca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461918" start="81439" end="81446" title="pamonha" label="pamonha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573204" start="81470" end="81477" title="sfiha" label="esfirra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644022" start="81512" end="81518" title="kibbeh" label="kibbeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q747457" start="81542" end="81550" title="empanada" label="empanada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914862" start="81669" end="81679" title="brigadeiro" label="brigadeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939956" start="81706" end="81718" title="bolo de rolo" label="bolo de rolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459788" start="81735" end="81743" title="goiabada" label="goiabada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981212" start="81746" end="81752" title="cocada" label="cocada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687127" start="81772" end="81780" title="beijinho" label="beijinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q84578333" start="81815" end="81830" title="Romeu e Julieta" label="Romeu e Julieta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002721" start="81880" end="81886" title="paçoca" label="paçoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q10357458" start="81888" end="81896" title="rapadura" label="rapadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120502" start="81901" end="81914" title="pé-de-moleque" label="pé-de-moleque"/>
<link wikidata="Q33943" start="81944" end="81948" title="açaí" label="açaí"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144414" start="81950" end="81957" title="cupuaçu" label="cupuaçu"/>
<link wikidata="Q169" start="81959" end="81964" title="mango" label="mango"/>
<link wikidata="Q34887" start="81966" end="81972" title="papaya" label="papaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="81974" end="81979" title="cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34007" start="81981" end="81987" title="cashew" label="cashew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181909" start="81989" end="81994" title="guava" label="guava"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="81996" end="82002" title="orange (fruit)" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q13195" start="82004" end="82008" title="Lime (fruit)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q156790" start="82010" end="82022" title="passionfruit" label="passionfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="82024" end="82033" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q311460" start="82039" end="82047" title="Spondias" label="hog plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8492" start="82062" end="82067" title="juice" label="juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="82086" end="82095" title="chocolate" label="chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q855373" start="82098" end="82105" title="ice pop" label="ice pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="82111" end="82120" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="82182" end="82196" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q729924" start="82274" end="82287" title="Prince Regent" label="Prince Regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q676301" start="82288" end="82296" title="João VI of Portugal" label="Dom João"/>
<link wikidata="Q970729" start="82462" end="82469" title="O Globo" label="O Globo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628345" start="82486" end="82506" title="O Estado de S. Paulo" label="O Estado de S. Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075408" start="82788" end="82795" title="TV Tupi" label="TV Tupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11987" start="82799" end="82818" title="Assis Chateaubriand" label="Assis Chateaubriand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587" start="82922" end="82927" title="Rede Globo" label="Globo"/>
<link wikidata="Q965371" start="82929" end="82932" title="Sistema Brasileiro de Televisão" label="SBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458581" start="82934" end="82942" title="RecordTV" label="RecordTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713068" start="82944" end="82956" title="Rede Bandeirantes" label="Bandeirantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090363" start="82961" end="82967" title="RedeTV!" label="RedeTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q23745" start="83153" end="83163" title="telenovela" label="telenovela"/>
<link wikidata="Q781182" start="83194" end="83216" title="List of universities in Brazil by state" label="Brazilian universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="83231" end="83249" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="83256" end="83259" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359776" start="83264" end="83287" title="Burroughs Large Systems" label="Burroughs Large Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q62955" start="83357" end="83363" title="import" label="import"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="83500" end="83512" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="83517" end="83525" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672304" start="83624" end="83647" title="TV Brasil Internacional" label="TV Brasil Internacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616075" start="83666" end="83684" title="television station" label="television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q10377184" start="83791" end="83810" title="Globo Internacional" label="Globo Internacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q10377499" start="83812" end="83834" title="RecordTV Internacional" label="RecordTV Internacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q16496499" start="83839" end="83857" title="Band Internacional" label="Band Internacional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="83912" end="83920" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="83926" end="83960" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazilian men&amp;#x27;s national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q125351662" start="84016" end="84035" title="FIFA World Rankings" label="FIFA World Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="84053" end="84062" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="84096" end="84106" title="Volleyball" label="Volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="84108" end="84118" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="84120" end="84131" title="auto racing" label="auto racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11417" start="84136" end="84148" title="martial arts" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q899281" start="84179" end="84221" title="Brazil men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team" label="Brazil men&amp;#x27;s national volleyball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q300168" start="84270" end="84282" title="FIVB Volleyball World League" label="World League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218218" start="84284" end="84309" title="FIVB Volleyball World Grand Champions Cup" label="World Grand Champions Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669035" start="84311" end="84329" title="FIVB Volleyball Men&amp;#x27;s World Championship" label="World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q300153" start="84338" end="84347" title="FIVB Volleyball Men&amp;#x27;s World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="84402" end="84413" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q14085739" start="84525" end="84532" title="Sailing (sport)" label="sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="84534" end="84542" title="Swimming (sport)" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="84544" end="84550" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q159992" start="84552" end="84559" title="surfing" label="surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q842284" start="84561" end="84574" title="skateboarding" label="skateboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q114466" start="84576" end="84579" title="MMA" label="MMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q43450" start="84581" end="84591" title="gymnastics" label="gymnastics"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="84593" end="84599" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="84601" end="84605" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="84607" end="84616" title="Track and field" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="84621" end="84633" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q210778" start="84688" end="84702" title="beach soccer" label="beach football"/>
<link wikidata="Q171401" start="84704" end="84710" title="futsal" label="futsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28961" start="84733" end="84743" title="footvolley" label="footvolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q159452" start="84827" end="84835" title="Capoeira" label="Capoeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q934671" start="84837" end="84846" title="Vale tudo" label="Vale tudo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189336" start="84851" end="84870" title="Brazilian jiu-jitsu" label="Brazilian jiu-jitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q132515" start="84955" end="84974" title="1950 FIFA World Cup" label="1950 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q79859" start="85004" end="85023" title="2014 FIFA World Cup" label="2014 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630358" start="85025" end="85042" title="2019 Copa América" label="2019 Copa América"/>
<link wikidata="Q58039558" start="85047" end="85064" title="2021 Copa América" label="2021 Copa América"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="85071" end="85080" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171387" start="85090" end="85116" title="Autódromo José Carlos Pace" label="Autódromo José Carlos Pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961" start="85135" end="85155" title="Brazilian Grand Prix" label="Grand Prix of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192716" start="85181" end="85202" title="1963 Pan American Games" label="IV Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059469" start="85242" end="85263" title="2007 Pan American Games" label="XV Pan American Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="85332" end="85350" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142161" start="85355" end="85376" title="2016 Summer Paralympics" label="2016 Paralympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="85471" end="85482" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q26001" start="85520" end="85545" title="FIBA Basketball World Cup" label="FIBA Basketball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q375654" start="85550" end="85554" title="1954 FIBA World Championship" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q810332" start="85559" end="85563" title="1963 FIBA World Championship" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q649678" start="85588" end="85619" title="Brazil national basketball team" label="Brazil national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112209" start="85685" end="85702" title="Outline of Brazil" label="Outline of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q954203" start="85997" end="86014" title="C. R. Boxer" label="Boxer, Charles R."/>
<link wikidata="Q2600716" start="86610" end="86628" title="Barsa (encyclopedia)" label="Enciclopédia Barsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8774862" start="86889" end="86902" title="Elio Gaspari" label="Gaspari, Elio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626296" start="87990" end="88008" title="Stuart B. Schwartz" label="Stuart B. Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q10382194" start="88193" end="88211" title="Thomas Skidmore" label="Skidmore, Thomas E"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3385" wikidata="Q4204" url="?curid=3385" title="Black Forest">
<text>The Black Forest ( ) is a large forested mountain range in the state of Baden-Württemberg in southwest Germany, bounded by the Rhine Valley to the west and south and close to the borders with France and Switzerland. It is the source of the Danube and Neckar rivers.

Its highest peak is the Feldberg with an elevation of above sea level. Roughly oblong in shape, with a length of and breadth of up to , it has an area of about .

Historically, the area was known for forestry and the mining of ore deposits, but tourism has now become the primary industry, accounting for around 300,000 jobs. There are several ruined military fortifications dating back to the 17th century.

== History ==

In ancient times, the Black Forest was known as , after the Celtic deity, Abnoba. In Roman times (Late antiquity), it was given the name (&quot;Marcynian Forest&quot;, from the Germanic word &quot;marka&quot;, &quot;border&quot;). The Black Forest probably represented the border area of the Marcomanni (&quot;border people&quot;) who were settled east of the Roman . They, in turn, were part of the Germanic tribe of Suebi, who subsequently gave their name to the historic state of Swabia. With the exception of Roman settlements on the perimeter (e.g. the baths in Badenweiler, and mines near Badenweiler and Sulzburg) and the construction of the Roman road of Kinzigtalstraße, the colonization of the Black Forest was not carried out by the Romans but by the Alemanni. They settled and first colonized the valleys, crossing the old settlement boundary, the so-called &quot;red sandstone border&quot;, for example, from the region of Baar. Soon afterwards, increasingly higher areas and adjacent forests were colonized, so that by the end of the 10th century, the first settlements could be found in the red (bunter) sandstone region. These include, for example, Rötenbach, which was first mentioned in 819.

Some of the uprisings (including the Bundschuh movement) that preceded the 16th century German Peasants&#x27; War, originated in the Black Forest. Further peasant unrest, in the shape of the saltpetre uprisings, took place over the next two centuries in Hotzenwald.

Remnants of military fortifications dating from the 17th and 18th centuries can be found in the Black Forest, especially on the mountain passes. Examples include the multiple baroque fieldworks of Margrave Louis William of Baden-Baden or individual defensive positions such as the Alexanderschanze (Alexander&#x27;s Redoubt), the Röschenschanze and the Schwedenschanze (Swedish Redoubt).

Originally, the Black Forest was a mixed forest of deciduous trees and firs. At the higher elevations spruce also grew. In the middle of the 19th century, the Black Forest was almost completely deforested by intensive forestry and was subsequently replanted, mostly with spruce monocultures.

In 1990, extensive damage to the forest was caused by a series of windstorms. On 26 December 1999, Cyclone Lothar raged across the Black Forest and caused even greater damage, especially to the spruce monocultures. As had happened following the 1990 storms, large quantities of fallen logs were kept in provisional wet-storage areas for years. The effects of the storm are demonstrated by the Lothar Path, a forest educational and adventure trail at the nature centre in Ruhestein on a highland timber forest of about 10 hectares that was destroyed by a hurricane. Several areas of storm damage, both large and small, were left to nature and have developed today into a natural mixed forest again.

== Geography ==

The Black Forest stretches from the High Rhine in the south to the Kraichgau in the north. In the west it is bounded by the Upper Rhine Plain (which, from a natural region perspective, also includes the low chain of foothills); in the east it transitions to the Gäu, Baar and hill country west of the Klettgau. From north to south, the Black Forest extends for over , attaining a width of up to in the south and in the north. The Black Forest is the highest part of the South German Scarplands, and much of it is densely wooded, a fragment of the Hercynian Forest of antiquity.

Administratively, the Black Forest belongs completely to the state of Baden-Württemberg and comprises the cities of Freiburg, Pforzheim and Baden-Baden as well as the following districts (&quot;Kreise&quot;). In the north: Enz, Rastatt and Calw; in the middle: Freudenstadt, Ortenaukreis and Rottweil; in the south: Emmendingen, Schwarzwald-Baar, Breisgau-Hochschwarzwald, Lörrach and Waldshut.

=== Natural regions ===
The natural regions of the Black Forest are separated by various features.

Geomorphologically, the main division is between the gentle eastern slopes with their mostly rounded hills and broad plateaux (so-called Danubian relief, especially prominent in the north and east on the Bunter Sandstone) and the deeply incised, steeply falling terrain in the west that drops into the Upper Rhine Graben; the so-called Valley Black Forest (&quot;&quot;) with its Rhenanian relief. It is here, in the west, where the highest mountains and the greatest local differences in height (of up to 1000 metres) are found. The valleys are often narrow and ravine-like. The summits are rounded, and there are remnants of plateaux and -like landforms.

Geologically the clearest division is also between east and west. Large areas of the eastern Black Forest, the lowest layer of the South German Scarplands composed of Bunter Sandstone, are covered by seemingly endless coniferous forest with their island clearings. The exposed basement in the west, predominantly made up of metamorphic rocks and granites, was, despite its rugged topography, easier to settle and appears much more open and inviting today with its varied meadow valleys.
The most common way of dividing the regions of the Black Forest is, however, from north to south. Until the 1930s, the Black Forest was divided into the Northern and Southern Black Forest, the boundary being the line of the Kinzig valley. Later the Black Forest was divided into the heavily forested Northern Black Forest, the lower, central section, predominantly used for agriculture in the valleys, was the Central Black Forest and the much higher Southern Black Forest with its distinctive highland economy and ice age glacial relief. The term High Black Forest referred to the highest areas of the South and southern Central Black Forest.

The boundaries drawn were, however, quite varied. In 1931, Robert Gradmann called the Central Black Forest the catchment area of the Kinzig and in the west the section up to the lower Elz and Kinzig tributary of the Gutach. A pragmatic division, which is oriented not just on natural and cultural regions, uses the most important transverse valleys. Based on that, the Central Black Forest is bounded by the Kinzig in the north and the line from Dreisam to Gutach in the south, corresponding to the Bonndorf Graben zone and the course of the present day B 31.

In 1959, Rudolf Metz combined the earlier divisions and proposed a modified tripartite division, which combined natural and cultural regional approaches and was widely used. His Central Black Forest is bounded in the north by the watershed between the Acher and Rench and subsequently between the Murg and Kinzig or Forbach and Kinzig, in the south by the Bonndorf Graben zone, which restricts the Black Forest in the east as does the Freudenstadt Graben further north by its transition into the Northern Black Forest.

==== Work of the Institute of Applied Geography ====
The Handbook of the Natural Region Divisions of Germany published by the Federal Office of Regional Geography (&quot;&quot;) since the early 1950s names the Black Forest as one of six tertiary-level major landscape regions within the secondary-level region of the South German Scarplands and, at the same time, one of nine new major landscape unit groups. It is divided into six so-called major units (level 4 landscapes). This division was refined and modified in several successor publications (1:200,000 individual map sheets) up to 1967, each covering individual sections of the map. The mountain range was also divided into three regions. The northern boundary of the Central Black Forest in this classification runs south of the Rench Valley and the Kniebis to near Freudenstadt. Its southern boundary varied with each edition.

In 1998, the Baden-Württemberg State Department for Environmental Protection (today the Baden-Württemberg State Department for the Environment, Survey and Nature Conservation) published a reworked Natural Region Division of Baden-Württemberg. It is restricted to the level of the natural regional major units and has been used since for the state&#x27;s administration of nature conservation:


The Black Forest Foothills (&quot;&quot;, 150) geomorphologically form plateaux on the north and northeast periphery of the mountain range that descend to the Kraichgau in the north and the Heckengäu landscapes in the east. They are incised by valleys, especially those of the Nagold river system, into individual interfluves; a narrow northwestern finger extends to beyond the Enz near Neuenbürg and also borders the middle reaches of the Alb to the west as far as a point immediately above Ettlingen. To the southwest it is adjoined by the Black Forest Grinden and Enz Hills (, 151), along the upper reaches of the Enz and Murg, forming the heart of the Northern Black Forest. The west of the Northern Black Forest is formed by the Northern Black Forest Valleys (, 152) with the middle reaches of the Murg around Gernsbach, the middle course of the Oos to Baden-Baden, the middle reaches of the Bühlot above Bühls and the upper reaches of the Rench around Oppenau. Their exit valleys from the mountain range are all oriented towards the northwest.
The Central Black Forest (153) is mainly restricted to the catchment area of the River Kinzig above Offenburg as well as the Schutter and the low hills north of the Elz.

The Southeastern Black Forest (, 154) consists mainly of the catchment areas of the upper reaches of the Danube headstreams, the Brigach and Breg as well as the left side valleys of the Wutach north of Neustadt – and thus draining from the northeast of the Southern Black Forest. To the south and west it is adjoined by the High Black Forest (, 155) with the highest summits in the whole range around the Feldberg and the Belchen. Its eastern part, the Southern Black Forest Plateau, is oriented towards the Danube, but drained over the Wutach and the Alb into the Rhine. The southern crest of the Black Forest in the west is deeply incised by the Rhine into numerous ridges. Immediately right of the Wiese above Lörrach rises the relatively small Bunter Sandstone-Rotliegendes table of the Weintenau Uplands () in the extreme southwest of the Black Forest; morphologically, geologically and climatically it is separate from the other parts of the Southern Black Forest and, in this classification, is also counted as part of the High Black Forest.

=== Mountains ===
At the Feldberg in the Southern Black Forest is the range&#x27;s highest summit. Also in the same area are the Herzogenhorn (1,415 m) and the Belchen (1,414 m). In general the mountains of the Southern or High Black Forest are higher than those in the Northern Black Forest. The highest Black Forest peak north of the Freiburg–Höllental–Neustadt line is the Kandel (1,241.4 m). Like the highest point of the Northern Black Forest, the Hornisgrinde (1,163 m), or the Southern Black Forest lookout mountains, the Schauinsland (1,284.4 m) and Blauen (1,164.7 m) it lies near the western rim of the range.

=== Rivers and lakes ===
Rivers in the Black Forest include the Danube (which originates in the Black Forest as the confluence of the Brigach and Breg rivers), the Enz, the Kinzig, the Murg, the Nagold, the Neckar, the Rench, and the Wiese. The Black Forest occupies part of the continental divide between the Atlantic Ocean drainage basin (drained by the Rhine) and the Black Sea drainage basin (drained by the Danube).

The longest Black Forest rivers are (length includes stretches outside the Black Forest):
* Enz ()
* Kinzig ()
* Elz ()
* Wutach ()
* Nagold (), hydrological main artery of the Nagold-Enz systems
* Danube (), headstreams:
** Breg ()
** Brigach ()
* Murg ()
* Rench ()
* Schutter ()
* Wiese ()
* Acher ()
* Dreisam (incl. Rotbach )
* Alb (incl. Menzenschwander Alb )
* Glatt ()
* Möhlin ()
* Wolf ()
* Schiltach ()
* Wehra (incl. Rüttebach )
* Oos ()
* Glasbach (), hydrological main artery of the Neckar system

Important lakes of natural, glacial origin in the Black Forest include the Titisee, the Mummelsee and the Feldsee. Especially in the Northern Black Forest are a number of other, smaller tarns. Numerous reservoirs like the – formerly natural but much smaller – Schluchsee with the other lakes of the &quot;Schluchseewerk&quot;, the Schwarzenbach Reservoir, the Kleine Kinzig Reservoir or the Nagold Reservoir are used for electricity generation, flood protection or drinking water supply.

== Geology ==
The Black Forest consists of a cover of sandstone on top of a core of gneiss and granite. Formerly it shared tectonic evolution with the nearby Vosges Mountains. Later during the Middle Eocene a rifting period affected the area and caused formation of the Upper Rhine Plain. During the last glacial period of the Würm glaciation, the Black Forest was covered by glaciers; several tarns (or lakes) such as the Mummelsee are remains of this period.

=== Basement ===
The geological foundation of the Black Forest is formed by the crystalline bedrock of the Variscan basement. This is covered in the east and northeast by Bunter Sandstone slabs, the so-called platforms. On the western edge a descending, step-fault-like, foothill zone borders the Upper Rhine Graben consisting of rocks of the Triassic and Jurassic periods.

The dominant rocks of the basement are gneiss (ortho- and paragneisses, in the south also migmatites and diatexites, for example on the Schauinsland and Kandel). These gneisses were penetrated by a number of granitic bodies during the Carboniferous period. Among the bigger ones are the Triberg Granite and the Forbach Granite, the youngest is the Bärhalde Granite. In the south lies the zone of Badenweiler-Lenzkirch, in which Palaeozoic rocks have been preserved (volcanite and sedimentary rocks), which are interpreted as the intercalated remains of a microcontinental collision. Still further in the southeast (around Todtmoos) is a range of exotic inclusions: gabbro from Ehrsberg, serpentinites and pyroxenites near Todtmoos, norite near Horbach), which are possibly the remnants of an accretionary wedge from a continental collision. Also noteworthy are the basins in the Rotliegend, for example the Schramberg or the Baden-Baden Basin with thick quartz-porphyry and tuff plates (exposed, for example, on the rock massif of Battert near Baden-Baden). Thick rock, covered by bunter, also occurs in the north of the Dinkelberg block (several hundred metres thick in the Basel geothermal borehole). Even further to the southeast, under the Jura, lies the North Swiss Permocarboniferous Basin.

=== Uplift of the mountains ===
Since the downfaulting of the Upper Rhine Graben during the Eocene epoch, the two shoulders on either side have been uplifted: the Black Forest to the east and the Vosges to the west. In the centre lies the Kaiserstuhl volcano, which dates to the Miocene. In the times that followed, the Mesozoic platform on the uplands was largely eroded, apart from remains of Bunter Sandstone and Rotliegend Group, but it has survived within the graben itself. During the Pliocene a pronounced but uneven bulge especially affected the southern Black Forest, including the Feldberg. As a result, the upper surface of the basement in the northern part of the forest around the Hornisgrinde is considerably lower. In the central Black Forest, the tectonic syncline of the Kinzig and Murg emerged.

Geomorphologist Walther Penck regarded the Black Forest as an uplifted geologic dome and modeled his theory of piedmonttreppen (piedmont benchlands) on it.

=== Platform ===
Above the crystalline basement of the Northern Black Forest and the adjacent parts of the Central Black Forest, the bunter sandstone platforms rise in prominent steps. The most resistant surface strata on the stepped terrain of the uplands and the heights around the upper reaches of the Enz, which have been heavily eroded by the tributaries of the Murg, is the silicified main conglomerate (Middle Bunter). To the east and north are the nappes of the Upper Bunter (platten sandstones and red clays). South of the Kinzig the Bunter Sandstone zone narrows to a fringe in the east of the mountain range.

=== Ice age and topography ===
It is considered proven that the Black Forest was heavily glaciated during the peak periods of at least the Riss and Würm glaciations (up to about 10,000 years ago). This glacial geomorphology characterizes almost all of the High Black Forest as well as the main ridge of the Northern Black Forest. Apart from that, it is only discernible from a large number of cirques mainly facing northeast. Especially in this direction snow accumulated on the shaded and leeward slopes of the summit plateau to form short cirque glaciers that made the sides of these funnel-shaped depressions. There are still tarns in some of these old cirques, partly a result of the elevation of the low-side lip of the cirque, such as the Mummelsee, Wildsee, Schurmsee, Glaswaldsee, Buhlbachsee, Nonnenmattweiher, and Feldsee. The Titisee formed as glacial lake behind a glacial moraine.

==Culture==
The Black Forest is mainly rural, with many scattered villages and a few large towns. Tradition and custom are celebrated in many places in the form of annual festivities. The main dialect spoken in the Black Forest area is Alemannic. The forest is best known for its typical farmhouses with their sweeping half-hipped roofs, its Black Forest gâteaus, Black Forest ham, Black Forest gnomes, Kirschwasser and the cuckoo clock.

=== Traditional costume ===
Traditional costume or Tracht is still sometimes worn today, usually at festive occasions. The appearance of such costume varies from region to region, sometimes markedly. One of the best-known Black Forest costumes is that of the villages of Kirnbach, Reichenbach and Gutach im Kinzigtal with the characteristic &quot;Bollenhut&quot; headdress. Unmarried women wear the hats with red bobbles or &quot;Bollen&quot;; married women wear black. Engaged women sometimes wear a bridal crown (&quot;Schäppel&quot;) before and on the day of their wedding, whose largest examples from the town of St. Georgen weigh up to 5 kilograms.

=== Art ===
Its rural beauty as well as the sense of tradition of its inhabitants attracted many artists in the 19th and early 20th centuries, whose works made the Black Forest famous the world over. Notable were Hans Thoma from Bernau and his fellow student, Rudolf Epp, who was sponsored by the Grand Duke of Baden, Frederick I. Both artists painted motifs from the Black Forest throughout their lives. Artist J. Metzler from Düsseldorf travelled through the Black Forest to paint his landscapes. The works of the Gutach artist colony around Wilhelm Hasemann were widely admired, their landscape and genre motifs capturing the character of the Black Forest. Like local author Heinrich Hansjakob, they were part of a Baden folk costume movement.

=== Crafts ===
In the field of handicrafts, wood carving produces folk art like the Longinus crosses along with sculptors like Matthias Faller. Wood carving is a traditional cottage industry in the region, and carved ornaments now are produced in substantial numbers as souvenirs for tourists. Cuckoo clocks are a popular example.

Glassblowing is another notable craft of the Black Forest region. At the beginning of the 15th century, the art of glassmaking took hold in the Bavarian-Bohemian border mountains, especially since the necessary raw materials such as quartz and wood were abundant here. With the permission of the manor, glassblowers operated simple glass production facilities as &quot;wandering huts&quot; (&quot;Wanderhütten&quot;), the locations of which were relocated when the local resources were available. They needed huge amounts of firewood and wood for potash. In the second half of the 18th century, the huts had to close due to a shortage of wood and sales difficulties. Only after 1800, when the demand for luxury glass increased enormously, when a few decades of regulated forestry had ensured the regrowth of the raw material wood and when the forest-destroying potash extraction had become unnecessary due to the new glass flux soda, some glass huts (&quot;Glashütten&quot;) revived. Some glassblowing factories still testify to this today, for example in Höllental, near Todtnau and in Wolfach.

=== Cuisine ===
Black Forest ham originated from this region, as did the Black Forest gâteau, which is also known as &quot;Black Forest Cherry Cake&quot; or &quot;Black Forest Cake&quot; and is made with chocolate cake, cream, sour cherries and Kirsch. The Black Forest variety of &quot;Flammekueche&quot; is a Baden specialty made with ham, cheese and cream. &quot;Pfannkuchen&quot;, a crêpe or crêpe-like (&quot;Eierkuchen&quot; or &quot;Palatschinken&quot;) pastry, is also common.

The Black Forest is known for its long tradition in gourmet cuisine. No fewer than 17 Michelin starred restaurants are located in the region, among them two restaurants with three stars (Restaurants Bareiss and Schwarzwaldstube in Baiersbronn) as well as the only restaurant in Germany that has been awarded a Michelin star every year since 1966. At &quot;Schwarzwald Hotel Adler&quot; in Häusern, three generations of chefs from the same family have defended the award from the first year the Michelin Guide selected restaurants in Germany until today.

=== &quot;Fasnet&quot; ===
The German holiday of Fastnacht, or &quot;Fasnet&quot;, as it is known in the Black Forest region, occurs in the time leading up to Lent. On &quot;Fasnetmendig&quot;, or the Monday before Ash Wednesday, crowds of people line the streets, wearing wooden, mostly hand-carved masks. One prominent style of mask is called the Black Forest Style, originating from the Black Forest Region.

=== Cego ===

The Black Forest is home to an unusual tarot card game called Cego, that is part of the region&#x27;s cultural heritage. After the defeat of Further Austria in 1805, much of its territory was allocated to the Grand Duchy of Baden. During the ensuing Napoleonic Wars, soldiers from Baden deployed with Napoleon&#x27;s troops to Spain where, among other things, they learned a new card game, Ombre. They took this back to Baden and adapted it to be played with Tarot cards which were then in common use in southern Germany.

Cego soon developed into the national game of Baden and Hohenzollern, and these are the only regions of Germany where tarot cards are still used for playing games. The game has grown organically, and there are many regional variations, but in recent years the establishment of a Cego Black Forest Championship has led to official tournament rules being defined. In addition, regular courses and local tournaments are held and it is a permanent feature of Alemannic Week, held annually in the Black Forest at the end of September.

== Nature ==
=== Conservation areas ===
There are two nature parks and one national park named after the Black Forest that cover the region: the Southern Black Forest Nature Park, the Central/North Black Forest and the Black Forest National Park. The difference between a nature park and a national park is that a nature park&#x27;s aim is to strive for environmentally sustainable land use, to preserve the countryside as a cultural landscape, to market local produce more effectively, to make the area more suitable for sustainable tourism and to practice environmental education. A national park&#x27;s aims are to protect the country&#x27;s natural heritage, to practice environmental education, to serve purposes of scientific environmental observation and to prevent the area from being commercially exploited.

The Southern Black Forest Nature Park (&quot;Naturpark Südschwarzwald&quot;) was founded in 1999. It comprises 394,000 ha and is therefore Germany&#x27;s largest nature park (as of 2020). It encloses the southern part of the Central Black Forest, the Southern Black Forest and adjacent areas.

The Central/North Black Forest Nature Park (&quot;Naturpark Schwarzwald Mitte/Nord&quot;) was founded in 2000. It covers 375,000 ha and is thus the second-largest in Germany (as of 2020). It begins in the southern part of the Central Black Forest, bordering on the Southern Black Forest Nature Park and covers the rest of the Black Forest to the north.

The Black Forest National Park, established in 2014, is the first national park in Baden-Württemberg. It lies completely within the Central/North Black Forest Nature Park between the cities of Freudenstadt and Baden-Baden and covers an area of 10,062 ha. Its motto is &quot;Natur Natur sein lassen&quot; (let nature be nature).

===Fauna===
In addition to the characteristic range of fauna found in Central European forests, the following less common animals may be observed in the Black Forest:

* Black Forest cattle which belong to the rare breed of Hinterwälder cattle,
* the giant earthworm &quot;Lumbricus badensis&quot;, which is found only in the Black Forest region,
* the Black Forest Horse, a draft horse once indispensable for heavy field work and nowadays an endangered breed, and
* the endangered Western capercaillie.

=== Climate ===
The mountain range has lower temperatures and higher rainfall than its surrounding countryside. The highlands of the Black Forest are characterized by regular rainfall throughout the year. However, temperatures do not fall evenly with increasing elevation, nor does the rainfall increase uniformly. Rather, the precipitation rises quickly even in the lower regions and is disproportionately heavy on the rainier western side of the mountains.
The wettest areas are the highlands around the Hornisgrinde in the north and around the Belchen and Feldberg in the south, where annual rainfall reaches 1,800–2,100 mm. Moisture-laden Atlantic westerlies dump about as much rain in the Northern Black Forest, despite its lower elevation, than in the higher area of the Southern Black Forest. There, the Vosges act as a rain shield in the face of the prevailing winds. On the exposed east side of the Central Black Forest, it is much drier; the annual rainfall there is about 750 L/m2.

The higher elevations of the Black Forest are characterized by relatively small annual fluctuations and steamed extreme values. This is the result of the frequent light winds and greater cloud cover in summer. During the winter months, frequent high pressure means that the summits are often bathed in sunshine, while the valleys disappear under a thick blanket of fog as a result of pockets of cold air (temperature inversion).

== Tourism and transport ==
The main industry of the Black Forest is tourism. Black Forest Tourism (&quot;Schwarzwald Tourismus&quot;) assesses that there are around 140,000 direct full-time jobs in the tourist sector and around 34.8 million tourist overnight stays in 2009. In spring, summer and autumn an extensive network of hiking trails and mountain bike routes enable different groups of people to use the natural region. In winter, it is the various types of winter sport that come to the fore. There are facilities for both downhill and Nordic skiing in many places.

=== Tourist attractions ===
The most heavily frequented tourist destinations and resorts in the Black Forest are the Titisee and the Schluchsee. Both lakes offer opportunities for water sports like diving and windsurfing. The Mummelsee is a recreational lake and a starting point for a number of hiking trails including the Kunstpfad am Mummelsee (&quot;sculpture trail at the Mummelsee&quot;). The Murg valley, the Kinzig valley, the Triberg Waterfalls and the Open Air Museum at Vogtsbauernhof are also popular. Lookout mountains include the Feldberg, the Belchen, the Kandel and the Schauinsland in the Southern Black Forest; and the Hornisgrinde, the Schliffkopf, the Hohloh, the Merkur and the Teufelsmühle in the Northern Black Forest. The height differences in the mountains are used in many places for hang gliding and paragliding.

One often visited town is Baden-Baden with its thermal baths and festival hall. Other thermal baths are found in the spa resorts of Badenweiler, Bad Herrenalb, Bad Wildbad, Bad Krozingen, Bad Liebenzell and Bad Bellingen. From the beginning of the 19th century, the desire for spa and bathing resorts arose in all of Central Europe because of the increasing economic potential, increasing mobility and the use of advertising. The Neo-renaissance style Friedrichsbad and the Palais Thermal are examples for spas built in this era.

Other tourist destinations are the old imperial town of Gengenbach, the former county towns of Wolfach, Schiltach and Haslach im Kinzigtal and the flower and wine village of Sasbachwalden at the foot of the Hornisgrinde. Picturesque old towns may be visited in Altensteig, Dornstetten, Freiburg im Breisgau, Gernsbach, Villingen and Zell am Harmersbach. Baiersbronn is a centre of gastronomic excellence, Freudenstadt is built around the largest market place in Germany. Gersbach&#x27;s floral displays have won awards as the German Golden Village of 2004 and the European Golden Village of 2007.

Noted for their fine interiors are the former monastery of St. Blasien as well as the abbeys of Sankt Trudpert, St. Peter and St. Märgen. Alpirsbach Abbey and the ruined Hirsau Abbey were built of red sandstone in the Hirsau style. Another idyllic rural edifice is Wittichen Abbey near Schenkenzell.
There are well known winter sports areas around the Feldberg, near Todtnau with its FIS downhill ski run of &quot;Fahler Loch&quot; and in Hinterzarten, a centre and talent forge for German ski jumpers. In the Northern Black Forest, the winter-sports areas are concentrated along the Black Forest High Road and on the ridge between the Murg and Enz rivers around Kaltenbronn.

=== Hiking trails ===
The Black Forest has a great number of very varied trails; some of pan-regional significance. The European long-distance path E1 crosses the Black Forest following the routes of some of the local long-distance paths. Their framework is a network of long-distance paths with main routes and side branches, many of which were laid out in the early 20th century by the Black Forest Club (&quot;Schwarzwaldverein&quot;). The best known of these is the challenging West Way (&quot;Westweg&quot;) with its many steep inclines. After 1950, circular walks were constructed to meet the changing demand, initially from the relatively dense railway network and, later, mainly from locally established hiking car parks. Currently, special, more experience-oriented themed paths are being laid out, such as the Dornstetten Barefoot Park (&quot;Barfußpark Dornstetten&quot;), the Park of All Senses (&quot;Park mit allen Sinnen&quot;) in Gutach (Black Forest Railway), as well as those designed to bring the walker more directly in contact with nature (e.g. the &quot;Schluchtensteig&quot;). Roads and wide forest tracks are thus less often used than hitherto.

There are numerous shorter paths suitable for day walks, as well as mountain biking and cross-country skiing trails. The total network of tracks amounts to around , and is maintained and overseen by volunteers of the Black Forest Club (figures from Bremke, 1999, p. 9), which is the second largest German hiking association. As of 2021, the club counts 65,000 members.

=== Museums in the Black Forest ===
==== Culture and crafts ====
The Black Forest Open Air Museum at the Vogtsbauernhof farm in Gutach has original Black Forest houses offering insights into farming life of the 16th and 17th centuries. The buildings were dismantled at their original sites, the individual pieces numbered and then re-erected to exactly the same plan in the museum. The open-air museum shows the life of 16th and 17th century farmers in the region featuring the &quot;Vogtsbauernhof&quot; which dates back to 1612.

The German Clock Museum in Furtwangen gives a comprehensive cross-section of the history of the watchmaking and clockmaking industries.

From this early precision engineering a formerly important phonographic industry developed in the 20th century; the history of leisure electronics is presented in the German Phono Museum in St. Georgen.

The Schüttesäge Museum in Schiltach has information and living history demonstrations covering the themes of lumbering and timber rafting in the Kinzig valley as well as tanning.

The Black Forest Costume Museum in Haslach im Kinzigtal offers an overview of the traditional costume of the whole of the Black Forest and its peripheral regions. Also located in Haslach: the Hansjakob Museum and the Hansjakob Archive with numerous works of the writer, priest, politician, historian and chronicler, Heinrich Hansjakob.

==== Nature and science ====
The MiMa Mineralogy and Mathematics Museum in Oberwolfach houses minerals and mining exhibits from the whole of the Black Forest and links them to mathematical explanations.

=== Infrastructure ===

==== Road transport ====
Several tourist routes run through the Black Forest. Well known holiday routes are the Black Forest High Road (B 500) and the German Clock Road.

Thanks to its winding country roads, the Black Forest is a popular destination for motorcyclists. This arm of tourism is controversial due to the high number of accidents and the wide-ranging noise pollution and has been restricted through the introduction of speed limits and by placing certain roads out of bounds. For example, since 1984, motorcyclists have been banned from using the mountain-racing route on the Schauinsland during summer weekends.

==== Railway transport ====
The whole of the Black Forest was once linked by railway. In the eastern part of the Northern Black Forest by the Enz Valley Railway from Pforzheim to Bad Wildbad, by the Nagold Valley Railway from Pforzheim via Calw and Nagold to Horb am Neckar, by the Württemberg Black Forest Railway from Stuttgart to Calw and the Gäu Railway from Stuttgart to Freudenstadt or its present-day section from Eutingen to Freudenstadt.

Many railway lines run from the Rhine Plain up the valleys into the Black Forest: the Alb Valley Railway runs from Karlsruhe to Bad Herrenalb, the Murg Valley Railway from Rastatt to Freudenstadt, the Acher Valley Railway from Achern to Ottenhöfen im Schwarzwald and the Rench Valley Railway from Appenweier to Bad Griesbach. The Baden Black Forest Railway has linked Offenburg with Konstanz on Lake Constance since 1873, running via Hausach, Triberg, St. Georgen, Villingen and Donaueschingen. In Hausach the Kinzig Valley Railway branches off to Freudenstadt, in Denzlingen the Elz Valley Railway peels off towards Elzach, the Höllental Railway runs from Freiburg im Breisgau through the Höllental valley to Donaueschingen, the Münstertal Railway from Bad Krozingen to Münstertal, the Kander Valley Railway from Haltingen near Basel through the Kander valley to Kandern and the Wiesen Valley Railway from Basel to Zell im Wiesental.

The Three Lakes Railway branches off at the Titisee from the Höllental Railway and runs to the Windgfällweiher and the Schluchsee. The Wutach Valley Railway runs along the border between Baden-Württemberg and Switzerland, linking Waldshut-Tiengen with Immendingen on the Black Forest Railway.

Most of these routes are still busy today, whilst some are popular heritage lines.

=== Administration ===
Since January 2006, the Black Forest Tourist organisation, &quot;Schwarzwald Tourismus&quot;, whose head office is in Freiburg, has been responsible for the administration of tourism in the 320 municipalities of the region. Hitherto there had been four separate tourist associations.

=== Points of interest ===
There are many historic towns in the Black Forest. Popular tourist destinations include Baden-Baden, Freiburg, Calw (the birth town of Hermann Hesse), Gengenbach, Staufen, Schiltach, Haslach and Altensteig. Other popular destinations include such mountains as the Feldberg, the Belchen, the Kandel, and the Schauinsland; the Titisee and Schluchsee lakes; the All Saints Waterfalls; the Triberg Waterfalls, not the highest, but the most famous waterfalls in Germany; and the gorge of the River Wutach.

For drivers, the main route through the region is the fast A 5 (E35) motorway, but a variety of signposted scenic routes such as the Schwarzwaldhochstraße (, Baden-Baden to Freudenstadt), Schwarzwald Tälerstraße (, the Murg and Kinzig valleys) or Badische Weinstraße (Baden Wine Street, , a wine route from Baden-Baden to Weil am Rhein) offers calmer driving along high roads. The last is a picturesque trip starting in the south of the Black Forest going north and includes numerous old wineries and tiny villages. Another, more specialized route is the German Clock Route, a circular route that traces the horological history of the region.

Due to the rich mining history dating from medieval times (the Black Forest was one of the most important mining regions of Europe ) there are many mines re-opened to the public. Such mines may be visited in the Kinzig valley, the Suggental, the Muenster valley, and around Todtmoos.

The Black Forest was visited on several occasions by Count Otto von Bismarck during his years as Prussian and later German chancellor (1862–1890). Allegedly, he was especially interested in the Triberg Waterfalls. There is now a monument in Triberg dedicated to Bismarck, who apparently enjoyed the tranquility of the region as an escape from his day-to-day political duties in Berlin.

The Black Forest featured in the philosophical development of Martin Heidegger. Heidegger wrote and edited some of his philosophical works in a small hut in the Black Forest, and would receive visitors there for walks, including his former pupil Hannah Arendt. This hut features explicitly in his essay &quot;Building, Dwelling, Thinking&quot;. His walks in the Black Forest are supposed to have inspired the title of his collection of essays &quot;Holzwege&quot;, translated as &quot;Off The Beaten Track&quot;.

== Economy and craftsmanship ==
=== Mining ===
Mining developed in the Black Forest due to its ore deposits, which were often lode-shaped. The formation of these deposits (Schauinsland Pit: zinc, lead, about 700–1000 g silver/ton of lead; baryte, fluorite, less lead and zinc in the Kinzig valley; BiCoNi ores near Wittichen, uranium discovered in the Krunkelbach valley near Menzenschwand but never officially mined) often used to be linked to the intrusion of Carboniferous granite in the para- and orthogneisses. More recent research has revealed that most of these lode fillings are much younger (Triassic to Tertiary). Economic deposits of other minerals included: fluorite in the Northern Black Forest near Pforzheim, baryte in the central region near Freudenstadt, fluorite along with lead and silver near Wildschapbach, baryte and fluorite in the Rankach valley and near Ohlsbach, in the Southern Black Forest near Todtnau, Wieden and Urberg.

Small liquid magmatic deposits of nickel-magnetite gravel in norite were mined or prospected in the Hotzenwald forest near Horbach and Todtmoos. Strata-bound deposits include iron ores in the Dogger layer of the foothill zone and uranium near Müllenbach/Baden-Baden. Stone coal is only found near Berghaupten and Diersburg, but was always only of local importance.

Chronology: Stone Age mining of haematite (as red pigment) near Sulzburg. By the 5th and 6th centuries B.C. iron ore was being mined by the Celts in the Northern Black Forest (for example in Neuenbürg). Especially in the Middle Black Forest, but also in the south (for example in the Münster valley) ore mining was already probably taking place in Roman times (mining of silver and lead ore; evidence of this at Sulzburg and possibly Badenweiler). Until the High Middle Ages the High Black Forest was practically unsettled. In the course of inland colonisation in the Late High Middle Ages even the highlands were cultivated by settlers from the abbeys (St. Peter&#x27;s, St. Märgen&#x27;s). In the Late High Middle Ages (from about 1100) mining experienced another boom, especially around Todtnau, in the Münster and Suggen valleys and, later, on the Schauinsland too. It is believed that around 800–1,000 miners lived and worked in the Münster valley until the end of the Middle Ages. After the Plague, which afflicted the valley in 1516, the German Peasants&#x27; War (1524–26) and the Thirty Years&#x27; War, mining in the region declined until just a few pits remained.

An important mining area was the Kinzig valley and its side valleys. The small mining settlement of Wittichen near Schenkenzell in the upper Kinzig valley had many pits from which miners dug baryte, cobalt and silver of many kinds. A circular, geological footpath runs today past the old pits and tips.

Another boom began in the early 18th century after the loss of the Alsace to France. It lasted until the 19th century. Many pits from this period may be visited today as show mines; for example the Teufelsgrund Pit (Münstertal), the Finstergrund Pit near Wieden, the Hoffnungsstollen (&quot;Hope Gallery&quot;) at Todtmoos, the mine in the Schauinsland, the formerly especially silver-rich Wenzel Pit in Oberwolfach and Gr. Segen Gottes (&quot;God&#x27;s Great Blessing&quot;) in Haslach-Schnellingen.

Non-ferrous metal mining in the Black Forest continued until the middle of the 20th century near Wildschapbach and on the Schauinsland (to 1954); fluorite and baryte are still mined today at the Clara Pit in the Rankach valley in Oberwolfach. Iron ores of the Dogger formation was worked until the 1970s near Ringsheim and was smelted in Kehl.

Compared with the Harz and Ore Mountains the quantities of silver extracted in the Black Forest were rather modest and reached only about ten percent of that produced in the other silver-mining regions.

There are many show mines in the Black Forest. These include: the Frischglück Pit near Neuenbürg, the Hella Glück Pit near Neubulach, the Silbergründle Pit near Seebach, the Himmlich Heer Pit near Hallwangen, the Heilige Drei Könige Pit near Freudenstadt, the Segen Gottes Pit near Haslach, the Wenzel Pit near Oberwolfach, the Caroline Pit near Sexau, the Suggental Silver Mine near Waldkirch, the Schauinsland Pit near Freiburg, the Teufelsgrund Pit near Münstertal, the Finstergrund Pit near Wieden and the Hoffnungsstollen Pit near Todtmoos.

=== Forestry ===
For several centuries logs from the Black Forest were rafted down the Enz, Kinzig, Murg, Nagold and Rhine rivers for use in the shipping industry, as construction timber and for other purposes. This branch of industry boomed in the 18th century and led to large-scale clearances. As most of the long, straight pine logs were transported downriver for shipbuilding in the Netherlands, they were referred to as &quot;Dutchmen&quot;. The logs were used in the Netherlands, above all, as piles for house construction in the sandy and wet ground. Even today in Amsterdam large numbers of historic building are built on these posts and the reforestation of the Black Forest with spruce monocultures testifies to the destruction of the original mixed forest. With the expansion of the railway and road network as alternative transportation, rafting largely came to an end in the late 19th century.

Today, loggers harvest fir trees—especially very tall and branchless ones—mainly to ship to Japan. The global advertising impact of Expo 2000 fuelled a resurgence of timber exports. The importance of the timber resources of the Black Forest has also increased sharply recently due to the increasing demand for wood pellets for heating.

=== Glass-making, charcoal-burning and potash-mining ===
The timber resources of the Black Forest provided the basis for other sectors of the economy that have now largely disappeared. Charcoal burners (&quot;Köhler&quot;) built their wood piles (&quot;Meiler&quot;) in the woods and produced charcoal, which, like the products of the potash boilers—further processed &quot;inter alia&quot; for the glassmaking industry. The Black Forest supplied raw materials and energy for the manufacture of forest glass. This is evidenced today by a number of glassblowing houses e.g. in the Hoellental in Todtnau and Wolfach and the Forest Glass Centre in Gersbach (Schopfheim), which is open to visitors.

=== Precision-engineering, clock and jewellery manufacture ===

In the relatively inaccessible Black Forest valleys, industrialization did not arrive until late in the day. In winter, many farmers made wooden cuckoo clocks to supplement their income. This developed in the 19th century into the precision engineering and watch industry, which boomed with the arrival of the railway in many of the Black Forest valleys. The initial disadvantage of their remote location, which led to the development of precision-engineered wooden handicrafts, became a competitive advantage because of their access to raw materials: timber from the forest and metal from the mines. As part of a structural support programme the Baden State Government founded the first clockmaking school in 1850 in Furtwangen to ensure that small artisans were given good training and thus better sales opportunities. Due to the increasing demand for mechanical devices, large companies such as Junghans and Kienzle became established. In the 20th century, the production of consumer electronics was developed by companies such as SABA, Dual and Becker. In the 1970s, the industry declined due to Far Eastern competition. Nevertheless, the Black Forest remains a centre for the metalworking industry and is home to many high-tech companies.

Since the start of industrialisation there have been numerous firms in Pforzheim that manufacture jewellery and work with precious metals and stones. There is also a goldsmith&#x27;s school in Pforzheim.

=== Hydropower ===

Due to the large amounts of precipitation and elevation changes the Black Forest has significant hydropower potential. This was used until the 19th century especially for operating numerous mills, including sawmills and hammer mills and was one of the local factors in the industrialization of some Black Forest valleys.

Since the 20th century, the Black Forest has seen the large-scale generation of electrical power using run-of-the-river power plants and pumped storage power stations. From 1914 to 1926, the Rudolf Fettweis Company was established in the Murg valley in the Northern Black Forest with the construction of the Schwarzenbach Dam. In 1932, the Schluchsee reservoir, with its new dam, became the upper basin of a pumped-storage power plant. In 2013 the association of the Southern Black Forest&#x27;s &quot;Schluchseewerk&quot; owned five power plants with 14 storage tanks. At the Hornberg Basin topographical conditions allow an average head of water of 625 m to drive the turbines before it flows into the Wehra Reservoir.

In the 21st century, in the wake of the Renewable Energy Sources Act, numerous smaller run-of-the-river power stations were re-opened or newly constructed.

== Notable people and residents ==
* Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen (1621/22–1676), German novelist; in 1665–67, he kept an inn in Gaisbach in the Black Forest while writing his famous picaresque novel &quot;Simplicius Simplicissimus&quot; (1669)
* Hans Thoma, born in Bernau (1839–1924), German painter
* Hermann Hesse, born in Calw (1877–1962), German poet and novelist
* Jürgen Klopp, football manager, who grew up in village of Glatten
* Martin Heidegger, German philosopher, who spent much of his time in Todtnauberg, where he wrote most of &quot;Being and Time&quot;.

== Gallery ==
== See also ==

* Hercynian Forest (historic)
* Schwarzwaldverein (Black Forest Association)
* German Clock Museum
* Black Forest gateau
* Black Forest ham

==Notes==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
=== Geography ===
* .
* .

=== Economy, geology and mining ===
* Eberhard Gothein: &quot;Wirtschaftsgeschichte des Schwarzwaldes und der angrenzenden Landschaften. Erster Band: Städte- und Gewerbegeschichte&quot;, Verlag Karl J. Trübner, Strassburg 1892 (digitalised).
* .

=== Art history ===
* Richard Schmidt: &quot;Schwarzwald&quot; (Deutsche Lande – Deutsche Kunst). Munich/Berlin, 1965.

=== Nature ===
* Adolf Hanle: &quot;Nordschwarzwald&quot; (Meyers Naturführer). Mannheim/Vienna/Zurich, 1989.
* Adolf Hanle: &quot;Südschwarzwald&quot; (Meyers Naturführer). Mannheim/Vienna/Zurich, 1989.
* Ulrike Klugmann (Hrsg.): &quot;Südschwarzwald, Feldberg und Wutachschlucht&quot; (Naturmagazin Draußen). Hamburg, 1983.
* Hans-Peter Schaub: &quot;Der Schwarzwald. Naturvielfalt in einer alten Kulturlandschaft&quot;. Mannheim, 2001.

=== Fiction ===
* Jürgen Lodemann (ed.): &quot;Schwarzwaldgeschichten&quot;. Klöpfer &amp; Mayer, Tübingen, 2007, .
* Herbert Schnierle-Lutz (ed.): &quot;Schwarzwald-Lesebuch. Geschichten aus 6 Jahrhunderten mit zahlreichen Bildern&quot;, 224 pages, Hohenheim Verlag, Stuttgart, 2011, .

=== General ===
* Barnes, K. J. (2007). &quot;A Rough Passage: Memories of an Empire&quot;
* Bremke, N. (1999). &quot;Schwarzwald quer&quot;. Karlsruhe: Braun. .
* Lamparski, F. (1985). Der Einfluß der Regenwurmart Lumbricus badensis auf Waldböden im Südschwarzwald. &quot;Schriftenreihe des Institut für Bodenkunde und Waldernährungslehre der Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg i. Br., 15&quot;. . English summary

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4204" start="4" end="16" title="Black Forest" label="Black Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="32" end="38" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="41" end="55" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="63" end="68" title="States of Germany" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="72" end="89" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="103" end="110" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q61276156" start="127" end="139" title="Rhine Valley" label="Rhine Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="192" end="198" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="203" end="214" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="240" end="246" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673" start="251" end="257" title="Neckar" label="Neckar"/>
<link wikidata="Q316401" start="291" end="299" title="Feldberg (Black Forest)" label="Feldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633778" start="308" end="317" title="elevation" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="327" end="336" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="494" end="497" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q808548" start="603" end="641" title="Baroque fortifications in the Black Forest" label="several ruined military fortifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q322585" start="765" end="771" title="Abnoba" label="Abnoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="789" end="803" title="Late antiquity" label="Late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q209851" start="983" end="993" title="Marcomanni" label="Marcomanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="1109" end="1114" title="Suebi" label="Suebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812551" start="1174" end="1180" title="Swabia" label="Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25430" start="1286" end="1297" title="Badenweiler" label="Badenweiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q505849" start="1302" end="1310" title="Sulzburg" label="Sulzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q700095" start="1354" end="1369" title="Kinzig (Rhine)" label="Kinzigtalstraße"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="1453" end="1461" title="Alemanni" label="Alemanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q126132" start="1627" end="1631" title="Baar (region)" label="Baar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725265" start="1856" end="1865" title="Rötenbach (Friedenweiler)" label="Rötenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q786772" start="1939" end="1957" title="Bundschuh movement" label="Bundschuh movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q154031" start="1990" end="2015" title="German Peasants&amp;#x27; War" label="German Peasants&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11183742" start="2093" end="2102" title="Niter" label="saltpetre"/>
<link wikidata="Q897243" start="2156" end="2166" title="Hotzenwald" label="Hotzenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q808548" start="2181" end="2204" title="Baroque fortifications in the Black Forest" label="military fortifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q157802" start="2366" end="2374" title="Margrave" label="Margrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q58755" start="2375" end="2403" title="Louis William, Margrave of Baden-Baden" label="Louis William of Baden-Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476543" start="2450" end="2466" title="Alexanderschanze" label="Alexanderschanze"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048438" start="2499" end="2513" title="Röschenschanze" label="Röschenschanze"/>
<link wikidata="Q17326120" start="2522" end="2537" title="Schwedenschanze (Zuflucht)" label="Schwedenschanze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254694" start="2539" end="2554" title="Schwedenschanze" label="Swedish Redoubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517542" start="2570" end="2605" title="History of the forest in Central Europe" label="the Black Forest was a mixed forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="2660" end="2666" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q220212" start="2836" end="2847" title="monoculture" label="monoculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538444" start="2907" end="2927" title="Storm Vivian" label="series of windstorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q520286" start="2950" end="2964" title="Cyclone Lothar" label="Cyclone Lothar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871067" start="3244" end="3255" title="Lothar Path" label="Lothar Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409975" start="3322" end="3331" title="Ruhestein" label="Ruhestein"/>
<link wikidata="Q650521" start="3603" end="3613" title="High Rhine" label="High Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q835695" start="3634" end="3643" title="Kraichgau" label="Kraichgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q22964" start="3691" end="3708" title="Upper Rhine Plain" label="Upper Rhine Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q897245" start="3829" end="3832" title="Gäu (Baden-Württemberg)" label="Gäu"/>
<link wikidata="Q126132" start="3834" end="3838" title="Baar (region)" label="Baar"/>
<link wikidata="Q539839" start="3868" end="3876" title="Klettgau" label="Klettgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q464478" start="4037" end="4060" title="South German Scarplands" label="South German Scarplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q699675" start="4114" end="4130" title="Hercynian Forest" label="Hercynian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833" start="4262" end="4270" title="Freiburg" label="Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046" start="4272" end="4281" title="Pforzheim" label="Pforzheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4100" start="4286" end="4297" title="Baden-Baden" label="Baden-Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q106658" start="4340" end="4346" title="Districts of Germany" label="Kreise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8184" start="4369" end="4372" title="Enz (district)" label="Enz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8182" start="4374" end="4381" title="Rastatt (district)" label="Rastatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8186" start="4386" end="4390" title="Calw (district)" label="Calw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189" start="4407" end="4419" title="Freudenstadt (district)" label="Freudenstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8191" start="4421" end="4433" title="Ortenaukreis" label="Ortenaukreis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8211" start="4438" end="4446" title="Rottweil (district)" label="Rottweil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8193" start="4462" end="4473" title="Emmendingen (district)" label="Emmendingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8203" start="4475" end="4491" title="Schwarzwald-Baar" label="Schwarzwald-Baar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8195" start="4493" end="4517" title="Breisgau-Hochschwarzwald" label="Breisgau-Hochschwarzwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q8198" start="4519" end="4526" title="Lörrach (district)" label="Lörrach"/>
<link wikidata="Q8200" start="4531" end="4539" title="Waldshut (district)" label="Waldshut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970725" start="4570" end="4584" title="natural region" label="natural region"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="4642" end="4660" title="Geomorphology" label="Geomorphologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="4779" end="4787" title="Danube" label="Danubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q186131" start="4788" end="4794" title="relief (geology)" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q22964" start="4944" end="4962" title="Upper Rhine Plain" label="Upper Rhine Graben"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="5022" end="5031" title="Rhine" label="Rhenanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q464478" start="5431" end="5454" title="Swabian-Franconian Scarpland" label="South German Scarplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="5624" end="5640" title="metamorphic rock" label="metamorphic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="5646" end="5653" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q700095" start="5999" end="6024" title="Kinzig (Rhine)" label="line of the Kinzig valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998580" start="6087" end="6108" title="Northern Black Forest" label="Northern Black Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940689" start="6197" end="6217" title="Central Black Forest" label="Central Black Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635387" start="6238" end="6259" title="Southern Black Forest" label="Southern Black Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="6302" end="6309" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211517" start="6335" end="6352" title="High Black Forest" label="High Black Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q700083" start="6616" end="6619" title="Elz (Rhine)" label="Elz"/>
<link wikidata="Q875893" start="6648" end="6654" title="Gutach (Kinzig)" label="Gutach"/>
<link wikidata="Q515480" start="6878" end="6885" title="Dreisam" label="Dreisam"/>
<link wikidata="Q557834" start="6889" end="6895" title="Gutach (Schwarzwaldbahn)" label="Gutach"/>
<link wikidata="Q892710" start="6931" end="6946" title="Bonndorf Graben" label="Bonndorf Graben"/>
<link wikidata="Q34520" start="6986" end="6990" title="Bundesstraße 31" label="B 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q152005" start="7223" end="7232" title="drainage divide" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q570612" start="7245" end="7250" title="Acher" label="Acher"/>
<link wikidata="Q525014" start="7255" end="7260" title="Rench" label="Rench"/>
<link wikidata="Q700081" start="7290" end="7294" title="Murg (Northern Black Forest)" label="Murg"/>
<link wikidata="Q700095" start="7299" end="7305" title="Kinzig (Rhine)" label="Kinzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574764" start="7570" end="7621" title="Handbook of the Natural Region Divisions of Germany" label="Handbook of the Natural Region Divisions of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342341" start="8322" end="8329" title="Kniebis" label="Kniebis"/>
<link wikidata="Q835695" start="8955" end="8964" title="Kraichgau" label="Kraichgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592977" start="8986" end="8995" title="Heckengäu" label="Heckengäu"/>
<link wikidata="Q314708" start="9073" end="9079" title="Nagold (river)" label="Nagold"/>
<link wikidata="Q23228" start="9110" end="9120" title="interfluve" label="interfluve"/>
<link wikidata="Q14071" start="9174" end="9177" title="Enz" label="Enz"/>
<link wikidata="Q80759" start="9183" end="9192" title="Neuenbürg" label="Neuenbürg"/>
<link wikidata="Q562295" start="9236" end="9239" title="Alb (Upper Rhine)" label="Alb"/>
<link wikidata="Q14893" start="9288" end="9297" title="Ettlingen" label="Ettlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546950" start="9351" end="9358" title="Grinde (landform)" label="Grinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q520119" start="9611" end="9620" title="Gernsbach" label="Gernsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q460293" start="9647" end="9650" title="Oos (river)" label="Oos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4100" start="9654" end="9665" title="Baden-Baden" label="Baden-Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q19276276" start="9693" end="9699" title="Sandbach (Acher)" label="Bühlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q505534" start="9706" end="9711" title="Bühl (Baden)" label="Bühls"/>
<link wikidata="Q525014" start="9741" end="9746" title="Rench" label="Rench"/>
<link wikidata="Q515470" start="9754" end="9761" title="Oppenau" label="Oppenau"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="9905" end="9919" title="drainage basin" label="catchment area"/>
<link wikidata="Q700095" start="9933" end="9939" title="Kinzig (Rhine)" label="Kinzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044" start="9946" end="9955" title="Offenburg" label="Offenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q885308" start="9971" end="9979" title="Schutter (Kinzig)" label="Schutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q700083" start="10011" end="10014" title="Elz (Rhine)" label="Elz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="10122" end="10128" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q316393" start="10146" end="10153" title="Brigach" label="Brigach"/>
<link wikidata="Q316397" start="10158" end="10162" title="Breg (river)" label="Breg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188185" start="10203" end="10209" title="Wutach (river)" label="Wutach"/>
<link wikidata="Q505504" start="10219" end="10227" title="Neustadt im Schwarzwald" label="Neustadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q316401" start="10422" end="10430" title="Feldberg (Black Forest)" label="Feldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15074583" start="10439" end="10446" title="Belchen (Black Forest)" label="Belchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q464823" start="10569" end="10572" title="Alb (High Rhine)" label="Alb"/>
<link wikidata="Q666946" start="10718" end="10723" title="Wiese (river)" label="Wiese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6855" start="10730" end="10737" title="Lörrach" label="Lörrach"/>
<link wikidata="Q338593" start="10782" end="10792" title="Rotliegend" label="Rotliegend"/>
<link wikidata="Q316401" start="11092" end="11100" title="Feldberg (Black Forest)" label="Feldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q460690" start="11196" end="11208" title="Herzogenhorn" label="Herzogenhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15074583" start="11227" end="11234" title="Belchen (Black Forest)" label="Belchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q314746" start="11443" end="11449" title="Kandel (mountain)" label="Kandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q650402" start="11520" end="11532" title="Hornisgrinde" label="Hornisgrinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q650549" start="11596" end="11608" title="Schauinsland" label="Schauinsland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25630" start="11625" end="11631" title="Blauen (Badenweiler)" label="Blauen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="11752" end="11758" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q316393" start="11822" end="11829" title="Brigach" label="Brigach"/>
<link wikidata="Q316397" start="11834" end="11838" title="Breg (river)" label="Breg"/>
<link wikidata="Q14071" start="11852" end="11855" title="Enz" label="Enz"/>
<link wikidata="Q700095" start="11861" end="11867" title="Kinzig (Rhine)" label="Kinzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q700081" start="11873" end="11877" title="Murg (Northern Black Forest)" label="Murg"/>
<link wikidata="Q314708" start="11883" end="11889" title="Nagold (river)" label="Nagold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673" start="11895" end="11901" title="Neckar" label="Neckar"/>
<link wikidata="Q525014" start="11907" end="11912" title="Rench" label="Rench"/>
<link wikidata="Q666946" start="11922" end="11927" title="Wiese (river)" label="Wiese"/>
<link wikidata="Q604673" start="11967" end="11985" title="continental divide" label="continental divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="11998" end="12012" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="12013" end="12027" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="12044" end="12049" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="12059" end="12068" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q14071" start="12202" end="12205" title="Enz" label="Enz"/>
<link wikidata="Q700095" start="12211" end="12217" title="Kinzig (Rhine)" label="Kinzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q700083" start="12223" end="12226" title="Elz (Rhine)" label="Elz"/>
<link wikidata="Q188185" start="12232" end="12238" title="Wutach (river)" label="Wutach"/>
<link wikidata="Q314708" start="12244" end="12250" title="Nagold (river)" label="Nagold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="12308" end="12314" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="12319" end="12329" title="headstream" label="headstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q316397" start="12335" end="12339" title="Breg (river)" label="Breg"/>
<link wikidata="Q316393" start="12346" end="12353" title="Brigach" label="Brigach"/>
<link wikidata="Q700081" start="12359" end="12363" title="Murg (Northern Black Forest)" label="Murg"/>
<link wikidata="Q525014" start="12369" end="12374" title="Rench" label="Rench"/>
<link wikidata="Q885308" start="12380" end="12388" title="Schutter (Kinzig)" label="Schutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q666946" start="12394" end="12399" title="Wiese (river)" label="Wiese"/>
<link wikidata="Q570612" start="12405" end="12410" title="Acher" label="Acher"/>
<link wikidata="Q515480" start="12416" end="12423" title="Dreisam" label="Dreisam"/>
<link wikidata="Q319426" start="12431" end="12438" title="Rotbach (Dreisam)" label="Rotbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q464823" start="12443" end="12446" title="Alb (High Rhine)" label="Alb"/>
<link wikidata="Q464823" start="12454" end="12473" title="Menzenschwander Alb" label="Menzenschwander Alb"/>
<link wikidata="Q317747" start="12478" end="12483" title="Glatt (Neckar)" label="Glatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q319649" start="12489" end="12495" title="Möhlin (Rhine)" label="Möhlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q882659" start="12501" end="12505" title="Wolf (river)" label="Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q315212" start="12511" end="12520" title="Schiltach (river)" label="Schiltach"/>
<link wikidata="Q554442" start="12526" end="12531" title="Wehra" label="Wehra"/>
<link wikidata="Q460293" start="12553" end="12556" title="Oos (river)" label="Oos"/>
<link wikidata="Q575262" start="12562" end="12570" title="Fischbach (Eschach)" label="Glasbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673" start="12607" end="12613" title="Neckar" label="Neckar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="12650" end="12657" title="glacial" label="glacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q700097" start="12697" end="12704" title="Titisee" label="Titisee"/>
<link wikidata="Q650335" start="12710" end="12719" title="Mummelsee" label="Mummelsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402828" start="12728" end="12735" title="Feldsee" label="Feldsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851937" start="12808" end="12813" title="tarn (lake)" label="tarns"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="12824" end="12833" title="reservoir" label="reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q835671" start="12882" end="12892" title="Schluchsee" label="Schluchsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2244959" start="12927" end="12941" title="Schluchseewerk" label="Schluchseewerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485741" start="12953" end="12976" title="Schwarzenbach Reservoir" label="Schwarzenbach Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390846" start="12982" end="13005" title="Kleine Kinzig Reservoir" label="Kleine Kinzig Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603051" start="13013" end="13029" title="Nagold Reservoir" label="Nagold Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q383973" start="13043" end="13065" title="electricity generation" label="electricity generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187968" start="13067" end="13083" title="flood protection" label="flood protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892" start="13087" end="13101" title="drinking water" label="drinking water"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="13165" end="13174" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="13195" end="13201" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="13206" end="13213" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q187843" start="13269" end="13285" title="Vosges" label="Vosges Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="13311" end="13317" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="13320" end="13324" title="rift" label="rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q22964" start="13381" end="13398" title="Upper Rhine Plain" label="Upper Rhine Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="13416" end="13430" title="glacial period" label="glacial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q14520484" start="13438" end="13453" title="Würm glaciation" label="Würm glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851937" start="13505" end="13521" title="tarn (lake)" label="tarns (or lakes)"/>
<link wikidata="Q650335" start="13534" end="13543" title="Mummelsee" label="Mummelsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q840828" start="13680" end="13688" title="Variscan orogeny" label="Variscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997927" start="13744" end="13760" title="Bunter (geology)" label="Bunter Sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="13827" end="13837" title="Fault (geology)" label="step-fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="13916" end="13924" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="13929" end="13937" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q744630" start="14038" end="14047" title="migmatite" label="migmatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="14183" end="14196" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293700" start="14259" end="14274" title="Forbach Granite" label="Forbach Granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094611" start="14503" end="14519" title="Continental fragment" label="microcontinental"/>
<link wikidata="Q46947" start="14613" end="14619" title="gabbro" label="gabbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q62042" start="14625" end="14633" title="Häg-Ehrsberg" label="Ehrsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q737339" start="14635" end="14647" title="serpentinite" label="serpentinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q648913" start="14653" end="14663" title="pyroxenite" label="pyroxenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468713" start="14680" end="14686" title="norite" label="norite"/>
<link wikidata="Q518897" start="14692" end="14699" title="Dachsberg" label="Horbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q419990" start="14740" end="14758" title="accretionary wedge" label="accretionary wedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q338593" start="14827" end="14837" title="Rotliegend" label="Rotliegend"/>
<link wikidata="Q484924" start="14922" end="14926" title="tuff" label="tuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q810946" start="14979" end="14986" title="Battert" label="Battert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226532" start="15069" end="15079" title="Dinkelberg" label="Dinkelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q636340" start="15129" end="15139" title="geothermal gradient" label="geothermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22964" start="15308" end="15326" title="Upper Rhine Plain" label="Upper Rhine Graben"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="15338" end="15344" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q187843" start="15442" end="15448" title="Vosges" label="Vosges"/>
<link wikidata="Q701516" start="15485" end="15504" title="Kaiserstuhl (Baden-Württemberg)" label="Kaiserstuhl volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="15525" end="15532" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="15566" end="15574" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q666258" start="15575" end="15583" title="platform (geology)" label="platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q338593" start="15662" end="15678" title="Rotliegend" label="Rotliegend Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="15737" end="15745" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q319440" start="16018" end="16026" title="syncline" label="syncline"/>
<link wikidata="Q52109" start="16060" end="16075" title="Geomorphology" label="Geomorphologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q75913" start="16076" end="16089" title="Walther Penck" label="Walther Penck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236743" start="16131" end="16144" title="dome (geology)" label="geologic dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q48795625" start="16171" end="16186" title="piedmonttreppen" label="piedmonttreppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14071" start="16522" end="16525" title="Enz" label="Enz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479638" start="16673" end="16678" title="nappe" label="nappe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14663456" start="16977" end="16981" title="Riss glaciation" label="Riss"/>
<link wikidata="Q14520484" start="16986" end="16990" title="Würm glaciation" label="Würm"/>
<link wikidata="Q184368" start="17231" end="17237" title="cirque" label="cirque"/>
<link wikidata="Q650335" start="17583" end="17592" title="Mummelsee" label="Mummelsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570882" start="17594" end="17601" title="Wildsee (Ruhestein)" label="Wildsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q14931740" start="17603" end="17612" title="Schurmsee" label="Schurmsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298761" start="17614" end="17625" title="Glaswaldsee" label="Glaswaldsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15697090" start="17627" end="17638" title="Buhlbachsee" label="Buhlbachsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996312" start="17640" end="17656" title="Nonnenmattweiher" label="Nonnenmattweiher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402828" start="17662" end="17669" title="Feldsee" label="Feldsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q211302" start="17693" end="17705" title="glacial lake" label="glacial lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="17723" end="17730" title="moraine" label="moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131339" start="17969" end="17978" title="Alemannic German" label="Alemannic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254483" start="18013" end="18031" title="Black Forest house" label="typical farmhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q162034" start="18052" end="18069" title="hip roof" label="half-hipped roofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19028" start="18075" end="18095" title="Black Forest gateau" label="Black Forest gâteaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q700026" start="18097" end="18113" title="Black Forest ham" label="Black Forest ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q188215" start="18128" end="18133" title="gnome" label="gnome"/>
<link wikidata="Q279034" start="18136" end="18142" title="Kirsch" label="Kirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q155518" start="18157" end="18169" title="cuckoo clock" label="cuckoo clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q18752255" start="18223" end="18229" title="Tracht" label="Tracht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743537" start="18443" end="18451" title="Kirnbach (Wolfach)" label="Kirnbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139150" start="18453" end="18464" title="Reichenbach (Hornberg)" label="Reichenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q557834" start="18469" end="18488" title="Gutach (Schwarzwaldbahn)" label="Gutach im Kinzigtal"/>
<link wikidata="Q315041" start="18519" end="18528" title="Bollenhut" label="Bollenhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646517" start="18673" end="18685" title="bridal crown" label="bridal crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q83036" start="18789" end="18800" title="Sankt Georgen im Schwarzwald" label="St. Georgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q678094" start="19040" end="19050" title="Hans Thoma" label="Hans Thoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q537241" start="19056" end="19062" title="Bernau im Schwarzwald" label="Bernau"/>
<link wikidata="Q57483" start="19145" end="19156" title="Frederick I, Grand Duke of Baden" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676361" start="19239" end="19249" title="J. Metzler" label="J. Metzler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="19255" end="19265" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479589" start="19371" end="19387" title="Wilhelm Hasemann" label="Wilhelm Hasemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="19619" end="19631" title="wood carving" label="wood carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869515" start="19659" end="19673" title="Longinus cross" label="Longinus cross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19702" end="19717" title="Matthias Faller" label="Matthias Faller"/>
<link wikidata="Q155518" start="19869" end="19881" title="Cuckoo clock" label="Cuckoo clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12185286" start="19907" end="19919" title="Glassblowing" label="Glassblowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="20140" end="20146" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="20151" end="20155" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564271" start="20454" end="20460" title="potash" label="potash"/>
<link wikidata="Q301685" start="20963" end="20972" title="Höllental (Black Forest)" label="Höllental"/>
<link wikidata="Q61665" start="20979" end="20986" title="Todtnau" label="Todtnau"/>
<link wikidata="Q506780" start="20994" end="21001" title="Wolfach" label="Wolfach"/>
<link wikidata="Q700026" start="21020" end="21036" title="Black Forest ham" label="Black Forest ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19028" start="21077" end="21096" title="Black Forest gateau" label="Black Forest gâteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q279034" start="21249" end="21255" title="Kirsch" label="Kirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q316849" start="21291" end="21303" title="Flammekueche" label="Flammekueche"/>
<link wikidata="Q44541" start="21370" end="21381" title="Pancake" label="Pfannkuchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12200" start="21391" end="21396" title="crêpe" label="crêpe"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21418" end="21428" title=":de:Eierkuchen" label="Eierkuchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12264276" start="21444" end="21457" title="Palatschinken" label="Palatschinken"/>
<link wikidata="Q214844" start="21576" end="21592" title="Michelin Guide" label="Michelin starred"/>
<link wikidata="Q84359975" start="21701" end="21717" title="Schwarzwaldstube (restaurant)" label="Schwarzwaldstube"/>
<link wikidata="Q81241" start="21721" end="21732" title="Baiersbronn" label="Baiersbronn"/>
<link wikidata="Q515671" start="21879" end="21886" title="Häusern" label="Häusern"/>
<link wikidata="Q537225" start="22094" end="22103" title="Swabian-Alemannic Fastnacht" label="Fastnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="22204" end="22208" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q123542" start="22260" end="22273" title="Ash Wednesday" label="Ash Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q510406" start="22510" end="22525" title="tarot card game" label="tarot card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052690" start="22533" end="22537" title="Cego" label="Cego"/>
<link wikidata="Q660702" start="22612" end="22627" title="Further Austria" label="Further Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q186320" start="22680" end="22700" title="Grand Duchy of Baden" label="Grand Duchy of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="22721" end="22736" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235626" start="22861" end="22866" title="Ombre" label="Ombre"/>
<link wikidata="Q583269" start="22930" end="22935" title="Tarot" label="Tarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="23050" end="23062" title="House of Hohenzollern" label="Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q131339" start="23449" end="23458" title="Alemannic German" label="Alemannic"/>
<link wikidata="Q728904" start="23579" end="23590" title="nature park" label="nature park"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="23600" end="23613" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738778" start="23907" end="23915" title="Land use planning" label="land use"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344240" start="24047" end="24066" title="sustainable tourism" label="sustainable tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q948732" start="24083" end="24106" title="environmental education" label="environmental education"/>
<link wikidata="Q885288" start="24347" end="24380" title="Southern Black Forest Nature Park" label="Southern Black Forest Nature Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852" start="24462" end="24464" title="Hectare" label="ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q884467" start="24641" end="24679" title="Central/North Black Forest Nature Park" label="Central/North Black Forest Nature Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968948" start="24995" end="25021" title="Black Forest National Park" label="Black Forest National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="25057" end="25070" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q884467" start="25123" end="25161" title="Central/North Black Forest Nature Park" label="Central/North Black Forest Nature Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q82838" start="25184" end="25196" title="Freudenstadt" label="Freudenstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4100" start="25201" end="25212" title="Baden-Baden" label="Baden-Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518523" start="25544" end="25563" title="Hinterwald" label="Hinterwälder cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q799158" start="25593" end="25611" title="Lumbricus badensis" label="Lumbricus badensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q545962" start="25673" end="25691" title="Black Forest Horse" label="Black Forest Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q18562285" start="25695" end="25706" title="draft horse" label="draft horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q129059" start="25802" end="25822" title="Western capercaillie" label="Western capercaillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q190096" start="27224" end="27245" title="Inversion (meteorology)" label="temperature inversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="27781" end="27789" title="Alpine skiing" label="downhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q216613" start="27794" end="27807" title="Nordic skiing" label="Nordic skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q700097" start="27942" end="27949" title="Titisee" label="Titisee"/>
<link wikidata="Q835671" start="27958" end="27968" title="Schluchsee" label="Schluchsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="28023" end="28029" title="Underwater diving" label="diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q191051" start="28034" end="28045" title="windsurfing" label="windsurfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q650335" start="28051" end="28060" title="Mummelsee" label="Mummelsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792564" start="28149" end="28171" title="Kunstpfad am Mummelsee" label="Kunstpfad am Mummelsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q700081" start="28224" end="28235" title="Murg (Northern Black Forest)" label="Murg valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q700095" start="28241" end="28254" title="Kinzig (Rhine)" label="Kinzig valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q650634" start="28260" end="28278" title="Triberg Waterfalls" label="Triberg Waterfalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254559" start="28287" end="28320" title="Black Forest Open Air Museum, Vogtsbauernhof" label="Open Air Museum at Vogtsbauernhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q316401" start="28369" end="28377" title="Feldberg (Black Forest)" label="Feldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15074583" start="28383" end="28390" title="Belchen (Black Forest)" label="Belchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q314746" start="28396" end="28402" title="Kandel (mountain)" label="Kandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q650549" start="28411" end="28423" title="Schauinsland" label="Schauinsland"/>
<link wikidata="Q650402" start="28462" end="28474" title="Hornisgrinde" label="Hornisgrinde"/>
<link wikidata="Q881889" start="28480" end="28491" title="Schliffkopf" label="Schliffkopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624072" start="28497" end="28503" title="Hohloh" label="Hohloh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921853" start="28509" end="28515" title="Merkur (Baden-Baden)" label="Merkur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407178" start="28524" end="28536" title="Teufelsmühle (Black Forest)" label="Teufelsmühle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208147" start="28635" end="28647" title="hang gliding" label="hang gliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q178380" start="28652" end="28663" title="paragliding" label="paragliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4100" start="28692" end="28703" title="Baden-Baden" label="Baden-Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q25430" start="28798" end="28809" title="Badenweiler" label="Badenweiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q374242" start="28811" end="28824" title="Bad Herrenalb" label="Bad Herrenalb"/>
<link wikidata="Q502755" start="28826" end="28837" title="Bad Wildbad" label="Bad Wildbad"/>
<link wikidata="Q496391" start="28839" end="28852" title="Bad Krozingen" label="Bad Krozingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q522349" start="28854" end="28868" title="Bad Liebenzell" label="Bad Liebenzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q61630" start="28873" end="28886" title="Bad Bellingen" label="Bad Bellingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="28983" end="28997" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q502163" start="29096" end="29111" title="Renaissance Revival architecture" label="Neo-renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464166" start="29118" end="29131" title="Friedrichsbad" label="Friedrichsbad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408570" start="29140" end="29154" title="Palais Thermal" label="Palais Thermal"/>
<link wikidata="Q505495" start="29253" end="29263" title="Gengenbach" label="Gengenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q506780" start="29292" end="29299" title="Wolfach" label="Wolfach"/>
<link wikidata="Q83039" start="29301" end="29310" title="Schiltach" label="Schiltach"/>
<link wikidata="Q519729" start="29315" end="29335" title="Haslach im Kinzigtal" label="Haslach im Kinzigtal"/>
<link wikidata="Q533808" start="29371" end="29384" title="Sasbachwalden" label="Sasbachwalden"/>
<link wikidata="Q157967" start="29458" end="29468" title="Altensteig" label="Altensteig"/>
<link wikidata="Q82299" start="29470" end="29481" title="Dornstetten" label="Dornstetten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833" start="29483" end="29503" title="Freiburg im Breisgau" label="Freiburg im Breisgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q520119" start="29505" end="29514" title="Gernsbach" label="Gernsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3865" start="29516" end="29525" title="Villingen-Schwenningen" label="Villingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q187544" start="29530" end="29549" title="Zell am Harmersbach" label="Zell am Harmersbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q81241" start="29551" end="29562" title="Baiersbronn" label="Baiersbronn"/>
<link wikidata="Q82838" start="29602" end="29614" title="Freudenstadt" label="Freudenstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514957" start="29668" end="29676" title="Gersbach (Schopfheim)" label="Gersbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q467233" start="29761" end="29784" title="Entente Florale Europe" label="European Golden Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q532367" start="29854" end="29865" title="St. Blaise Abbey, Black Forest" label="St. Blasien"/>
<link wikidata="Q274990" start="29891" end="29905" title="Münstertal, Black Forest" label="Sankt Trudpert"/>
<link wikidata="Q557671" start="29907" end="29916" title="Sankt Peter, Baden-Württemberg" label="St. Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q550625" start="29921" end="29931" title="St. Märgen" label="St. Märgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q315631" start="29933" end="29949" title="Alpirsbach Abbey" label="Alpirsbach Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q532415" start="29965" end="29977" title="Hirsau Abbey" label="Hirsau Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776282" start="30060" end="30075" title="Wittichen Abbey" label="Wittichen Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q81350" start="30081" end="30093" title="Schenkenzell" label="Schenkenzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q61665" start="30162" end="30169" title="Todtnau" label="Todtnau"/>
<link wikidata="Q212928" start="30179" end="30182" title="Fédération Internationale de Ski" label="FIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q515356" start="30234" end="30246" title="Hinterzarten" label="Hinterzarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q896418" start="30379" end="30401" title="Black Forest High Road" label="Black Forest High Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722662" start="30458" end="30469" title="Kaltenbronn (Gernsbach)" label="Kaltenbronn"/>
<link wikidata="Q849854" start="30592" end="30619" title="European long-distance path" label="European long-distance path"/>
<link wikidata="Q151653" start="30620" end="30622" title="European walking route E1" label="E1"/>
<link wikidata="Q897078" start="30860" end="30909" title="Schwarzwaldverein" label="Black Forest Club (&amp;quot;Schwarzwaldverein&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31325" end="31347" title="Dornstetten#Barefoot park" label="Barfußpark Dornstetten"/>
<link wikidata="Q538615" start="31418" end="31424" title="Gutach im Breisgau" label="Gutach"/>
<link wikidata="Q450204" start="31426" end="31446" title="Black Forest Railway (Baden)" label="Black Forest Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q520611" start="31710" end="31725" title="mountain biking" label="mountain biking"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="31730" end="31750" title="cross-country skiing" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q897078" start="31859" end="31876" title="Schwarzwaldverein" label="Black Forest Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254559" start="32081" end="32109" title="Black Forest Open Air Museum" label="Black Forest Open Air Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q557834" start="32140" end="32146" title="Gutach (Schwarzwaldbahn)" label="Gutach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254483" start="32160" end="32178" title="Black Forest house" label="Black Forest house"/>
<link wikidata="Q896528" start="32548" end="32567" title="German Clock Museum" label="German Clock Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q82717" start="32571" end="32581" title="Furtwangen im Schwarzwald" label="Furtwangen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157798" start="32640" end="32651" title="watchmaking" label="watchmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700922" start="32656" end="32667" title="clockmaking" label="clockmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205882" start="32848" end="32867" title="German Phono Museum" label="German Phono Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q83036" start="32871" end="32882" title="St. Georgen im Schwarzwald" label="St. Georgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259902" start="32889" end="32907" title="Schüttesäge Museum" label="Schüttesäge Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q83039" start="32911" end="32920" title="Schiltach" label="Schiltach"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="32994" end="33003" title="lumbering" label="lumbering"/>
<link wikidata="Q395976" start="33008" end="33022" title="timber rafting" label="timber rafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q211578" start="33055" end="33062" title="Tanning (leather)" label="tanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254565" start="33069" end="33096" title="Black Forest Costume Museum" label="Black Forest Costume Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q519729" start="33100" end="33120" title="Haslach im Kinzigtal" label="Haslach im Kinzigtal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597505" start="33381" end="33399" title="Heinrich Hansjakob" label="Heinrich Hansjakob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494401" start="33435" end="33473" title="MiMa Mineralogy and Mathematics Museum" label="MiMa Mineralogy and Mathematics Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q557688" start="33477" end="33488" title="Oberwolfach" label="Oberwolfach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406331" start="33719" end="33732" title="holiday route" label="holiday route"/>
<link wikidata="Q896418" start="33742" end="33764" title="Black Forest High Road" label="Black Forest High Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q896026" start="33766" end="33771" title="Bundesstraße 500" label="B 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204305" start="33781" end="33798" title="German Clock Road" label="German Clock Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q608003" start="33884" end="33896" title="motorcyclist" label="motorcyclist"/>
<link wikidata="Q289995" start="34189" end="34210" title="ADAC Schauinsland Races" label="mountain-racing route"/>
<link wikidata="Q650549" start="34218" end="34230" title="Schauinsland" label="Schauinsland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="34333" end="34340" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346158" start="34398" end="34416" title="Enz Valley Railway" label="Enz Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046" start="34422" end="34431" title="Pforzheim" label="Pforzheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q502755" start="34435" end="34446" title="Bad Wildbad" label="Bad Wildbad"/>
<link wikidata="Q598144" start="34455" end="34476" title="Nagold Valley Railway" label="Nagold Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q487921" start="34496" end="34500" title="Calw" label="Calw"/>
<link wikidata="Q26344" start="34505" end="34511" title="Nagold (town)" label="Nagold"/>
<link wikidata="Q82690" start="34515" end="34529" title="Horb am Neckar" label="Horb am Neckar"/>
<link wikidata="Q314870" start="34538" end="34570" title="Black Forest Railway (Württemberg)" label="Württemberg Black Forest Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="34576" end="34585" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q321591" start="34664" end="34701" title="Gäu Railway (Eutingen–Freudenstadt)" label="section from Eutingen to Freudenstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640163" start="34790" end="34808" title="Alb Valley Railway" label="Alb Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040" start="34819" end="34828" title="Karlsruhe" label="Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q374242" start="34832" end="34845" title="Bad Herrenalb" label="Bad Herrenalb"/>
<link wikidata="Q286817" start="34851" end="34870" title="Murg Valley Railway" label="Murg Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6874" start="34876" end="34883" title="Rastatt" label="Rastatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q82838" start="34887" end="34899" title="Freudenstadt" label="Freudenstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q884392" start="34905" end="34925" title="Acher Valley Railway" label="Acher Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q373824" start="34931" end="34937" title="Achern" label="Achern"/>
<link wikidata="Q533667" start="34941" end="34966" title="Ottenhöfen im Schwarzwald" label="Ottenhöfen im Schwarzwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q314757" start="34975" end="34995" title="Rench Valley Railway" label="Rench Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q527749" start="35001" end="35011" title="Appenweier" label="Appenweier"/>
<link wikidata="Q527937" start="35015" end="35028" title="Bad Griesbach im Schwarzwald" label="Bad Griesbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q450204" start="35034" end="35060" title="Black Forest Railway (Baden)" label="Baden Black Forest Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044" start="35072" end="35081" title="Offenburg" label="Offenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834" start="35087" end="35095" title="Konstanz" label="Konstanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127" start="35099" end="35113" title="Lake Constance" label="Lake Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q506856" start="35138" end="35145" title="Hausach" label="Hausach"/>
<link wikidata="Q83271" start="35147" end="35154" title="Triberg" label="Triberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q83036" start="35156" end="35167" title="St. Georgen im Schwarzwald" label="St. Georgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3865" start="35169" end="35178" title="Villingen-Schwenningen" label="Villingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83062" start="35183" end="35197" title="Donaueschingen" label="Donaueschingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q314800" start="35214" end="35235" title="Kinzig Valley Railway (Black Forest)" label="Kinzig Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q538523" start="35269" end="35279" title="Denzlingen" label="Denzlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q884374" start="35284" end="35302" title="Elz Valley Railway" label="Elz Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q506773" start="35321" end="35327" title="Elzach" label="Elzach"/>
<link wikidata="Q314772" start="35333" end="35350" title="Höllental Railway (Black Forest)" label="Höllental Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833" start="35361" end="35381" title="Freiburg im Breisgau" label="Freiburg im Breisgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q895607" start="35434" end="35452" title="Münstertal Railway" label="Münstertal Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q496391" start="35458" end="35471" title="Bad Krozingen" label="Bad Krozingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q274990" start="35475" end="35485" title="Münstertal/Schwarzwald" label="Münstertal"/>
<link wikidata="Q897250" start="35491" end="35512" title="Kander Valley Railway" label="Kander Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q61909" start="35518" end="35527" title="Haltingen" label="Haltingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="35533" end="35538" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q61661" start="35568" end="35575" title="Kandern" label="Kandern"/>
<link wikidata="Q682873" start="35584" end="35605" title="Wiesen Valley Railway" label="Wiesen Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="35611" end="35616" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q61618" start="35620" end="35637" title="Zell im Wiesental" label="Zell im Wiesental"/>
<link wikidata="Q895590" start="35644" end="35663" title="Three Lakes Railway" label="Three Lakes Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q505504" start="35684" end="35691" title="Titisee-Neustadt" label="Titisee"/>
<link wikidata="Q895782" start="35735" end="35750" title="Windgfällweiher" label="Windgfällweiher"/>
<link wikidata="Q835671" start="35759" end="35769" title="Schluchsee" label="Schluchsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q897260" start="35775" end="35796" title="Wutach Valley Railway" label="Wutach Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q505433" start="35870" end="35886" title="Waldshut-Tiengen" label="Waldshut-Tiengen"/>
<link wikidata="Q520808" start="35892" end="35903" title="Immendingen" label="Immendingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q420962" start="36001" end="36014" title="heritage line" label="heritage line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833" start="36159" end="36167" title="Freiburg im Breisgau" label="Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4100" start="36441" end="36452" title="Baden-Baden" label="Baden-Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833" start="36454" end="36462" title="Freiburg" label="Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q487921" start="36464" end="36468" title="Calw" label="Calw"/>
<link wikidata="Q25973" start="36488" end="36501" title="Hermann Hesse" label="Hermann Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q505495" start="36504" end="36514" title="Gengenbach" label="Gengenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q528062" start="36516" end="36523" title="Staufen, Germany" label="Staufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83039" start="36525" end="36534" title="Schiltach" label="Schiltach"/>
<link wikidata="Q519729" start="36536" end="36543" title="Haslach im Kinzigtal" label="Haslach"/>
<link wikidata="Q157967" start="36548" end="36558" title="Altensteig" label="Altensteig"/>
<link wikidata="Q15074583" start="36631" end="36638" title="Belchen (Black Forest)" label="Belchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q314746" start="36644" end="36650" title="Kandel (Black Forest)" label="Kandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q700097" start="36678" end="36685" title="Titisee" label="Titisee"/>
<link wikidata="Q835671" start="36690" end="36700" title="Schluchsee" label="Schluchsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648518" start="36712" end="36733" title="All Saints Waterfalls" label="All Saints Waterfalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q650634" start="36739" end="36757" title="Triberg Waterfalls" label="Triberg Waterfalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q150784" start="36827" end="36832" title="canyon" label="gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q188185" start="36846" end="36852" title="Wutach (river)" label="Wutach"/>
<link wikidata="Q9015" start="36914" end="36917" title="Bundesautobahn 5" label="A 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q896418" start="36988" end="37009" title="Schwarzwaldhochstraße" label="Schwarzwaldhochstraße"/>
<link wikidata="Q4100" start="37013" end="37024" title="Baden-Baden" label="Baden-Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q82838" start="37028" end="37040" title="Freudenstadt" label="Freudenstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q700081" start="37074" end="37078" title="Murg (Northern Black Forest)" label="Murg"/>
<link wikidata="Q700095" start="37083" end="37089" title="Kinzig (Rhine)" label="Kinzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4100" start="37162" end="37173" title="Baden-Baden" label="Baden-Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q61909" start="37177" end="37190" title="Weil am Rhein" label="Weil am Rhein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204305" start="37410" end="37428" title="German Clock Route" label="German Clock Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q186398" start="37463" end="37474" title="horology" label="horological"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="37843" end="37860" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q650634" start="37978" end="37996" title="Triberg Waterfalls" label="Triberg Waterfalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="38233" end="38249" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q60025" start="38417" end="38430" title="Hannah Arendt" label="Hannah Arendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353628" start="38857" end="38873" title="Schauinsland Pit" label="Schauinsland Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="38875" end="38879" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="38881" end="38885" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="38904" end="38910" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q184196" start="38924" end="38930" title="baryte" label="baryte"/>
<link wikidata="Q102151" start="38932" end="38940" title="fluorite" label="fluorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q15856892" start="38983" end="38989" title="BiCoNi Formation" label="BiCoNi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478369" start="39000" end="39009" title="Wittichen" label="Wittichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="39011" end="39018" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550037" start="39037" end="39055" title="Krunkelbach Pit" label="Krunkelbach valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921029" start="39061" end="39074" title="Menzenschwand" label="Menzenschwand"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="39286" end="39294" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188645" start="39298" end="39306" title="Tertiary" label="Tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046" start="39398" end="39407" title="Pforzheim" label="Pforzheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q82838" start="39443" end="39455" title="Freudenstadt" label="Freudenstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q61665" start="39608" end="39615" title="Todtnau" label="Todtnau"/>
<link wikidata="Q550730" start="39617" end="39623" title="Wieden (Black Forest)" label="Wieden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468713" start="39698" end="39704" title="norite" label="norite"/>
<link wikidata="Q509189" start="39772" end="39780" title="Todtmoos" label="Todtmoos"/>
<link wikidata="Q182458" start="39904" end="39914" title="Stone coal" label="Stone coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q515800" start="39934" end="39945" title="Berghaupten" label="Berghaupten"/>
<link wikidata="Q533642" start="39950" end="39959" title="Hohberg" label="Diersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="40015" end="40024" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="40035" end="40044" title="haematite" label="haematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q505849" start="40067" end="40075" title="Sulzburg" label="Sulzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="40111" end="40119" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="40143" end="40148" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q80759" start="40194" end="40203" title="Neuenbürg" label="Neuenbürg"/>
<link wikidata="Q274990" start="40287" end="40301" title="Münstertal/Schwarzwald" label="Münster valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="40364" end="40370" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q25430" start="40437" end="40448" title="Badenweiler" label="Badenweiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="40461" end="40477" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q720757" start="40657" end="40673" title="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s Abbey, Black Forest" label="St. Peter&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776108" start="40675" end="40692" title="St. Märgen&amp;#x27;s Abbey" label="St. Märgen&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q650549" start="40855" end="40867" title="Schauinsland" label="Schauinsland"/>
<link wikidata="Q154031" start="41048" end="41073" title="German Peasants&amp;#x27; War" label="German Peasants&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="41092" end="41114" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q700095" start="41212" end="41225" title="Kinzig (Rhine)" label="Kinzig valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776282" start="41279" end="41288" title="Wittichen Abbey" label="Wittichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81350" start="41294" end="41306" title="Schenkenzell" label="Schenkenzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q184196" start="41370" end="41376" title="baryte" label="baryte"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="41378" end="41384" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="41389" end="41395" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q819511" start="41476" end="41480" title="tip (mining)" label="tips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="41550" end="41556" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506469" start="41653" end="41662" title="show mine" label="show mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q274990" start="41699" end="41709" title="Münstertal/Schwarzwald" label="Münstertal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418359" start="41716" end="41728" title="Finstergrund" label="Finstergrund"/>
<link wikidata="Q650549" start="41823" end="41835" title="Schauinsland" label="Schauinsland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550146" start="41873" end="41883" title="Wenzel Pit" label="Wenzel Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q557688" start="41887" end="41898" title="Oberwolfach" label="Oberwolfach"/>
<link wikidata="Q15388112" start="41907" end="41919" title="Segen Gottes Show Mine" label="Segen Gottes"/>
<link wikidata="Q519729" start="41963" end="41970" title="Haslach im Kinzigtal" label="Haslach"/>
<link wikidata="Q80477" start="42083" end="42096" title="Bad Rippoldsau-Schapbach" label="Wildschapbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549893" start="42181" end="42190" title="Clara Pit" label="Clara Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q557688" start="42216" end="42227" title="Oberwolfach" label="Oberwolfach"/>
<link wikidata="Q557798" start="42295" end="42304" title="Ringsheim" label="Ringsheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q15979" start="42324" end="42328" title="Kehl" label="Kehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="42349" end="42353" title="Harz" label="Harz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198" start="42358" end="42371" title="Ore Mountains" label="Ore Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506469" start="42550" end="42559" title="show mine" label="show mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q80759" start="42622" end="42631" title="Neuenbürg" label="Neuenbürg"/>
<link wikidata="Q541843" start="42658" end="42667" title="Neubulach" label="Neubulach"/>
<link wikidata="Q550793" start="42696" end="42703" title="Seebach (Baden)" label="Seebach"/>
<link wikidata="Q82299" start="42732" end="42742" title="Hallwangen" label="Hallwangen"/>
<link wikidata="Q82838" start="42777" end="42789" title="Freudenstadt" label="Freudenstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15388112" start="42795" end="42811" title="Segen Gottes Pit" label="Segen Gottes Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q519729" start="42817" end="42824" title="Haslach im Kinzigtal" label="Haslach"/>
<link wikidata="Q557688" start="42846" end="42857" title="Oberwolfach" label="Oberwolfach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549886" start="42863" end="42875" title="Caroline Pit" label="Caroline Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q550991" start="42881" end="42886" title="Sexau" label="Sexau"/>
<link wikidata="Q505447" start="42919" end="42928" title="Waldkirch" label="Waldkirch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833" start="42956" end="42964" title="Freiburg im Breisgau" label="Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q274990" start="42992" end="43002" title="Münstertal/Schwarzwald" label="Münstertal"/>
<link wikidata="Q550730" start="43030" end="43036" title="Wieden (Black Forest)" label="Wieden"/>
<link wikidata="Q509189" start="43071" end="43079" title="Todtmoos" label="Todtmoos"/>
<link wikidata="Q14071" start="43169" end="43172" title="Enz" label="Enz"/>
<link wikidata="Q700095" start="43174" end="43180" title="Kinzig (Rhine)" label="Kinzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q700081" start="43182" end="43186" title="Murg (Northern Black Forest)" label="Murg"/>
<link wikidata="Q314708" start="43188" end="43194" title="Nagold (river)" label="Nagold"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="43199" end="43204" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446" start="43227" end="43231" title="ship" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="43262" end="43268" title="Lumber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="43470" end="43481" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374167" start="43583" end="43588" title="Pile (type of foundation)" label="piles"/>
<link wikidata="Q220212" start="43779" end="43790" title="monoculture" label="monoculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q622896" start="43837" end="43849" title="mixed forest" label="mixed forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q734463" start="44123" end="44132" title="Expo 2000" label="Expo 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q146981" start="44301" end="44312" title="wood pellet" label="wood pellet"/>
<link wikidata="Q729340" start="44513" end="44528" title="Charcoal burner" label="Charcoal burner"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564271" start="44663" end="44669" title="potash" label="potash"/>
<link wikidata="Q785222" start="44727" end="44738" title="glassmaking" label="glassmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759306" start="44823" end="44835" title="forest glass" label="forest glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q12185286" start="44876" end="44888" title="glassblowing" label="glassblowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q506780" start="44934" end="44941" title="Wolfach" label="Wolfach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514957" start="44973" end="44994" title="Gersbach (Schopfheim)" label="Gersbach (Schopfheim)"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="45141" end="45158" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q131512" start="45213" end="45219" title="farmer" label="farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q155518" start="45233" end="45245" title="cuckoo clock" label="cuckoo clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11604665" start="45319" end="45340" title="precision engineering" label="precision engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q82717" start="45806" end="45816" title="Furtwangen" label="Furtwangen"/>
<link wikidata="Q560976" start="45986" end="45994" title="Junghans" label="Junghans"/>
<link wikidata="Q832811" start="45999" end="46006" title="Kienzle Uhren" label="Kienzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188115" start="46122" end="46126" title="SABA (electronics manufacturer)" label="SABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q877200" start="46128" end="46132" title="Dual (brand)" label="Dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585554" start="46137" end="46143" title="Harman Becker Automotive Systems" label="Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046" start="46404" end="46413" title="Pforzheim" label="Pforzheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q211423" start="46499" end="46508" title="goldsmith" label="goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="46655" end="46665" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="46748" end="46753" title="water mill" label="mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="46765" end="46772" title="sawmill" label="sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q256752" start="46778" end="46789" title="hammer mill" label="hammer mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411996" start="46983" end="47011" title="run-of-the-river power plant" label="run-of-the-river power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q339353" start="47017" end="47045" title="pumped storage power station" label="pumped storage power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485741" start="47188" end="47205" title="Schwarzenbach Dam" label="Schwarzenbach Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q835671" start="47220" end="47230" title="Schluchsee" label="Schluchsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628370" start="47457" end="47471" title="Hornberg Basin" label="Hornberg Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554517" start="47584" end="47599" title="Wehra Reservoir" label="Wehra Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q314496" start="47642" end="47670" title="German Renewable Energy Sources Act" label="Renewable Energy Sources Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q31220" start="47796" end="47837" title="Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen" label="Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44563" start="47955" end="47971" title="picaresque novel" label="picaresque novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q705839" start="47978" end="48003" title="Simplicius Simplicissimus" label="Simplicius Simplicissimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q678094" start="48019" end="48029" title="Hans Thoma" label="Hans Thoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q537241" start="48039" end="48045" title="Bernau im Schwarzwald" label="Bernau"/>
<link wikidata="Q25973" start="48076" end="48089" title="Hermann Hesse" label="Hermann Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q487921" start="48099" end="48103" title="Calw" label="Calw"/>
<link wikidata="Q83106" start="48144" end="48156" title="Jürgen Klopp" label="Jürgen Klopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q80475" start="48202" end="48209" title="Glatten" label="Glatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="48212" end="48228" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071668" start="48280" end="48291" title="Todtnauberg" label="Todtnauberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q404567" start="48322" end="48336" title="Being and Time" label="Being and Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q699675" start="48377" end="48393" title="Hercynian Forest" label="Hercynian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q897078" start="48407" end="48424" title="Schwarzwaldverein" label="Schwarzwaldverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q896528" start="48454" end="48473" title="German Clock Museum" label="German Clock Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19028" start="48476" end="48495" title="Black Forest gateau" label="Black Forest gateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q700026" start="48498" end="48514" title="Black Forest ham" label="Black Forest ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q100765" start="48627" end="48643" title="Eberhard Gothein" label="Eberhard Gothein"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3386" wikidata="Q166" url="?curid=3386" title="Black Sea">
<text>The Black Sea is a marginal mediterranean sea lying between Europe and Asia, east of the Balkans, south of the East European Plain, west of the Caucasus, and north of Anatolia. It is bounded by Bulgaria, Georgia, Romania, Russia, Turkey, and Ukraine. The Black Sea is supplied by major rivers, principally the Danube, Dnieper and Dniester. Consequently, while six countries have a coastline on the sea, its drainage basin includes parts of 24 countries in Europe.

The Black Sea, not including the Sea of Azov, covers , has a maximum depth of , and a volume of .
Most of its coasts ascend rapidly.
These rises are the Pontic Mountains to the south, bar the southwest-facing peninsulas, the Caucasus Mountains to the east, and the Crimean Mountains to the mid-north.
In the west, the coast is generally small floodplains below foothills such as the Strandzha; Cape Emine, a dwindling of the east end of the Balkan Mountains; and the Dobruja Plateau considerably farther north.
The longest east–west extent is about .
Important cities along the coast include (clockwise from the Bosporus) Burgas, Varna, Constanța, Odesa, Sevastopol, Novorossiysk, Sochi, Poti, Batumi, Trabzon and Samsun.

The Black Sea has a positive water balance, with an annual net outflow of per year through the Bosporus and the Dardanelles into the Aegean Sea. While the net flow of water through the Bosporus and Dardanelles (known collectively as the Turkish Straits) is out of the Black Sea, water generally flows in both directions simultaneously: Denser, more saline water from the Aegean flows into the Black Sea underneath the less dense, fresher water that flows out of the Black Sea. This creates a significant and permanent layer of deep water that does not drain or mix and is therefore anoxic. This anoxic layer is responsible for the preservation of ancient shipwrecks which have been found in the Black Sea, which ultimately drains into the Mediterranean Sea, via the Turkish Straits and the Aegean Sea. The Bosporus strait connects it to the small Sea of Marmara which in turn is connected to the Aegean Sea via the strait of the Dardanelles. To the north, the Black Sea is connected to the Sea of Azov by the Kerch Strait.

The water level has varied significantly over geological time. Due to these variations in the water level in the basin, the surrounding shelf and associated aprons have sometimes been dry land. At certain critical water levels, connections with surrounding water bodies can become established. It is through the most active of these connective routes, the Turkish Straits, that the Black Sea joins the World Ocean. During geological periods when this hydrological link was not present, the Black Sea was an endorheic basin, operating independently of the global ocean system (similar to the Caspian Sea today). Currently, the Black Sea water level is relatively high; thus, water is being exchanged with the Mediterranean. The Black Sea undersea river is a current of particularly saline water flowing through the Bosporus Strait and along the seabed of the Black Sea, the first of its kind discovered.

== Name ==

=== Modern names ===
Current names of the sea are usually equivalents of the English name &quot;Black Sea&quot;, including these given in the countries bordering the sea:
* , 
* , 
* , 
* Laz and , , or simply , , , &quot;Sea&quot;
* , 
* , 

Such names have not yet been shown conclusively to predate the 13thcentury.

In Greece, the historical name &quot;Euxine Sea&quot;, which holds a different literal meaning (see below), is still widely used:
* , ; the name , , is used, but is much less common.

The Black Sea is one of four seas named in English after common color terms – the others being the Red Sea, the White Sea and the Yellow Sea.

=== Historical names and etymology ===
The earliest known name of the Black Sea is the Sea of Zalpa, so called by both the Hattians and their conquerors, the Hittites. The Hattic city of Zalpa was &quot;situated probably at or near the estuary of the Marrassantiya River, the modern Kızıl Irmak, on the Black Sea coast.&quot;

The principal Greek name &quot;Póntos Áxeinos&quot; is generally accepted to be a rendering of the Iranian word (&quot;dark colored&quot;). Ancient Greek voyagers adopted the name as , identified with the Greek word (inhospitable). The name (Inhospitable Sea), first attested in Pindar (), was considered an ill omen and was euphemized to its opposite, (Hospitable Sea), also first attested in Pindar. This became the commonly used designation in Greek, although in mythological contexts the &quot;true&quot; name remained favored.

Strabo&#x27;s &quot;Geographica&quot; (1.2.10) reports that in antiquity, the Black Sea was often simply called &quot;the Sea&quot; ( ). He thought that the sea was called the &quot;Inhospitable Sea&quot; by the inhabitants of the Pontus region of the southern shoreline before Greek colonization due to its difficult navigation and hostile barbarian natives (7.3.6), and that the name was changed to &quot;hospitable&quot; after the Milesians colonized the region, bringing it into the Greek world.

Popular supposition derives &quot;Black Sea&quot; from the dark color of the water or climatic conditions. Some scholars understand the name to be derived from a system of color symbolism representing the cardinal directions, with black or dark for north, red for south, white for west, and green or light blue for east. Hence, &quot;Black Sea&quot; meant &quot;Northern Sea&quot;. According to this scheme, the name could only have originated with a people living between the northern (black) and southern (red) seas: this points to the Achaemenids (550–330 BC). This interpretation has been labeled as folk etymology and may reflect a primitive historical understanding of the &quot;P/Bla&quot; phoneme originally associated with the name.

In the Greater Bundahishn, a Middle Persian Zoroastrian scripture, the Black Sea is called . In the tenth-century Persian geography book , the Black Sea is called &quot;Georgian Sea&quot; (). &quot;The Georgian Chronicles&quot; use the name (Sea of Speri) after the Kartvelian tribe of Speris or Saspers. Other modern names such as and (both meaning Black Sea) originated during the 13th century. A 1570 map from Abraham Ortelius&#x27;s labels the sea (Great Sea), compare Latin .

English writers of the 18th century often used &quot;Euxine Sea&quot; ( or ). During the Ottoman Empire, it was called either (Perso-Arabic) or (Ottoman Turkish), both meaning &quot;Black Sea&quot;.

== Geography ==
The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Black Sea as follows:

The area surrounding the Black Sea is commonly referred to as the &quot;Black Sea Region&quot;. Its northern part lies within the &quot;Chernozem belt&quot; (black soil belt) which goes from eastern Croatia (Slavonia), along the Danube (northern Serbia, northern Bulgaria (Danubian Plain) and southern Romania (Wallachian Plain) to northeast Ukraine and further across the Central Black Earth Region and southern Russia into Siberia.

The littoral zone of the Black Sea is often referred to as the Pontic littoral or Pontic zone.

The largest bays of the Black Sea are Karkinit Bay in Ukraine; the Gulf of Burgas in Bulgaria; Dnieprovska Gulf and Dniestrovsky Liman, both in Ukraine; and Sinop Bay and Samsun Bay, both in Turkey.

=== Coastline and exclusive economic zones ===
=== Drainage basin ===
The largest rivers flowing into the Black Sea are:
# Danube
# Dnieper
# Don
# Dniester
# Kızılırmak
# Kuban
# Sakarya
# Southern Bug
# Çoruh/Chorokhi
# Yeşilırmak
# Rioni
# Yeya
# Mius
# Kamchiya
# Enguri/Egry
# Kalmius
# Molochna
# Tylihul
# Velykyi Kuialnyk
# Veleka
# Rezovo
# Kodori/Kwydry
# Bzyb/Bzipi
# Supsa
# Mzymta
These rivers and their tributaries comprise a Black Sea drainage basin that covers wholly or partially 24 countries:
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
Unrecognized states:


=== Islands ===
Some islands in the Black Sea belong to Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, and Ukraine:
* St. Thomas Island – Bulgaria
* St. Anastasia Island – Bulgaria
* St. Cyricus Island – Bulgaria
* St. Ivan Island – Bulgaria
* St. Peter Island – Bulgaria
* Sacalinu Mare Island – Romania
* Sacalinu Mic Island – Romania
* K Island – Romania and Ukraine
* Utrish Island
* Krupinin Island
* Sudiuk Island
* Kefken Island
* Oreke Island
* Giresun Island – Turkey
* Dzharylhach Island – Ukraine
* Zmiinyi (Snake) Island – Ukraine
=== Climate ===

Short-term climatic variation in the Black Sea region is significantly influenced by the operation of the North Atlantic oscillation, the climatic mechanisms resulting from the interaction between the north Atlantic and mid-latitude air masses. While the exact mechanisms causing the North Atlantic Oscillation remain unclear, it is thought the climate conditions established in western Europe mediate the heat and precipitation fluxes reaching Central Europe and Eurasia, regulating the formation of winter cyclones, which are largely responsible for regional precipitation inputs and influence Mediterranean sea surface temperatures (SSTs).

The relative strength of these systems also limits the amount of cold air arriving from northern regions during winter. Other influencing factors include the regional topography, as depressions and storm systems arriving from the Mediterranean are funneled through the low land around the Bosporus, with the Pontic and Caucasus mountain ranges acting as waveguides, limiting the speed and paths of cyclones passing through the region.

== Geology and bathymetry ==

The Black Sea is divided into two depositional basins—the Western Black Sea and Eastern Black Sea—separated by the Mid-Black Sea High, which includes the Andrusov Ridge, Tetyaev High, and Archangelsky High, extending south from the Crimean Peninsula. The basin includes two distinct relict back-arc basins which were initiated by the splitting of an Albian volcanic arc and the subduction of both the Paleo- and Neo-Tethys oceans, but the timings of these events remain uncertain. Arc volcanism and extension occurred as the Neo-Tethys Ocean subducted under the southern margin of Laurasia during the Mesozoic. Uplift and compressional deformation took place as the Neotethys continued to close. Seismic surveys indicate that rifting began in the Western Black Sea in the Barremian and Aptian followed by the formation of oceanic crust 20million years later in the Santonian. Since its initiation, compressional tectonic environments led to subsidence in the basin, interspersed with extensional phases resulting in large-scale volcanism and numerous orogenies, causing the uplift of the Greater Caucasus, Pontides, southern Crimean Peninsula and Balkanides mountain ranges.
During the Messinian salinity crisis in the neighboring Mediterranean Sea, water levels fell but without drying up the sea. The collision between the Eurasian and African plates and the westward escape of the Anatolian block along the North Anatolian and East Anatolian faults dictates the current tectonic regime, which features enhanced subsidence in the Black Sea basin and significant volcanic activity in the Anatolian region. These geological mechanisms, in the long term, have caused the periodic isolations of the Black Sea from the rest of the global ocean system.

The large shelf to the north of the basin is up to wide and features a shallow apron with gradients between 1:40 and 1:1000. The southern edge around Turkey and the eastern edge around Georgia, however, are typified by a narrow shelf that rarely exceeds in width and a steep apron that is typically 1:40 gradient with numerous submarine canyons and channel extensions. The Euxine abyssal plain in the center of the Black Sea reaches a maximum depth of just south of Yalta on the Crimean Peninsula.

=== Chronostratigraphy ===
The Paleo-Euxinian is described by the accumulation of eolian silt deposits (related to the Riss glaciation) and the lowering of sea levels (MIS 6, 8 and 10). The Karangat marine transgression occurred during the Eemian Interglacial (MIS 5e). This may have been the highest sea levels reached in the late Pleistocene. Based on this some scholars have suggested that the Crimean Peninsula was isolated from the mainland by a shallow strait during the Eemian Interglacial.

The Neoeuxinian transgression began with an inflow of waters from the Caspian Sea. Neoeuxinian deposits are found in the Black Sea below water depth in three layers. The upper layers correspond with the peak of the Khvalinian transgression, on the shelf shallow-water sands and coquina mixed with silty sands and brackish-water fauna, and inside the Black Sea Depression hydrotroilite silts. The middle layers on the shelf are sands with brackish-water mollusc shells. Of continental origin, the lower level on the shelf is mostly alluvial sands with pebbles, mixed with less common lacustrine silts and freshwater mollusc shells. Inside the Black Sea Depression they are terrigenous non-carbonate silts, and at the foot of the continental slope turbidite sediments.

== Hydrology ==
The Black Sea is the world&#x27;s largest body of water with a meromictic basin. The deep waters do not mix with the upper layers of water that receive oxygen from the atmosphere. As a result, over 90% of the deeper Black Sea volume is anoxic water. The Black Sea&#x27;s circulation patterns are primarily controlled by basin topography and fluvial inputs, which result in a strongly stratified vertical structure. Because of the extreme stratification, it is classified as a salt wedge estuary.

Inflow from the Mediterranean Sea through the Bosporus and Dardanelles has a higher salinity and density than the outflow, creating the classic estuarine circulation. This means that the inflow of dense water from the Mediterranean occurs at the bottom of the basin while the outflow of fresher Black Sea surface-water into the Sea of Marmara occurs near the surface. According to Gregg (2002), the outflow is or around , and the inflow is or around .

The following water budget can be estimated:
* Water in: 
** Total river discharge: 
** Precipitation: 
** Inflow via Bosporus: 
* Water out: 
** Evaporation: (reduced greatly since the 1970s)
** Outflow via Bosporus: 

The southern sill of the Bosporus is located at below present sea level (deepest spot of the shallowest cross-section in the Bosporus, located in front of Dolmabahçe Palace) and has a wet section of around . Inflow and outflow current speeds are averaged around , but much higher speeds are found locally, inducing significant turbulence and vertical shear. This allows for turbulent mixing of the two layers. Surface water leaves the Black Sea with a salinity of 17 practical salinity units (PSU) and reaches the Mediterranean with a salinity of 34 PSU. Likewise, an inflow of the Mediterranean with salinity 38.5 PSU experiences a decrease to about 34 PSU.

Mean surface circulation is cyclonic; waters around the perimeter of the Black Sea circulate in a basin-wide shelfbreak gyre known as the Rim Current. The Rim Current has a maximum velocity of about . Within this feature, two smaller cyclonic gyres operate, occupying the eastern and western sectors of the basin. The Eastern and Western Gyres are well-organized systems in the winter but dissipate into a series of interconnected eddies in the summer and autumn. Mesoscale activity in the peripheral flow becomes more pronounced during these warmer seasons and is subject to interannual variability.

Outside of the Rim Current, numerous quasi-permanent coastal eddies are formed as a result of upwelling around the coastal apron and &quot;wind curl&quot; mechanisms. The intra-annual strength of these features is controlled by seasonal atmospheric and fluvial variations. During the spring, the Batumi eddy forms in the southeastern corner of the sea.

Beneath the surface waters—from about —there exists a halocline that stops at the Cold Intermediate Layer (CIL). This layer is composed of cool, salty surface waters, which are the result of localized atmospheric cooling and decreased fluvial input during the winter months. It is the remnant of the winter surface mixed layer. The base of the CIL is marked by a major pycnocline at about , and this density disparity is the major mechanism for isolation of the deep water.
Below the pycnocline is the Deep Water mass, where salinity increases to 22.3 PSU and temperatures rise to around . The hydrochemical environment shifts from oxygenated to anoxic, as bacterial decomposition of sunken biomass utilizes all of the free oxygen. Weak geothermal heating and long residence time create a very thick convective bottom layer.

The Black Sea undersea river is a current of particularly saline water flowing through the Bosporus Strait and along the seabed of the Black Sea. The discovery of the river, announced on 1 August 2010, was made by scientists at the University of Leeds and is the first of its kind to be identified. The undersea river stems from salty water spilling through the Bosporus Strait from the Mediterranean Sea into the Black Sea, where the water has a lower salt content.

== Hydrochemistry ==
Because of the anoxic water at depth, organic matter, including anthropogenic artifacts such as boat hulls, are well preserved. During periods of high surface productivity, short-lived algal blooms form organic rich layers known as sapropels. Scientists have reported an annual phytoplankton bloom that can be seen in many NASA images of the region. As a result of these characteristics the Black Sea has gained interest from the field of marine archaeology, as ancient shipwrecks in excellent states of preservation have been discovered, such as the Byzantine wreck Sinop D, located in the anoxic layer off the coast of Sinop, Turkey.

Modelling shows that, in the event of an asteroid impact on the Black Sea, the release of hydrogen sulfide clouds would pose a threat to health—and perhaps even life—for people living on the Black Sea coast.

There have been isolated reports of flares on the Black Sea occurring during thunderstorms, possibly caused by lightning igniting combustible gas seeping up from the sea depths.

== Ecology ==
=== Marine ===

The Black Sea supports an active and dynamic marine ecosystem, dominated by species suited to the brackish, nutrient-rich, conditions. As with all marine food webs, the Black Sea features a range of trophic groups, with autotrophic algae, including diatoms and dinoflagellates, acting as primary producers. The fluvial systems draining Eurasia and central Europe introduce large volumes of sediment and dissolved nutrients into the Black Sea, but the distribution of these nutrients is controlled by the degree of physiochemical stratification, which is, in turn, dictated by seasonal physiographic development.

During winter, strong wind promotes convective overturning and upwelling of nutrients, while high summer temperatures result in a marked vertical stratification and a warm, shallow mixed layer. Day length and insolation intensity also control the extent of the photic zone. Subsurface productivity is limited by nutrient availability, as the anoxic bottom waters act as a sink for reduced nitrate, in the form of ammonia. The benthic zone also plays an important role in Black Sea nutrient cycling, as chemosynthetic organisms and anoxic geochemical pathways recycle nutrients which can be upwelled to the photic zone, enhancing productivity.

In total, the Black Sea&#x27;s biodiversity contains around one-third of the Mediterranean&#x27;s and is experiencing natural and artificial invasions or &quot;Mediterranizations&quot;.

==== Phytoplankton ====
The main phytoplankton groups present in the Black Sea are dinoflagellates, diatoms, coccolithophores and cyanobacteria. Generally, the annual cycle of phytoplankton development comprises significant diatom and dinoflagellate-dominated spring production, followed by a weaker mixed assemblage of community development below the seasonal thermocline during summer months, and surface-intensified autumn production. This pattern of productivity is augmented by an &quot;Emiliania huxleyi&quot; bloom during the late spring and summer months.
* Dinoflagellates
: Annual dinoflagellate distribution is defined by an extended bloom period in subsurface waters during the late spring and summer. In November, subsurface plankton production is combined with surface production, due to vertical mixing of water masses and nutrients such as nitrite. The major bloom-forming dinoflagellate species in the Black Sea is &quot;Gymnodinium&quot; sp. Estimates of dinoflagellate diversity in the Black Sea range from 193 to 267 species. This level of species richness is relatively low in comparison to the Mediterranean Sea, which is attributable to the brackish conditions, low water transparency and presence of anoxic bottom waters. It is also possible that the low winter temperatures below of the Black Sea prevent thermophilous species from becoming established. The relatively high organic matter content of Black Sea surface water favors the development of heterotrophic (an organism that uses organic carbon for growth) and mixotrophic dinoflagellates species (able to exploit different trophic pathways), relative to autotrophs. Despite its unique hydrographic setting, there are no confirmed endemic dinoflagellate species in the Black Sea.
* Diatoms
: The Black Sea is populated by many species of the marine diatom, which commonly exist as colonies of unicellular, non-motile auto- and heterotrophic algae. The life-cycle of most diatoms can be described as &#x27;boom and bust&#x27; and the Black Sea is no exception, with diatom blooms occurring in surface waters throughout the year, most reliably during March. In simple terms, the phase of rapid population growth in diatoms is caused by the in-wash of silicon-bearing terrestrial sediments, and when the supply of silicon is exhausted, the diatoms begin to sink out of the photic zone and produce resting cysts. Additional factors such as predation by zooplankton and ammonium-based regenerated production also have a role to play in the annual diatom cycle. Typically, blooms during spring and blooms during the autumn.
* Coccolithophores
: Coccolithophores are a type of motile, autotrophic phytoplankton that produce CaCO3 plates, known as coccoliths, as part of their life cycle. In the Black Sea, the main period of coccolithophore growth occurs after the bulk of the dinoflagellate growth has taken place. In May, the dinoflagellates move below the seasonal thermocline into deeper waters, where more nutrients are available. This permits coccolithophores to utilize the nutrients in the upper waters, and by the end of May, with favorable light and temperature conditions, growth rates reach their highest. The major bloom-forming species is , which is also responsible for the release of dimethyl sulfide into the atmosphere. Overall, coccolithophore diversity is low in the Black Sea, and although recent sediments are dominated by and , Holocene sediments have been shown to also contain Helicopondosphaera and Discolithina species.
* Cyanobacteria
: Cyanobacteria are a phylum of picoplanktonic (plankton ranging in size from 0.2 to 2.0 μm) bacteria that obtain their energy via photosynthesis, and are present throughout the world&#x27;s oceans. They exhibit a range of morphologies, including filamentous colonies and biofilms. In the Black Sea, several species are present, and as an example, &quot;Synechococcus&quot; spp. can be found throughout the photic zone, although concentration decreases with increasing depth. Other factors which exert an influence on distribution include nutrient availability, predation, and salinity.

==== Animal species ====
* Zebra mussel
: The Black Sea along with the Caspian Sea is part of the zebra mussel&#x27;s native range. The mussel has been accidentally introduced around the world and become an invasive species where it has been introduced.
* Common carp
: The common carp&#x27;s native range extends to the Black Sea along with the Caspian Sea and Aral Sea. Like the zebra mussel, the common carp is an invasive species when introduced to other habitats.
* Round goby
: Another native fish that is also found in the Caspian Sea. It preys upon zebra mussels. Like the mussels and common carp, it has become invasive when introduced to other environments, like the Great Lakes in North America.
* Marine mammals and marine megafauna
: Marine mammals present within the basin include two species of dolphin (common and bottlenose) and the harbour porpoise, although all of these are endangered due to pressures and impacts by human activities. All three species have been classified as distinct subspecies from those in the Mediterranean and the Atlantic and are endemic to the Black and Azov seas, and are more active during nights in the Turkish Straits. However, construction of the Crimean Bridge has caused increases in nutrients and planktons in the waters, attracting large numbers of fish and more than 1,000 bottlenose dolphins. However, others claim that construction may cause devastating damages to the ecosystem, including dolphins.
: Mediterranean monk seals, now a vulnerable species, were historically abundant in the Black Sea, and are regarded to have become extinct from the basin in 1997. Monk seals were present at Snake Island, near the Danube Delta, until the 1950s, and several locations such as the and Doğankent were the last of the seals&#x27; hauling-out sites post-1990. Very few animals still thrive in the Sea of Marmara.
: Ongoing Mediterranizations may or may not boost cetacean diversity in the Turkish Straits and hence in the Black and Azov basins.
: Various species of pinnipeds, sea otter, and beluga whale were introduced into the Black Sea by mankind and later escaped either by accidental or purported causes. Of these, grey seals and beluga whales have been recorded with successful, long-term occurrences.
: Great white sharks are known to reach into the Sea of Marmara and Bosporus Strait and basking sharks into the Dardanelles, although it is unclear whether or not these sharks may reach into the Black and Azov basins.

==== Ecological effects of pollution ====
Since the 1960s, rapid industrial expansion along the Black Sea coastline and the construction of a major dam on the Danube have significantly increased annual variability in the N:P:Si ratio in the basin. Coastal areas, accordingly, have seen an increase in the frequency of monospecific phytoplankton blooms, with diatom-bloom frequency increasing by a factor of 2.5 and non-diatom bloom frequency increasing by a factor of 6. The non-diatoms, such as the prymnesiophytes (coccolithophore), sp., and the Euglenophyte , can out-compete diatom species because of the limited availability of silicon, a necessary constituent of diatom frustules. As a consequence of these blooms, benthic macrophyte populations were deprived of light, while anoxia caused mass mortality in marine animals.

Overfishing during the 1970s further compounded the decline in macrophytes, while the invasive ctenophore &quot;Mnemiopsis&quot; reduced the biomass of copepods and other zooplankton in the late 1980s. Additionally, an alien species—the warty comb jelly ()—established itself in the basin, exploding from a few individuals to an estimated biomass of one billion metric tons. The change in species composition in Black Sea waters also has consequences for hydrochemistry, as calcium-producing coccolithophores influence salinity and pH, although these ramifications have yet to be fully quantified. In central Black Sea waters, silicon levels also reduced significantly, due to a decrease in the flux of silicon associated with advection across isopycnal surfaces. This phenomenon demonstrates the potential for localized alterations in Black Sea nutrient-input to have basin-wide effects.

Pollution-reduction and regulation efforts led to a partial recovery of the Black Sea ecosystem during the 1990s, and an EU monitoring exercise, &#x27;EROS21&#x27;, revealed decreased nitrogen and phosphorus values relative to the 1989 peak. Recently, scientists have noted signs of ecological recovery, in part due to the construction of new sewage-treatment plants in Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, and Bulgaria in connection with those countries&#x27; membership of the European Union. populations have been checked with the arrival of another alien species that feeds on them.

== History ==
=== Mediterranean connection during the Holocene ===

The Black Sea is connected to the World Ocean by a chain of two shallow straits, the Dardanelles and the Bosporus. The Dardanelles is deep, and the Bosporus is as shallow as . By comparison, at the height of the last ice age, sea levels were more than lower than they are now.

There is evidence that water levels in the Black Sea were considerably lower at some point during the post-glacial period. Some researchers theorize that the Black Sea had been a landlocked freshwater lake (at least in upper layers) during the last glaciation and for some time after.

In the aftermath of the last glacial period, water levels in the Black Sea and the Aegean Sea rose independently until they were high enough to exchange water. The exact timeline of this development is still subject to debate. One possibility is that the Black Sea filled first, with excess freshwater flowing over the Bosporus sill and eventually into the Mediterranean Sea. There are also catastrophic scenarios, such as the &quot;Black Sea deluge hypothesis&quot; put forward by William Ryan, Walter Pitman and Petko Dimitrov.

==== Deluge hypothesis ====

The Black Sea deluge is a hypothesized catastrophic rise in the level of the Black Sea due to waters from the Mediterranean Sea breaching a sill in the Bosporus Strait. The hypothesis was headlined when &quot;The New York Times&quot; published it in December 1996, shortly before it was published in an academic journal. While it is agreed that the sequence of events described did occur, there is debate over the suddenness, dating, and magnitude of the events. Relevant to the hypothesis is that its description has led some to connect this catastrophe with prehistoric flood myths.

=== Archaeology ===

The Black Sea was sailed by Hittites, Carians, Colchians, Armenians, Thracians, Greeks, Persians, Cimmerians, Scythians, Romans, Byzantines, Goths, Huns, Avars, Slavs, Varangians, Crusaders, Venetians, Genoese, Georgians, Bulgarians, Tatars and Ottomans.

The concentration of historical powers, combined with the preservative qualities of the deep anoxic waters of the Black Sea, has attracted increased interest from marine archaeologists who have begun to discover a large number of ancient ships and organic remains in a high state of preservation.

=== Recorded history ===

The Black Sea was a busy waterway on the crossroads of the ancient world: the Balkans to the west, the Eurasian steppes to the north, the Caucasus and Central Asia to the east, Asia Minor and Mesopotamia to the south, and Greece to the southwest.

The land at the eastern end of the Black Sea, Colchis (in present-day Georgia), marked for the ancient Greeks the edge of the known world.

The Pontic–Caspian steppe to the north of the Black Sea is seen by several researchers as the pre-historic original homeland () of the speakers of the Proto-Indo-European language (PIE).

Greek presence in the Black Sea began at least as early as the 9th century BC with colonies scattered along the Black Sea&#x27;s southern coast, attracting traders and colonists due to the grain grown in the Black Sea hinterland.
By 500 BC, permanent Greek communities existed all around the Black Sea, and a lucrative trade-network connected the entirety of the Black Sea to the wider Mediterranean. While Greek colonies generally maintained very close cultural ties to their founding polis, Greek colonies in the Black Sea began to develop their own &quot;Black Sea Greek&quot; culture, known today as Pontic. The coastal communities of Black Sea Greeks remained a prominent part of the Greek world for centuries, and the realms of Mithridates of Pontus, Rome and Constantinople spanned the Black Sea to include Crimean territories.

The Black Sea became a virtual Ottoman Navy lake within five years of the Republic of Genoa losing control of the Crimean Peninsula in 1479, after which the only Western merchant vessels to sail its waters were those of Venice&#x27;s old rival Ragusa. The Black Sea became a trade route of slaves between Crimea and Ottoman Anatolia via the Crimean–Nogai slave raids in Eastern Europe.

Imperial Russia became a significant Black Sea power in the late-18th century,
occupying the littoral of Novorossiya in 1764 and of Crimea in 1783. Ottoman restrictions on Black Sea navigation were challenged by the Black Sea Fleet (founded in 1783) of the Imperial Russian Navy, and the Ottomans relaxed export controls after the outbreak in 1789 of the French Revolution.

=== Modern history ===
The Crimean War, fought between 1853 and 1856, saw naval engagements between the French and British allies and the forces of Nicholas I of Russia. On 2 March 1855, after the death of Nicholas I, Alexander II became Tsar. On 15 January 1856, the new tsar took Russia out of the war on the very unfavorable terms of the Treaty of Paris (1856), which included the loss of a naval fleet on the Black Sea, and the provision that the Black Sea was to be a demilitarized zone similar to a contemporaneous region of the Baltic Sea.

==== World Wars ====

The Black Sea was a significant naval theatre of World War I (1914–1918) and saw both naval and land battles between 1941 and 1945 during World War II. For example, Sevastopol was obliterated by the Nazis, who even brought Schwerer Gustav to the Siege of Sevastopol (1941–1942). The Soviet naval base was one of the strongest fortifications in the world. Its site, on a deeply eroded, bare limestone promontory at the southwestern tip of the Crimea, made an approach by land forces exceedingly difficult. The high-level cliffs overlooking Severnaya Bay protected the anchorage, making an amphibious landing just as dangerous. The Soviet Navy had built upon these natural defenses by modernizing the port and installing heavy coastal batteries consisting of 180mm and 305mm re-purposed battleship guns which were capable of firing inland as well as out to sea. The artillery emplacements were protected by reinforced concrete fortifications and 9.8-inch thick armored turrets.

==== 21st century ====
During the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Snake Island was a source of contention. On 24 February 2022, two Russian navy warships attacked and captured Snake Island. It was subsequently bombarded heavily by Ukraine. On 30 June 2022, Ukraine announced that it had driven Russian forces off the island.

On 14 April 2022, the flagship of the Black Sea Fleet, Russian cruiser Moskva was sunk by Ukrainian missiles.

As early as 29 April 2022 submarines of the Black Sea Fleet were used by Russia to bombard Ukrainian cities with Kalibr SLCMs. The Kalibr missile was so successful that on 10 March 2023 Defense Minister Sergey Shoigu announced plans to broaden the type of ship which carried it, to include the corvette Steregushchiy and the nuclear-powered cruiser Admiral Nakhimov.

On the morning of 14 March 2023, a Russian Su-27 fighter jet intercepted and damaged an American MQ-9 Reaper drone, causing the latter to crash into the Black Sea. At 13:20 on 5 May 2023 a Russian Su-35 fighter jet intercepted and threatened the safety of a Polish L-140 Turbolet on a . The incident, which occurred east of Romanian airspace, 

As of January 2025, neither Ukraine nor Russia control the Black Sea, making it contested, claims Estonian Navy Commander Ivo Värk. &quot;The entire Black Sea can currently be seen as a contested maritime area where both sides have some room for action,&quot;. This room is greater near the coasts, where both sides benefit from air defense systems, sea mines, and various land-based weaponry. Ships only move out for specific operations to prevent excessive risks. He also noted that both parties operate gas drilling platforms equipped with surveillance devices to monitor the situation, but that those platforms often change hands.

== Economy and politics ==
The Black Sea plays an integral part in the connection between Asia and Europe. In addition to sea ports and fishing, key activities include hydrocarbons exploration for oil and natural gas, and tourism.
According to NATO, the Black Sea is a strategic corridor that provides smuggling channels for moving legal and illegal goods including drugs, radioactive materials, and counterfeit goods that can be used to finance terrorism.

=== Navigation ===
According to an International Transport Workers&#x27; Federation 2013 study, there were at least 30 operating merchant seaports in the Black Sea (including at least 12 in Ukraine). There were also around 2,400 commercial vessels operating in the Black Sea.

=== Fishing ===

The Turkish commercial fishing fleet catches around 300,000 tons of anchovies per year. The fishery is carried out mainly in winter, and the highest portion of the stock is caught in November and December.

=== Hydrocarbon exploration ===

In the 1980s, the Soviet Union started offshore drilling for petroleum in the sea&#x27;s western portion (adjoining Ukraine&#x27;s coast). Independent Ukraine continued and intensified that effort within its exclusive economic zone, inviting major international oil companies for exploration. Discovery of the new, massive oilfields in the area stimulated an influx of foreign investments. It also provoked a short-term peaceful territorial dispute with Romania which was resolved in 2011 by an international court redefining the exclusive economic zones between the two countries.

The Black Sea contains oil and natural gas resources but exploration in the sea is incomplete. , 20 wells are in place. Throughout much of its existence, the Black Sea has had significant oil and gas-forming potential because of significant inflows of sediment and nutrient-rich waters. However, this varies geographically. For example, prospects are poorer off the coast of Bulgaria because of the large influx of sediment from the Danube which obscured sunlight and diluted organic-rich sediments. Many of the discoveries to date have taken place offshore of Romania in the Western Black Sea and only a few discoveries have been made in the Eastern Black Sea.

During the Eocene, the Paratethys Sea was partially isolated and sea levels fell. During this time sand shed off the rising Balkanide, Pontide and Caucasus mountains trapped organic material in the Maykop Suite of rocks through the Oligocene and early Miocene. Natural gas appears in rocks deposited in the Miocene and Pliocene by the paleo-Dnieper and paleo-Dniester rivers, or in deep-water Oligocene-age rocks. Serious exploration began in 1999 with two deep-water wells, Limanköy-1 and Limanköy-2, drilled in Turkish waters. Next, the HPX (Hopa)-1 deepwater well targeted late Miocene sandstone units in Achara-Trialeti fold belt (also known as the Gurian fold belt) along the Georgia-Turkey maritime border. Although geologists inferred that these rocks might have hydrocarbons that migrated from the Maykop Suite, the well was unsuccessful. No more drilling happened for five years after the HPX-1 well. In 2010, Sinop-1 targeted carbonate reservoirs potentially charged from the nearby Maykop Suite on the Andrusov Ridge, but the well-struck only Cretaceous volcanic rocks. Yassihöyük-1 encountered similar problems.

Other Turkish wells, Sürmene-1 and Sile-1 drilled in the Eastern Black Sea in 2011 and 2015 respectively tested four-way closures above Cretaceous volcanoes, with no results in either case. A different Turkish well, Kastamonu-1 drilled in 2011 did successfully find thermogenic gas in Pliocene and Miocene shale-cored anticlines in the Western Black Sea. A year later in 2012, Romania drilled Domino-1 which struck gas prompting the drilling of other wells in the Neptun Deep. In 2016, the Bulgarian well Polshkov-1 targeted Maykop Suite sandstones in the Polshkov High and Russia is in the process of drilling Jurassic carbonates on the Shatsky Ridge as of 2018.

In August 2020, Turkey found of natural gas in the biggest ever discovery in the Black Sea, and hoped to begin production in the Sakarya Gas Field by 2023. The sector is near where Romania has also found gas reserves.

=== Trans-sea cooperation ===
=== Urban areas ===
=== Tourism ===

In the years following the end of the Cold War, the popularity of the Black Sea as a tourist destination steadily increased. Tourism at Black Sea resorts became one of the region&#x27;s growth industries.

The following is a list of notable Black Sea resort towns:
* 2 Mai (Romania)
* Agigea (Romania)
* Ahtopol (Bulgaria)
* Amasra (Turkey)
* Anaklia (Georgia)
* Anapa (Russia)
* Albena (Bulgaria)
* Alupka (Crimea, Ukraine/Russia )
* Alushta (Crimea, Ukraine/Russia )
* Balchik (Bulgaria)
* Batumi (Georgia)
* Burgas (Bulgaria)
* Byala (Bulgaria)
* Cap Aurora (Romania)
* Chakvi (Georgia)
* Constanța (Romania)
* Constantine and Helena (Bulgaria)
* Corbu (Romania)
* Costinești (Romania)
* Eforie (Romania)
* Emona (Bulgaria)
* Feodosia (Crimea, Ukraine/Russia )
* Foros (Crimea, Ukraine/Russia )
* Gagra (Abkhazia/Georgia)
* Gelendzhik (Russia)
* Giresun (Turkey)
* Golden Sands (Bulgaria)
* Gonio (Georgia)
* Gudauta and subsequently the Gudauta Bay (Abkhazia/Georgia)
* Gurzuf (Crimea, Ukraine/Russia )
* Hopa (Artvin, Turkey)
* Jupiter (Romania)
* Kamchia (Bulgaria)
* Kavarna (Bulgaria)
* Kiten (Bulgaria)
* Kobuleti (Georgia)
* Koktebel (Crimea, Ukraine/Russia )
* Lozenetz (Bulgaria)
* Mamaia (Romania)
* Mangalia (Romania)
* Năvodari (Romania)
* Neptun (Romania)
* Nesebar (Bulgaria)
* Novorossiysk (Russia)
* Obzor (Bulgaria)
* Odesa (Ukraine)
* Olimp (Romania)
* Ordu (Turkey)
* Pitsunda/Bichvinta (Abkhazia/Georgia)
* Pomorie (Bulgaria)
* Primorsko (Bulgaria)
* Rize (Turkey)
* Rusalka (Bulgaria)
* Samsun (Turkey)
* Saturn (Romania)
* Şile (Turkey)
* Sinop (Turkey)
* Skadovsk (Ukraine)
* Sochi (Russia)
* Sozopol (Bulgaria)
* Sudak (Crimea, Ukraine/Russia )
* Sulina (Romania)
* Sunny Beach (Bulgaria)
* Sveti Vlas (Bulgaria)
* Trabzon (Turkey)
* Tsikhisdziri (Georgia)
* Tuapse (Russia)
* Ureki (Georgia)
* Vama Veche (Romania)
* Varna (Bulgaria)
* Venus (Romania)
* Yalta (Crimea, Ukraine/Russia )
* Yevpatoria (Crimea, Ukraine/Russia )
* Zonguldak (Turkey)

=== Modern military use ===
The 1936 Montreux Convention provides for free passage of civilian ships between the international waters of the Black and the Mediterranean seas. However, a single country (Turkey) has complete control over the straits connecting the two seas. Military ships are categorized separately from civilian vessels and can pass through the straits only if the ship belongs to a Black Sea country. Other military ships have the right to pass through the straits if they are not in a war against Turkey and if they stay in the Black Sea basin for a limited time. The 1982 amendments to the Montreux Convention allow Turkey to close the straits at its discretion in both war and peacetime.

The Montreux Convention governs the passage of vessels between the Black, Mediterranean, and Aegean seas and the presence of military vessels belonging to non-littoral states in the Black Sea waters.

The Russian Black Sea Fleet has its official primary headquarters and facilities in the city of Sevastopol (Sevastopol Naval Base).

The Soviet hospital ship was sunk on 7 November 1941 by German aircraft while evacuating civilians and wounded soldiers from Crimea. It has been estimated that approximately 5,000 to 7,000 people were killed during the sinking, making it one of the deadliest maritime disasters in history. There were only eight survivors.

In December 2018, the Kerch Strait incident occurred, in which the Russian navy and coast guard took control of three Ukrainian vessels as the ships were trying to transit from the Black Sea into the Sea of Azov.

In April 2022, during the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the Russian cruiser Moskva was sunk in the western Black Sea by sea-skimming Neptune missiles of the Ukrainian Armed Forces while the Russians claimed that an onboard fire had caused munitions to explode and damage the ship extensively. She was the largest ship to be lost in naval combat in Europe since World War II.

In late 2023, Russia announced plans to build a naval base on the Black Sea coast of Abkhazia.

== See also ==

* 1927 Crimean earthquakes
* Kerch Strait
* Regions of Europe
* Sea of Azov

== Notes and references ==
=== Informational notes ===
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited references ===
* Stella Ghervas, &quot;Odessa et les confins de l&#x27;Europe: un éclairage historique&quot;, in Stella Ghervas et François Rosset (ed), &quot;Lieux d&#x27;Europe. Mythes et limites&quot; (Paris: Editions de la Maison des sciences de l&#x27;homme, 2008), pp.107–124. 
* Charles King, &quot;The Black Sea: A History&quot;, 2004, 
* William Ryan and Walter Pitman, &quot;Noah&#x27;s Flood&quot;, 1999, 
* Neal Ascherson, &quot;Black Sea&quot; (Vintage 1996), 
* Rüdiger Schmitt, &quot;Considerations on the Name of the Black Sea&quot;, in: &quot;Hellas und der griechische Osten&quot; (Saarbrücken 1996), pp.219–224
* 


== External links ==


* Space Monitoring of the Black Sea Coastline and Waters
* Pictures of the Black sea coast all along the Crimean peninsula
* Black Sea Environmental Internet Node
* Black Sea-Mediterranean Corridor during the last 30 ky: UNESCO IGCP 521 WG12</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="4" end="13" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q229088" start="19" end="27" title="marginal sea" label="marginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q986177" start="28" end="45" title="Mediterranean sea (oceanography)" label="mediterranean sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="60" end="66" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="71" end="75" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="89" end="96" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q191862" start="111" end="130" title="East European Plain" label="East European Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="144" end="152" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="167" end="175" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="194" end="202" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="204" end="211" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="213" end="220" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="222" end="228" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="230" end="236" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="242" end="249" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8737769" start="268" end="279" title="Inflow (hydrology)" label="supplied by"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="310" end="316" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="318" end="325" title="Dnieper" label="Dnieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="330" end="338" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="407" end="421" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35000" start="498" end="509" title="Sea of Azov" label="Sea of Azov"/>
<link wikidata="Q519263" start="618" end="634" title="Pontic Mountains" label="Pontic Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477" start="690" end="708" title="Caucasus Mountains" label="Caucasus Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q748282" start="730" end="747" title="Crimean Mountains" label="Crimean Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="808" end="818" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q539174" start="848" end="857" title="Strandzha" label="Strandzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q989356" start="859" end="869" title="Cape Emine" label="Cape Emine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170427" start="906" end="922" title="Balkan Mountains" label="Balkan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736223" start="932" end="947" title="Dobruja Plateau" label="Dobruja Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="1077" end="1085" title="Bosporus" label="Bosporus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509" start="1087" end="1093" title="Burgas" label="Burgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="1095" end="1100" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="1102" end="1111" title="Constanța" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="1113" end="1118" title="Odesa" label="Odesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="1120" end="1130" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q15760" start="1132" end="1144" title="Novorossiysk" label="Novorossiysk"/>
<link wikidata="Q39420" start="1146" end="1151" title="Sochi" label="Sochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185345" start="1153" end="1157" title="Poti" label="Poti"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="1159" end="1165" title="Batumi" label="Batumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45301" start="1167" end="1174" title="Trabzon" label="Trabzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160450" start="1179" end="1185" title="Samsun" label="Samsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148989" start="1217" end="1230" title="water balance" label="water balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="1300" end="1311" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="1321" end="1331" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051401" start="1425" end="1440" title="Turkish Straits" label="Turkish Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q496805" start="1537" end="1549" title="saline water" label="saline water"/>
<link wikidata="Q568324" start="1770" end="1776" title="Anoxic waters" label="anoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12727686" start="1835" end="1853" title="Ancient Black Sea shipwrecks" label="ancient shipwrecks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="1927" end="1944" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="2035" end="2049" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="2117" end="2128" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q187890" start="2197" end="2209" title="Kerch Strait" label="Kerch Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="2348" end="2353" title="continental shelf" label="shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="2614" end="2625" title="world ocean" label="World Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q194502" start="2719" end="2734" title="endorheic basin" label="endorheic basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="2803" end="2814" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084008" start="2939" end="2963" title="Black Sea undersea river" label="Black Sea undersea river"/>
<link wikidata="Q468469" start="3056" end="3062" title="seabed" label="seabed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160372" start="3316" end="3319" title="Laz language" label="Laz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="3451" end="3457" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q376431" start="3696" end="3706" title="color term" label="color term"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="3731" end="3738" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q44133" start="3744" end="3753" title="White Sea" label="White Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q37960" start="3762" end="3772" title="Yellow Sea" label="Yellow Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322482" start="3898" end="3906" title="Hattians" label="Hattians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="3933" end="3941" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q145237" start="3962" end="3967" title="Zalpuwa" label="Zalpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q257785" start="4058" end="4069" title="Kızılırmak River" label="Kızıl Irmak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="4116" end="4121" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="4201" end="4208" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="4381" end="4387" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="4635" end="4641" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q690653" start="4655" end="4666" title="Geographica" label="Geographica"/>
<link wikidata="Q621672" start="4866" end="4872" title="Pontus (region)" label="Pontus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="5069" end="5078" title="Milesians (Greek)" label="Milesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q828047" start="5079" end="5088" title="Greek colonisation" label="colonized"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5308" end="5360" title="Cardinal direction#Cultural variations" label="color symbolism representing the cardinal directions"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="5643" end="5652" title="Red Sea" label="(red) sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="5674" end="5685" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenids"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="5740" end="5754" title="folk etymology" label="folk etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="5833" end="5840" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005362" start="5886" end="5904" title="Bundahishn" label="Greater Bundahishn"/>
<link wikidata="Q32063" start="5908" end="5922" title="Middle Persian" label="Middle Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="5923" end="5934" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966830" start="6077" end="6100" title="The Georgian Chronicles" label="The Georgian Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18973" start="6145" end="6155" title="Kartvelian peoples" label="Kartvelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329911" start="6175" end="6182" title="Saspers" label="Saspers"/>
<link wikidata="Q232916" start="6292" end="6308" title="Abraham Ortelius" label="Abraham Ortelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="6450" end="6464" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q744068" start="6488" end="6500" title="Perso-Arabic" label="Perso-Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="6506" end="6521" title="Ottoman Turkish" label="Ottoman Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q233611" start="6581" end="6620" title="International Hydrographic Organization" label="International Hydrographic Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q193158" start="6806" end="6815" title="Chernozem" label="Chernozem"/>
<link wikidata="Q681964" start="6878" end="6886" title="Slavonia" label="Slavonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="6899" end="6905" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241026" start="6943" end="6957" title="Danubian Plain (Bulgaria)" label="Danubian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854529" start="6981" end="6997" title="Wallachian Plain" label="Wallachian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q190350" start="7043" end="7069" title="Central Black Earth Region" label="Central Black Earth Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="7095" end="7102" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="7109" end="7122" title="littoral zone" label="littoral zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q39594" start="7213" end="7216" title="bay" label="bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414385" start="7239" end="7251" title="Karkinit Bay" label="Karkinit Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q385652" start="7268" end="7282" title="Gulf of Burgas" label="Gulf of Burgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618618" start="7296" end="7312" title="Dnieper-Bug Estuary" label="Dnieprovska Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974485" start="7317" end="7329" title="Dniester Estuary" label="Dniestrovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q156030" start="7330" end="7335" title="Liman (landform)" label="Liman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039198" start="7358" end="7367" title="Hamsilos Bay" label="Sinop Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q160450" start="7372" end="7378" title="Samsun" label="Samsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="7483" end="7488" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="7524" end="7530" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="7533" end="7540" title="Dnieper" label="Dnieper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229" start="7543" end="7546" title="Don (river)" label="Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="7549" end="7557" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q257785" start="7560" end="7570" title="Kızılırmak River" label="Kızılırmak"/>
<link wikidata="Q82308" start="7573" end="7578" title="Kuban (river)" label="Kuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q217466" start="7581" end="7588" title="Sakarya River" label="Sakarya"/>
<link wikidata="Q188940" start="7591" end="7603" title="Southern Bug" label="Southern Bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q70970" start="7606" end="7620" title="Çoruh" label="Çoruh/Chorokhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145293" start="7623" end="7633" title="Yeşilırmak (river)" label="Yeşilırmak"/>
<link wikidata="Q203409" start="7636" end="7641" title="Rioni" label="Rioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q133452" start="7644" end="7648" title="Yeya" label="Yeya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165587" start="7651" end="7655" title="Mius" label="Mius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461510" start="7658" end="7666" title="Kamchiya" label="Kamchiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q504388" start="7669" end="7680" title="Enguri" label="Enguri/Egry"/>
<link wikidata="Q280796" start="7683" end="7690" title="Kalmius" label="Kalmius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513565" start="7693" end="7701" title="Molochna" label="Molochna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492856" start="7704" end="7711" title="Tylihul (river)" label="Tylihul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510220" start="7714" end="7730" title="Velykyi Kuialnyk" label="Velykyi Kuialnyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455311" start="7733" end="7739" title="Veleka" label="Veleka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890912" start="7742" end="7748" title="Rezovo (river)" label="Rezovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048890" start="7751" end="7764" title="Kodori (river)" label="Kodori/Kwydry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972264" start="7767" end="7777" title="Bzyb (river)" label="Bzyb/Bzipi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862423" start="7780" end="7785" title="Supsa (river)" label="Supsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364317" start="7788" end="7794" title="Mzymta" label="Mzymta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062415" start="8100" end="8120" title="St. Anastasia Island" label="St. Anastasia Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q12730526" start="8290" end="8298" title="K Island" label="K Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662500" start="8430" end="8448" title="Dzharylhach" label="Dzharylhach Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q155868" start="8461" end="8483" title="Snake Island (Black Sea)" label="Zmiinyi (Snake) Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137345" start="8617" end="8643" title="North Atlantic oscillation" label="North Atlantic oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79602" start="9019" end="9026" title="cyclone" label="cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="9072" end="9085" title="precipitation" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507383" start="9121" end="9144" title="sea surface temperature" label="sea surface temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="9322" end="9332" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="9385" end="9398" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q519263" start="9463" end="9469" title="Pontic Mountains" label="Pontic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477" start="9474" end="9482" title="Caucasus Mountains" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="9853" end="9870" title="Crimea" label="Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q798367" start="9911" end="9925" title="back-arc basin" label="back-arc basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q301728" start="9971" end="9977" title="Albian" label="Albian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426043" start="9978" end="9990" title="volcanic arc" label="volcanic arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="9999" end="10009" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432114" start="10022" end="10027" title="Paleo-Tethys Ocean" label="Paleo"/>
<link wikidata="Q208136" start="10037" end="10043" title="Tethys Ocean" label="Tethys"/>
<link wikidata="Q132033" start="10202" end="10210" title="Laurasia" label="Laurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="10222" end="10230" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q732702" start="10393" end="10402" title="Barremian" label="Barremian"/>
<link wikidata="Q622265" start="10407" end="10413" title="Aptian" label="Aptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q257290" start="10486" end="10495" title="Santonian" label="Santonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="10562" end="10572" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q505748" start="10649" end="10658" title="volcanism" label="volcanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="10672" end="10681" title="orogeny" label="orogenies"/>
<link wikidata="Q486986" start="10709" end="10725" title="Greater Caucasus" label="Greater Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q519263" start="10727" end="10735" title="Pontides" label="Pontides"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="10746" end="10763" title="Crimea" label="Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="10768" end="10774" title="Balkan" label="Balkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q605948" start="10807" end="10832" title="Messinian salinity crisis" label="Messinian salinity crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="10852" end="10869" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q188521" start="10946" end="10954" title="Eurasian Plate" label="Eurasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q203548" start="10959" end="10966" title="African Plate" label="African"/>
<link wikidata="Q259207" start="11005" end="11014" title="Anatolian Plate" label="Anatolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q181971" start="11031" end="11046" title="North Anatolian Fault" label="North Anatolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711902" start="11051" end="11065" title="East Anatolian Fault" label="East Anatolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q134851" start="11381" end="11386" title="continental shelf" label="shelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="11556" end="11563" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414755" start="11744" end="11764" title="Euxine abyssal plain" label="Euxine abyssal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q128499" start="11837" end="11842" title="Yalta" label="Yalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="11850" end="11867" title="Crimea" label="Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735091" start="11907" end="11914" title="Euxinia" label="Euxinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215839" start="11952" end="11963" title="Aeolian processes" label="eolian silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14663456" start="11989" end="12004" title="Riss glaciation" label="Riss glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166215" start="12038" end="12041" title="marine isotope stages" label="MIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q301920" start="12069" end="12089" title="marine transgression" label="marine transgression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295340" start="12110" end="12116" title="Eemian" label="Eemian"/>
<link wikidata="Q487294" start="12117" end="12129" title="Interglacial" label="Interglacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="12202" end="12213" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="12267" end="12284" title="Crimean Peninsula" label="Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="12439" end="12450" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225001" start="12647" end="12654" title="coquina" label="coquina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12740" end="12753" title="hydrotroilite" label="hydrotroilite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="12900" end="12908" title="alluvial" label="alluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="12952" end="12962" title="lacustrine" label="lacustrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6445670" start="12984" end="12997" title="mollusc shell" label="mollusc shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q749602" start="13041" end="13052" title="terrigenous sediment" label="terrigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="13067" end="13071" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290577" start="13097" end="13114" title="continental slope" label="continental slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501943" start="13115" end="13124" title="turbidite" label="turbidite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165822" start="13216" end="13226" title="meromictic" label="meromictic"/>
<link wikidata="Q568324" start="13389" end="13395" title="Anoxic waters" label="anoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434465" start="13494" end="13501" title="fluvial" label="fluvial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13629" end="13647" title="estuary#Salt wedge" label="salt wedge estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="13666" end="13683" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="13696" end="13704" title="Bosporus" label="Bosporus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="13709" end="13720" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="13978" end="13992" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q274141" start="14478" end="14495" title="Dolmabahçe Palace" label="Dolmabahçe Palace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14790" end="14814" title="Salinity#Seawater" label="practical salinity units"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478382" start="15011" end="15019" title="Cyclonic rotation" label="cyclonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250263" start="15103" end="15107" title="gyre" label="gyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q994122" start="15414" end="15420" title="eddy (fluid dynamics)" label="eddies"/>
<link wikidata="Q215915" start="15679" end="15688" title="upwelling" label="upwelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540292" start="15993" end="16002" title="halocline" label="halocline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478740" start="16308" end="16318" title="pycnocline" label="pycnocline"/>
<link wikidata="Q10577628" start="16676" end="16694" title="geothermal heating" label="geothermal heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030793" start="16704" end="16718" title="residence time" label="residence time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084008" start="16769" end="16793" title="Black Sea undersea river" label="Black Sea undersea river"/>
<link wikidata="Q468469" start="16886" end="16892" title="seabed" label="seabed"/>
<link wikidata="Q503424" start="16997" end="17016" title="University of Leeds" label="University of Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="17318" end="17331" title="human impact on the environment" label="anthropogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q326139" start="17439" end="17450" title="algal bloom" label="algal bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431405" start="17486" end="17494" title="sapropel" label="sapropel"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="17532" end="17545" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265179" start="17693" end="17711" title="marine archaeology" label="marine archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="17805" end="17814" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7524919" start="17821" end="17828" title="Sinop D" label="Sinop D"/>
<link wikidata="Q599416" start="17875" end="17888" title="Sinop, Turkey" label="Sinop, Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="17932" end="17947" title="asteroid impact" label="asteroid impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="17981" end="17997" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="18407" end="18415" title="brackish" label="brackish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053008" start="18508" end="18515" title="Trophic level" label="trophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131427" start="18529" end="18538" title="autotroph" label="autotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="18558" end="18564" title="diatom" label="diatom"/>
<link wikidata="Q120490" start="18570" end="18584" title="dinoflagellate" label="dinoflagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="19131" end="19141" title="insolation" label="insolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q579649" start="19183" end="19194" title="photic zone" label="photic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="19311" end="19318" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="19335" end="19342" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q686881" start="19348" end="19360" title="benthic zone" label="benthic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q120490" start="19836" end="19850" title="dinoflagellate" label="dinoflagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="19853" end="19859" title="diatom" label="diatom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647990" start="19862" end="19877" title="coccolithophore" label="coccolithophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="19883" end="19896" title="cyanobacteria" label="cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q126697989" start="20245" end="20262" title="Emiliania huxleyi" label="Emiliania huxleyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q120490" start="20319" end="20333" title="Dinoflagellate" label="Dinoflagellate"/>
<link wikidata="Q72157355" start="20609" end="20616" title="nitrite" label="nitrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q140581" start="20691" end="20702" title="Gymnodinium" label="Gymnodinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q568324" start="20977" end="20983" title="Anoxic waters" label="anoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q834023" start="21083" end="21096" title="thermophilous" label="thermophilous"/>
<link wikidata="Q159344" start="21228" end="21239" title="heterotroph" label="heterotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="21466" end="21473" title="endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="21517" end="21523" title="Diatom" label="Diatom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36468" start="21628" end="21639" title="unicellular" label="unicellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="21676" end="21681" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="21984" end="21991" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193211" start="22137" end="22141" title="cyst" label="cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q190901" start="22200" end="22208" title="ammonium" label="ammonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647990" start="22355" end="22370" title="Coccolithophore" label="Coccolithophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q33596" start="22405" end="22411" title="Motility" label="motile"/>
<link wikidata="Q131427" start="22413" end="22424" title="autotrophic" label="autotrophic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="22425" end="22438" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q608189" start="22475" end="22484" title="coccolith" label="coccolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q849599" start="22696" end="22707" title="thermocline" label="thermocline"/>
<link wikidata="Q423133" start="23028" end="23044" title="dimethyl sulfide" label="dimethyl sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="23179" end="23187" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q93315" start="23277" end="23290" title="Cyanobacteria" label="Cyanobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382538" start="23323" end="23335" title="picoplankton" label="picoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="23380" end="23382" title="micrometre" label="μm"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="23384" end="23392" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="23422" end="23436" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q467410" start="23563" end="23570" title="biofilm" label="biofilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q752130" start="23906" end="23918" title="Zebra mussel" label="Zebra mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="23950" end="23961" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="24086" end="24102" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q81110" start="24135" end="24146" title="Common carp" label="Common carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q35883" start="24241" end="24249" title="Aral Sea" label="Aral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q838199" start="24350" end="24360" title="Round goby" label="Round goby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="24556" end="24567" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="24614" end="24623" title="megafauna" label="megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q207114" start="24698" end="24704" title="common dolphin" label="common"/>
<link wikidata="Q149069" start="24709" end="24719" title="bottlenose dolphin" label="bottlenose"/>
<link wikidata="Q27027" start="24729" end="24745" title="harbour porpoise" label="harbour porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q35000" start="24978" end="24982" title="Sea of Azov" label="Azov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652980" start="25076" end="25090" title="Crimean Bridge" label="Crimean Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q208549" start="25338" end="25361" title="Mediterranean monk seal" label="Mediterranean monk seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q155868" start="25526" end="25538" title="Snake Island (Black Sea)" label="Snake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q184429" start="25549" end="25561" title="Danube Delta" label="Danube Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253669" start="25618" end="25627" title="Doğankent" label="Doğankent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682553" start="25661" end="25672" title="hauling-out" label="hauling-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="25727" end="25741" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q30263" start="25896" end="25904" title="pinniped" label="pinniped"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="25907" end="25916" title="sea otter" label="sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q132072" start="25922" end="25934" title="beluga whale" label="beluga whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q27370" start="26051" end="26060" title="grey seal" label="grey seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q129026" start="26141" end="26158" title="Great white shark" label="Great white shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q185260" start="26227" end="26240" title="basking shark" label="basking shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q189973" start="27341" end="27348" title="copepod" label="copepod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317486" start="27426" end="27442" title="warty comb jelly" label="warty comb jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738459" start="27578" end="27597" title="species composition" label="species composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="28422" end="28438" title="sewage treatment" label="sewage-treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="28760" end="28771" title="World Ocean" label="World Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q37901" start="28798" end="28804" title="strait" label="strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="28811" end="28822" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="28831" end="28839" title="Bosporus" label="Bosporus"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="28938" end="28950" title="Last Glacial Period" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="29373" end="29383" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046809" start="29723" end="29750" title="Black Sea deluge hypothesis" label="Black Sea deluge hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29772" end="29784" title="William Ryan (geologist)" label="William Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543871" start="29786" end="29799" title="Walter C. Pitman III" label="Walter Pitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q20498364" start="29804" end="29818" title="Petko Dimitrov" label="Petko Dimitrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="29960" end="29977" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="30002" end="30010" title="Bosporus" label="Bosporus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="30059" end="30077" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q737498" start="30153" end="30169" title="academic journal" label="academic journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q134052" start="30422" end="30432" title="flood myth" label="flood myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="30485" end="30493" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123411" start="30495" end="30502" title="Carians" label="Carians"/>
<link wikidata="Q183150" start="30504" end="30513" title="Colchis" label="Colchians"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="30515" end="30524" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q144964" start="30526" end="30535" title="Thracians" label="Thracians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="30537" end="30543" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="30545" end="30553" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q192730" start="30555" end="30565" title="Cimmerians" label="Cimmerians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="30567" end="30576" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="30578" end="30584" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441232" start="30586" end="30596" title="Byzantine Greeks" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="30598" end="30603" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="30605" end="30609" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="30611" end="30616" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="30618" end="30623" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q48343" start="30625" end="30635" title="Varangians" label="Varangians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="30637" end="30646" title="Crusaders" label="Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="30648" end="30657" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetians"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="30659" end="30666" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q183150" start="30668" end="30677" title="Colchis" label="Georgians"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="30679" end="30689" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="30691" end="30697" title="Tatars" label="Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="30702" end="30710" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137529" start="30734" end="30751" title="historical powers" label="historical powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q568324" start="30806" end="30819" title="anoxic waters" label="anoxic waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265179" start="30876" end="30897" title="maritime archaeology" label="marine archaeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q12727686" start="30943" end="30976" title="Ancient Black Sea shipwrecks" label="ancient ships and organic remains"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="31115" end="31122" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="31149" end="31155" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="31175" end="31183" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="31188" end="31200" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="31214" end="31224" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="31229" end="31240" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="31259" end="31265" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q183150" start="31331" end="31338" title="Colchis" label="Colchis"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="31355" end="31362" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="31380" end="31394" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q599529" start="31429" end="31450" title="Pontic–Caspian steppe" label="Pontic–Caspian steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006441" start="31532" end="31549" title="Proto-Indo-European homeland" label="original homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="31576" end="31604" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European language"/>
<link wikidata="Q828047" start="31696" end="31704" title="Greek colonisation" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q148837" start="32099" end="32104" title="polis" label="polis"/>
<link wikidata="Q679524" start="32217" end="32223" title="Pontic Greeks" label="Pontic"/>
<link wikidata="Q132203" start="32302" end="32313" title="Greek diaspora" label="Greek world"/>
<link wikidata="Q185126" start="32347" end="32368" title="Mithridates VI Eupator" label="Mithridates of Pontus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="32370" end="32374" title="Roman Empire" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="32379" end="32393" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="32427" end="32433" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062125" start="32480" end="32492" title="Ottoman Navy" label="Ottoman Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="32523" end="32540" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="32669" end="32675" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q208169" start="32693" end="32699" title="Republic of Ragusa" label="Ragusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q123560189" start="32724" end="32781" title="Crimean slave trade" label="trade route of slaves between Crimea and Ottoman Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242966" start="32790" end="32833" title="Crimean–Nogai slave raids in Eastern Europe" label="Crimean–Nogai slave raids in Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="32836" end="32851" title="Imperial Russia" label="Imperial Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136962" start="32941" end="32952" title="Novorossiya" label="Novorossiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q18408564" start="32965" end="32974" title="Annexation of the Crimean Khanate by the Russian Empire" label="of Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="33052" end="33067" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q583941" start="33093" end="33114" title="Imperial Russian Navy" label="Imperial Russian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="33191" end="33208" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="33238" end="33249" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="33359" end="33379" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nicholas I of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="33429" end="33441" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q319260" start="33552" end="33574" title="Treaty of Paris (1856)" label="Treaty of Paris (1856)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41691" start="33684" end="33702" title="demilitarized zone" label="demilitarized zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="33746" end="33756" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33830" end="33841" title="Naval warfare of World War I#Black Sea" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="33919" end="33931" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="33946" end="33956" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q27578" start="34004" end="34019" title="Schwerer Gustav" label="Schwerer Gustav"/>
<link wikidata="Q154860" start="34027" end="34058" title="Siege of Sevastopol (1941–1942)" label="Siege of Sevastopol (1941–1942)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34320" end="34333" title="Severnaya Bay" label="Severnaya Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358324" start="34506" end="34523" title="coastal batteries" label="coastal batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="34792" end="34819" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155868" start="34821" end="34833" title="Snake Island (Ukraine)" label="Snake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q111012552" start="34909" end="34943" title="2022 Snake Island campaign" label="attacked and captured Snake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="35119" end="35134" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992278" start="35136" end="35158" title="Russian cruiser Moskva" label="Russian cruiser Moskva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333260" start="35305" end="35311" title="Kalibr" label="Kalibr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631562" start="35312" end="35316" title="SLCM" label="SLCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q32024" start="35395" end="35408" title="Sergey Shoigu" label="Sergey Shoigu"/>
<link wikidata="Q170013" start="35486" end="35494" title="corvette" label="corvette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35495" end="35508" title="Steregushchiy" label="Steregushchiy"/>
<link wikidata="Q504292" start="35541" end="35557" title="Russian battlecruiser Admiral Nakhimov" label="Admiral Nakhimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q173680" start="35603" end="35608" title="Su-27" label="Su-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q816695" start="35657" end="35668" title="MQ-9 Reaper" label="MQ-9 Reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q117121762" start="35695" end="35722" title="2023 Black Sea drone incident" label="to crash into the Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q245275" start="35757" end="35762" title="Su-35" label="Su-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q157925" start="35825" end="35839" title="L-140 Turbolet" label="L-140 Turbolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370337" start="36003" end="36016" title="Estonian Navy" label="Estonian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="36785" end="36789" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="36843" end="36852" title="smuggling" label="smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665560" start="37034" end="37082" title="International Transport Workers&amp;#x27; Federation" label="International Transport Workers&amp;#x27; Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="37137" end="37144" title="seaport" label="seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="37189" end="37196" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188387" start="37361" end="37370" title="European anchovy" label="anchovies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="37551" end="37563" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079691" start="37572" end="37589" title="offshore drilling" label="offshore drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="37594" end="37603" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="37649" end="37656" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="37741" end="37764" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078001" start="37962" end="37981" title="territorial dispute" label="territorial dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="37987" end="37994" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="38790" end="38796" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q288291" start="38802" end="38812" title="Paratethys" label="Paratethys"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="39011" end="39020" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="39031" end="39038" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="40585" end="40591" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q106310678" start="40698" end="40715" title="Sakarya Gas Field" label="Sakarya Gas Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="40750" end="40757" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="40893" end="40901" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="40940" end="40947" title="tourism" label="tourist"/>
<link wikidata="Q875157" start="41106" end="41112" title="resort" label="resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q222854" start="41122" end="41127" title="2 Mai" label="2 Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q516748" start="41140" end="41146" title="Agigea" label="Agigea"/>
<link wikidata="Q341027" start="41159" end="41166" title="Ahtopol" label="Ahtopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q455458" start="41180" end="41186" title="Amasra" label="Amasra"/>
<link wikidata="Q484402" start="41198" end="41205" title="Anaklia" label="Anaklia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15758" start="41218" end="41223" title="Anapa" label="Anapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q670939" start="41235" end="41241" title="Albena" label="Albena"/>
<link wikidata="Q448047" start="41255" end="41261" title="Alupka" label="Alupka"/>
<link wikidata="Q46001" start="41290" end="41297" title="Alushta" label="Alushta"/>
<link wikidata="Q329437" start="41326" end="41333" title="Balchik" label="Balchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="41347" end="41353" title="Batumi" label="Batumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509" start="41366" end="41372" title="Burgas" label="Burgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043641" start="41386" end="41391" title="Byala, Varna Province" label="Byala"/>
<link wikidata="Q843759" start="41405" end="41415" title="Cap Aurora" label="Cap Aurora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646262" start="41428" end="41434" title="Chakvi" label="Chakvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="41447" end="41456" title="Constanța" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022285" start="41469" end="41491" title="Saints Constantine and Helena, Bulgaria" label="Constantine and Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054198" start="41505" end="41510" title="Corbu, Constanța" label="Corbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12113675" start="41523" end="41533" title="Costinești" label="Costinești"/>
<link wikidata="Q586387" start="41546" end="41552" title="Eforie" label="Eforie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597695" start="41565" end="41570" title="Emona, Bulgaria" label="Emona"/>
<link wikidata="Q158491" start="41584" end="41592" title="Feodosia" label="Feodosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437932" start="41621" end="41626" title="Foros, Crimea" label="Foros"/>
<link wikidata="Q44811" start="41655" end="41660" title="Gagra" label="Gagra"/>
<link wikidata="Q15775" start="41682" end="41692" title="Gelendzhik" label="Gelendzhik"/>
<link wikidata="Q201095" start="41704" end="41711" title="Giresun" label="Giresun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026748" start="41723" end="41735" title="Golden Sands" label="Golden Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537193" start="41749" end="41754" title="Gonio (settlement)" label="Gonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q242593" start="41767" end="41774" title="Gudauta" label="Gudauta"/>
<link wikidata="Q24684382" start="41796" end="41807" title="Gudauta Bay" label="Gudauta Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026062" start="41829" end="41835" title="Gurzuf" label="Gurzuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q657127" start="41864" end="41868" title="Hopa" label="Hopa"/>
<link wikidata="Q57591" start="41888" end="41895" title="Jupiter, Romania" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315768" start="41908" end="41915" title="Resort of Kamchiya" label="Kamchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q405120" start="41929" end="41936" title="Kavarna" label="Kavarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993655" start="41950" end="41955" title="Kiten, Burgas Province" label="Kiten"/>
<link wikidata="Q328975" start="41969" end="41977" title="Kobuleti" label="Kobuleti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743602" start="41990" end="41998" title="Koktebel" label="Koktebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249093" start="42027" end="42035" title="Lozenets, Burgas Province" label="Lozenetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q854646" start="42049" end="42055" title="Mamaia" label="Mamaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467498" start="42068" end="42076" title="Mangalia" label="Mangalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837960" start="42089" end="42097" title="Năvodari" label="Năvodari"/>
<link wikidata="Q369592" start="42110" end="42116" title="Neptun, Romania" label="Neptun"/>
<link wikidata="Q193241" start="42129" end="42136" title="Nesebar" label="Nesebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15760" start="42150" end="42162" title="Novorossiysk" label="Novorossiysk"/>
<link wikidata="Q406649" start="42174" end="42179" title="Obzor" label="Obzor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="42193" end="42198" title="Odesa" label="Odesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q528893" start="42211" end="42216" title="Olimp, Romania" label="Olimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q184539" start="42229" end="42233" title="Ordu" label="Ordu"/>
<link wikidata="Q211318" start="42245" end="42263" title="Pitsunda" label="Pitsunda/Bichvinta"/>
<link wikidata="Q407372" start="42285" end="42292" title="Pomorie" label="Pomorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q405153" start="42306" end="42315" title="Primorsko" label="Primorsko"/>
<link wikidata="Q201101" start="42329" end="42333" title="Rize" label="Rize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380631" start="42345" end="42352" title="Rusalka, Bulgaria" label="Rusalka"/>
<link wikidata="Q160450" start="42366" end="42372" title="Samsun" label="Samsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q911746" start="42384" end="42390" title="Saturn, Romania" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q241631" start="42403" end="42407" title="Şile" label="Şile"/>
<link wikidata="Q599416" start="42419" end="42424" title="Sinop, Turkey" label="Sinop"/>
<link wikidata="Q669688" start="42436" end="42444" title="Skadovsk" label="Skadovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q39420" start="42457" end="42462" title="Sochi" label="Sochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q271925" start="42474" end="42481" title="Sozopol" label="Sozopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830" start="42495" end="42500" title="Sudak" label="Sudak"/>
<link wikidata="Q328647" start="42529" end="42535" title="Sulina" label="Sulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011039" start="42548" end="42559" title="Sunny Beach" label="Sunny Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q406657" start="42573" end="42583" title="Sveti Vlas" label="Sveti Vlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q45301" start="42597" end="42604" title="Trabzon" label="Trabzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15547818" start="42616" end="42628" title="Tsikhisdziri" label="Tsikhisdziri"/>
<link wikidata="Q196702" start="42641" end="42647" title="Tuapse" label="Tuapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651285" start="42659" end="42664" title="Ureki" label="Ureki"/>
<link wikidata="Q936239" start="42677" end="42687" title="Vama Veche" label="Vama Veche"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="42700" end="42705" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089446" start="42719" end="42724" title="Venus, Romania" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128499" start="42737" end="42742" title="Yalta" label="Yalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q33345" start="42771" end="42781" title="Yevpatoria" label="Yevpatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q187895" start="42810" end="42819" title="Zonguldak" label="Zonguldak"/>
<link wikidata="Q869500" start="42862" end="42886" title="Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Straits" label="1936 Montreux Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q869500" start="43440" end="43459" title="Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Straits" label="Montreux Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="43699" end="43707" title="littoral" label="littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="43753" end="43768" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="43837" end="43847" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411903" start="43849" end="43870" title="Sevastopol Naval Base" label="Sevastopol Naval Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="43999" end="44005" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q22133664" start="44133" end="44151" title="List of maritime disasters in the 20th century" label="maritime disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q59199697" start="44220" end="44241" title="Kerch Strait incident" label="Kerch Strait incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q35000" start="44398" end="44409" title="Sea of Azov" label="Sea of Azov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992278" start="44471" end="44493" title="Russian cruiser Moskva" label="Russian cruiser Moskva"/>
<link wikidata="Q28706540" start="44544" end="44551" title="R-360 Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q936105" start="44568" end="44590" title="Armed Forces of Ukraine" label="Ukrainian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="44772" end="44784" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="44872" end="44880" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379532" start="44901" end="44925" title="1927 Crimean earthquakes" label="1927 Crimean earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187890" start="44928" end="44940" title="Kerch Strait" label="Kerch Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470668" start="44943" end="44960" title="Regions of Europe" label="Regions of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35000" start="44963" end="44974" title="Sea of Azov" label="Sea of Azov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079801" start="45357" end="45369" title="Charles King (professor of international affairs)" label="Charles King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747574" start="45490" end="45504" title="Neal Ascherson" label="Neal Ascherson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3390" wikidata="Q1845" url="?curid=3390" title="Bible">
<text>The Bible is a collection of religious texts and scriptures that are held to be sacred in Christianity, and partly in Judaism, Samaritanism, Islam, the Baháʼí Faith, and other Abrahamic religions. The Bible is an anthology (a compilation of texts of a variety of forms) originally written in Hebrew, Aramaic, and Koine Greek. The texts include instructions, stories, poetry, prophecies, and other genres. The collection of materials accepted as part of the Bible by a particular religious tradition or community is called a biblical canon. Believers generally consider it to be a product of divine inspiration, but the way they understand what that means and interpret the text varies.

The religious texts were compiled by different religious communities into various official collections. The earliest contained the first five books of the Bible, called the Torah in Hebrew and the Pentateuch (meaning &quot;five books&quot;) in Greek. The second-oldest part was a collection of narrative histories and prophecies (the Nevi&#x27;im). The third collection, the Ketuvim, contains psalms, proverbs, and narrative histories. &quot;Tanakh&quot; () is an alternate term for the Hebrew Bible, which is composed of the first letters of the three components comprising scriptures written originally in Hebrew: the Torah (&quot;Teaching&quot;), the Nevi&#x27;im (&quot;Prophets&quot;), and the Ketuvim (&quot;Writings&quot;). The Masoretic Text is the medieval version of the Tanakh—written in Hebrew and Aramaic—that is considered the authoritative text of the Hebrew Bible by modern Rabbinic Judaism. The Septuagint is a Koine Greek translation of the Tanakh from the third and second centuries BCE; it largely overlaps with the Hebrew Bible.

Christianity began as an outgrowth of Second Temple Judaism, using the Septuagint as the basis of the Old Testament. The early Church continued the Jewish tradition of writing and incorporating what it saw as inspired, authoritative religious books. The gospels, which are narratives about the life and teachings of Jesus, along with the Pauline epistles, and other texts quickly coalesced into the New Testament. 

With estimated total sales of over five billion copies, the Bible is the best-selling publication of all time. It has had a profound influence both on Western culture and history and on cultures around the globe. The study of it through biblical criticism has also indirectly impacted culture and history. The Bible is currently translated or is being translated into about half of the world&#x27;s languages.

Some view biblical texts as morally problematic, historically inaccurate, or corrupted by time; others find it a useful historical source for certain peoples and events or a source of ethical teachings. The Bible neither calls for nor condemns slavery outright, but there are verses that address dealing with it; these verses have been interpreted to support the institution of slavery, but the Bible has also been used to support abolitionism. Some have written that Christian supersessionism is rooted in the Book of Hebrews, whereas others locate its beginnings in the culture of the fourth-century Roman Empire. The Bible has been used to support monotheism, charity, healthcare, family values and education. It has also been used to support the death penalty, patriarchy, anti-LGBTQ rhetoric and bigotry, the violence of total war, and colonialism.
== Etymology ==
The term &quot;Bible&quot; can refer to the Hebrew Bible or the Christian Bible, which contains both the Old and New Testaments.

The English word &quot;Bible&quot; is derived from , meaning &quot;the books&quot; (singular ).
The word itself had the literal meaning of &quot;scroll&quot; and came to be used as the ordinary word for &quot;book&quot;. It is the diminutive of &quot;byblos&quot;, &quot;Egyptian papyrus&quot;, possibly so called from the name of the Phoenician seaport Byblos (also known as Gebal) from whence Egyptian papyrus was exported to Greece.

The Greek &quot;ta biblia&quot; (&quot;the books&quot;) was &quot;an expression Hellenistic Jews used to describe their sacred books&quot;. The biblical scholar F. F. Bruce notes that John Chrysostom appears to be the first writer (in his &quot;Homilies on Matthew&quot;, delivered between 386 and 388 CE) to use the Greek phrase &quot;ta biblia&quot; (&quot;the books&quot;) to describe both the Old and New Testaments together.

Latin &quot;biblia sacra&quot; &quot;holy books&quot; translates Greek (&quot;tà biblía tà hágia&quot;, &quot;the holy books&quot;). Medieval Latin is short for &quot;biblia sacra&quot; &quot;holy book&quot;. It gradually came to be regarded as a feminine singular noun (, gen. ) in medieval Latin, and so the word was loaned as singular into the vernaculars of Western Europe.

== Development and history ==

The Bible is not a single book; it is a collection of books whose complex development is not completely understood. The oldest books began as songs and stories orally transmitted from generation to generation. Scholars of the twenty-first century are only in the beginning stages of exploring &quot;the interface between writing, performance, memorization, and the aural dimension&quot; of the texts. Current indications are that writing and orality were not separate as much as ancient writing was learned in communal oral performance. The Bible was written and compiled by many people, who many scholars say are mostly unknown, from a variety of disparate cultures and backgrounds.

British biblical scholar John K. Riches wrote:
The books of the Bible were initially written and copied by hand on papyrus scrolls. No originals have survived. The age of the original composition of the texts is, therefore, difficult to determine and heavily debated. Using a combined linguistic and historiographical approach, Hendel and Joosten date the oldest parts of the Hebrew Bible (the Song of Deborah in Judges 5 and the Samson story of Judges 16 and 1 Samuel) to having been composed in the premonarchial early Iron Age (). The Dead Sea Scrolls, discovered in the caves of Qumran in 1947, are copies that can be dated to between 250 BCE and 100 CE. They are the oldest existing copies of the books of the Hebrew Bible of any length that are not fragments.

The earliest manuscripts were probably written in paleo-Hebrew, a kind of cuneiform pictograph similar to other pictographs of the same period. The exile to Babylon most likely prompted the shift to square script (Aramaic) in the fifth to third centuries BCE. From the time of the Dead Sea Scrolls, the Hebrew Bible was written with spaces between words to aid reading. By the eighth century CE, the Masoretes added vowel signs. Levites or scribes maintained the texts, and some texts were always treated as more authoritative than others. Scribes preserved and changed the texts by changing the script, updating archaic forms, and making corrections. These Hebrew texts were copied with great care.

Considered to be scriptures (sacred, authoritative religious texts), the books were compiled by different religious communities into various biblical canons (official collections of scriptures). The earliest compilation, containing the first five books of the Bible and called the Torah (meaning &quot;law&quot;, &quot;instruction&quot;, or &quot;teaching&quot;) or Pentateuch (&quot;five books&quot;), was accepted as Jewish canon by the fifth century BCE. A second collection of narrative histories and prophesies, called the Nevi&#x27;im (&quot;prophets&quot;), was canonized in the third century BCE. A third collection called the Ketuvim (&quot;writings&quot;), containing psalms, proverbs, and narrative histories, was canonized sometime between the second century BCE and the second century CE. These three collections were written mostly in Biblical Hebrew, with some parts in Aramaic, which together form the Hebrew Bible or &quot;TaNaKh&quot; (an abbreviation of &quot;Torah&quot;, &quot;Nevi&#x27;im&quot;, and &quot;Ketuvim&quot;).

=== Hebrew Bible ===
There are three major historical versions of the Hebrew Bible: the Septuagint, the Masoretic Text, and the Samaritan Pentateuch (which contains only the first five books). They are related but do not share the same paths of development. The Septuagint, or the LXX, is a translation of the Hebrew scriptures and some related texts into Koine Greek and is believed to have been carried out by approximately seventy or seventy-two scribes and elders who were Hellenic Jews, begun in Alexandria in the late third century BCE and completed by 132 BCE. Probably commissioned by Ptolemy II Philadelphus, King of Egypt, it addressed the need of the primarily Greek-speaking Jews of the Graeco-Roman diaspora. Existing complete copies of the Septuagint date from the third to the fifth centuries CE, with fragments dating back to the second century BCE. Revision of its text began as far back as the first century BCE. Fragments of the Septuagint were found among the Dead Sea Scrolls; portions of its text are also found on existing papyrus from Egypt dating to the second and first centuries BCE and to the first century CE.

The Masoretes began developing what would become the authoritative Hebrew and Aramaic text of the 24 books of the Hebrew Bible in Rabbinic Judaism near the end of the Talmudic period (–), but the actual date is difficult to determine. In the sixth and seventh centuries, three Jewish communities contributed systems for writing the precise letter-text, with its vocalization and accentuation known as the &quot;mas&#x27;sora&quot; (from which we derive the term &quot;masoretic&quot;). These early Masoretic scholars were based primarily in the Galilean cities of Tiberias and Jerusalem and in Babylonia (modern Iraq). Those living in the Jewish community of Tiberias in ancient Galilee (–950) made scribal copies of the Hebrew Bible texts without a standard text, such as the Babylonian tradition had, to work from. The canonical pronunciation of the Hebrew Bible (called Tiberian Hebrew) that they developed, and many of the notes they made, therefore, differed from the Babylonian. These differences were resolved into a standard text called the Masoretic text in the ninth century. The oldest complete copy still in existence is the Leningrad Codex dating to c. 1000 CE.

The Samaritan Pentateuch is a version of the Torah maintained by the Samaritan community since antiquity, which European scholars rediscovered in the 17th century; its oldest existing copies date to c. 1100 CE. Samaritans include only the Pentateuch (Torah) in their biblical canon. They do not recognize divine authorship or inspiration in any other book in the Jewish Tanakh. A Samaritan Book of Joshua partly based upon the Tanakh&#x27;s Book of Joshua exists, but Samaritans regard it as a non-canonical secular historical chronicle.

The first codex form of the Hebrew Bible was produced in the seventh century. The codex is the forerunner of the modern book. Popularized by early Christians, it was made by folding a single sheet of papyrus in half, forming &quot;pages&quot;. Assembling multiples of these folded pages together created a &quot;book&quot; that was more easily accessible and more portable than scrolls. In 1488, the first complete printed press version of the Hebrew Bible was produced.

=== New Testament ===
During the rise of Christianity in the first century CE, new scriptures were written in Koine Greek. Christians eventually called these new scriptures the &quot;New Testament&quot; and began referring to the Septuagint as the &quot;Old Testament&quot;. The New Testament has been preserved in more manuscripts than any other ancient work. Most early Christian copyists were not trained scribes. Many copies of the gospels and Paul&#x27;s letters were made by individual Christians over a relatively short period of time, very soon after the originals were written. There is evidence in the Synoptic Gospels, in the writings of the early church fathers, from Marcion, and in the Didache that Christian documents were in circulation before the end of the first century. Paul&#x27;s letters were circulated during his lifetime, and his death is thought to have occurred before 68 during Nero&#x27;s reign. Early Christians transported these writings around the Empire, translating them into Old Syriac, Coptic, Ethiopic, and Latin, and other languages.

Bart Ehrman explains how these multiple texts later became grouped by scholars into categories: During the early centuries of the church, Christian texts were copied in whatever location they were written or taken to. Since texts were copied locally, it is no surprise that different localities developed different kinds of textual tradition. That is to say, the manuscripts in Rome had many of the same errors, because they were for the most part &quot;in-house&quot; documents, copied from one another; they were not influenced much by manuscripts being copied in Palestine; and those in Palestine took on their own characteristics, which were not the same as those found in a place like Alexandria, Egypt. Moreover, in the early centuries of the church, some locales had better scribes than others. Modern scholars have come to recognize that the scribes in Alexandria – which was a major intellectual center in the ancient world – were particularly scrupulous, even in these early centuries, and that there, in Alexandria, a very pure form of the text of the early Christian writings was preserved, decade after decade, by dedicated and relatively skilled Christian scribes. These differing histories produced what modern scholars refer to as recognizable &quot;text types&quot;. The four most commonly recognized are Alexandrian, Western, Caesarean, and Byzantine.

The list of books included in the Catholic Bible was established as canon by the Council of Rome in 382, followed by those of Hippo in 393 and Carthage in 397. Between 385 and 405 CE, the early Christian church translated its canon into Vulgar Latin (the common Latin spoken by ordinary people), a translation known as the Vulgate. Since then, Catholic Christians have held ecumenical councils to standardize their biblical canon. The Council of Trent (1545–63), held by the Catholic Church in response to the Protestant Reformation, authorized the Vulgate as its official Latin translation of the Bible. A number of biblical canons have since evolved. Christian biblical canons range from the 73 books of the Catholic Church canon and the 66-book canon of most Protestant denominations to the 81 books of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church canon, among others. Judaism has long accepted a single authoritative text, whereas Christianity has never had an official version, instead having many different manuscript traditions.

===Variants===
All biblical texts were treated with reverence and care by those who copied them, yet there are transmission errors, called variants, in all biblical manuscripts. A variant is any deviation between two texts. Textual critic Daniel B. Wallace explains, &quot;Each deviation counts as one variant, regardless of how many MSS [manuscripts] attest to it.&quot; Hebrew scholar Emanuel Tov says the term is not evaluative; it is a recognition that the paths of development of different texts have separated.

Medieval handwritten manuscripts of the Hebrew Bible were considered extremely precise: the most authoritative documents from which to copy other texts. Even so, David Carr asserts that Hebrew texts still contain some variants. The majority of all variants are accidental, such as spelling errors, but some changes were intentional. In the Hebrew text, &quot;memory variants&quot; are generally accidental differences evidenced by such things as the shift in word order found in 1 Chronicles 17:24 and 2 Samuel 10:9 and 13. Variants also include the substitution of lexical equivalents, semantic and grammar differences, and larger scale shifts in order, with some major revisions of the Masoretic texts that must have been intentional.

Intentional changes in New Testament texts were made to improve grammar, eliminate discrepancies, harmonize parallel passages, combine and simplify multiple variant readings into one, and for theological reasons. Bruce K. Waltke observes that one variant for every ten words was noted in the recent critical edition of the Hebrew Bible, the &quot;Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia,&quot; leaving 90% of the Hebrew text without variation. The fourth edition of the United Bible Society&#x27;s &quot;Greek New Testament&quot; notes variants affecting about 500 out of 6900 words, or about 7% of the text.
==Content and themes==
===Themes===
The narratives, laws, wisdom sayings, parables, and unique genres of the Bible provide opportunity for discussion on most topics of concern to human beings: The role of women, sex, children, marriage, neighbours, friends, the nature of authority and the sharing of power, animals, trees and nature, money and economics, work, relationships, sorrow and despair and the nature of joy, among others. Philosopher and ethicist Jaco Gericke adds: &quot;The meaning of good and evil, the nature of right and wrong, criteria for moral discernment, valid sources of morality, the origin and acquisition of moral beliefs, the ontological status of moral norms, moral authority, cultural pluralism, [as well as] axiological and aesthetic assumptions about the nature of value and beauty. These are all implicit in the texts.&quot;

However, discerning the themes of some biblical texts can be problematic. Much of the Bible is in narrative form and in general, biblical narrative refrains from any kind of direct instruction, and in some texts the author&#x27;s intent is not easy to decipher. It is left to the reader to determine good and bad, right and wrong, and the path to understanding and practice is rarely straightforward. God is sometimes portrayed as having a role in the plot, but more often there is little about God&#x27;s reaction to events, and no mention at all of approval or disapproval of what the characters have done or failed to do. The writer makes no comment, and the reader is left to infer what they will. Jewish philosophers Shalom Carmy and David Schatz explain that the Bible &quot;often juxtaposes contradictory ideas, without explanation or apology&quot;.

The Hebrew Bible contains assumptions about the nature of knowledge, belief, truth, interpretation, understanding and cognitive processes. Ethicist Michael V. Fox writes that the primary axiom of the book of Proverbs is that &quot;the exercise of the human mind is the necessary and sufficient condition of right and successful behavior in all reaches of life&quot;. The Bible teaches the nature of valid arguments, the nature and power of language, and its relation to reality. According to Mittleman, the Bible provides patterns of moral reasoning that focus on conduct and character.

In the biblical metaphysic, humans have free will, but it is a relative and restricted freedom. Beach says that Christian &quot;voluntarism&quot; points to the &quot;will&quot; as the core of the self, and that within human nature, &quot;the core of who we are is defined by what we love&quot;. Natural law is in the Wisdom literature, the Prophets, Romans 1, Acts 17, and the book of Amos (Amos 1:3–2:5), where nations other than Israel are held accountable for their ethical decisions even though they do not know the Hebrew god. Political theorist Michael Walzer finds politics in the Hebrew Bible in covenant, law, and prophecy, which constitute an early form of &quot;almost&quot; democratic political ethics. Key elements in biblical criminal justice begin with the belief in God as the source of justice and the judge of all, including those administering justice on earth.

Carmy and Schatz say the Bible &quot;depicts the character of God, presents an account of creation, posits a metaphysics of divine providence and divine intervention, suggests a basis for morality, discusses many features of human nature, and frequently poses the notorious conundrum of how God can allow evil.&quot;

=== Hebrew Bible ===

The authoritative Hebrew Bible is taken from the masoretic text (called the Leningrad Codex) which dates from 1008. The Hebrew Bible can therefore sometimes be referred to as the Masoretic Text.

The Hebrew Bible is also known by the name Tanakh (Hebrew: ). This reflects the threefold division of the Hebrew scriptures, Torah (&quot;Teaching&quot;), Nevi&#x27;im (&quot;Prophets&quot;) and Ketuvim (&quot;Writings&quot;) by using the first letters of each word. It is not until the Babylonian Talmud () that a listing of the contents of these three divisions of scripture are found.

The Tanakh was mainly written in Biblical Hebrew, with some small portions (Ezra 4:8–6:18 and 7:12–26, Jeremiah 10:11, Daniel 2:4–7:28) written in Biblical Aramaic, a language which had become the &quot;lingua franca&quot; for much of the Semitic world.

==== Torah ====


The Torah (תּוֹרָה) is also known as the &quot;Five Books of Moses&quot; or the Pentateuch, meaning &quot;five scroll-cases&quot;. Traditionally these books were considered to have been dictated to Moses by God himself. Since the 17th century, scholars have viewed the original sources as being the product of multiple anonymous authors while also allowing the possibility that Moses first assembled the separate sources. There are a variety of hypotheses regarding when and how the Torah was composed, but there is a general consensus that it took its final form during the reign of the Persian Achaemenid Empire (probably 450–350 BCE), or perhaps in the early Hellenistic period (333–164 BCE).

The Hebrew names of the books are derived from the first words in the respective texts. The Torah consists of the following five books:
* Genesis, &quot;Bereshith&quot; (בראשית)
* Exodus, &quot;Shemot&quot; (שמות)
* Leviticus, &quot;Vayikra&quot; (ויקרא)
* Numbers, &quot;Bamidbar&quot; (במדבר)
* Deuteronomy, &quot;Devarim&quot; (דברים)

The first eleven chapters of Genesis provide accounts of the creation (or ordering) of the world and the history of God&#x27;s early relationship with humanity. The remaining thirty-nine chapters of Genesis provide an account of God&#x27;s covenant with the biblical patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob (also called Israel) and Jacob&#x27;s children, the &quot;Children of Israel&quot;, especially Joseph. It tells of how God commanded Abraham to leave his family and home in the city of Ur, eventually to settle in the land of Canaan, and how the Children of Israel later moved to Egypt.

The remaining four books of the Torah tell the story of Moses, who lived hundreds of years after the patriarchs. He leads the Children of Israel from slavery in ancient Egypt to the renewal of their covenant with God at Mount Sinai and their wanderings in the desert until a new generation was ready to enter the land of Canaan. The Torah ends with the death of Moses.

The commandments in the Torah provide the basis for Jewish religious law. Tradition states that there are 613 commandments (&quot;taryag mitzvot&quot;).

==== Nevi&#x27;im ====

Nevi&#x27;im (, &quot;Prophets&quot;) is the second main division of the Tanakh, between the Torah and Ketuvim. It contains two sub-groups, the Former Prophets ( , the narrative books of Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings) and the Latter Prophets ( , the books of Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel and the Twelve Minor Prophets).

The Nevi&#x27;im tell a story of the rise of the Hebrew monarchy and its division into two kingdoms, the Kingdom of Israel and the Kingdom of Judah, focusing on conflicts between the Israelites and other nations, and conflicts among Israelites, specifically, struggles between believers in &quot;the God&quot; (Yahweh) and believers in foreign gods, and the criticism of unethical and unjust behaviour of Israelite elites and rulers; in which prophets played a crucial and leading role. It ends with the conquest of the Kingdom of Israel by the Neo-Assyrian Empire, followed by the conquest of the Kingdom of Judah by the neo-Babylonian Empire and the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem.

===== Former Prophets =====
The Former Prophets are the books Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings. They contain narratives that begin immediately after the death of Moses with the divine appointment of Joshua as his successor, who then leads the people of Israel into the Promised Land, and end with the release from imprisonment of the last king of Judah. Treating Samuel and Kings as single books, they cover:
* Joshua&#x27;s conquest of the land of Canaan (in the Book of Joshua),
* the struggle of the people to possess the land (in the Book of Judges),
* the people&#x27;s request to God to give them a king so that they can occupy the land in the face of their enemies (in the Books of Samuel)
* the possession of the land under the divinely appointed kings of the House of David, ending in conquest and foreign exile (Books of Kings)

===== Latter Prophets =====

The Latter Prophets are Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and the Twelve Minor Prophets, counted as a single book.
* Hosea, &quot;Hoshea&quot; (הושע) denounces the worship of gods other than Yehovah, comparing Israel to a woman being unfaithful to her husband.
* Joel, &quot;Yo&#x27;el&quot; (יואל) includes a lament and a promise from God.
* Amos, &quot;Amos&quot; (עמוס) speaks of social justice, providing a basis for natural law by applying it to unbelievers and believers alike.
* Obadiah, &quot;Ovadya&quot; (עבדיה) addresses the judgment of Edom and restoration of Israel.
* Jonah, &quot;Yona&quot; (יונה) tells of a reluctant redemption of Ninevah.
* Micah, &quot;Mikha&quot; (מיכה) reproaches unjust leaders, defends the rights of the poor, and looks forward to world peace.
* Nahum, &quot;Nakhum&quot; (נחום) speaks of the destruction of Nineveh.
* Habakkuk, &quot;Havakuk&quot; (חבקוק) upholds trust in God over Babylon.
* Zephaniah, &quot;Tzefanya&quot; (צפניה) pronounces coming of judgment, survival and triumph of remnant.
* Haggai, &quot;Khagay&quot; (חגי) rebuild Second Temple.
* Zechariah, &quot;Zekharya&quot; (זכריה) God blesses those who repent and are pure.
* Malachi, &quot;Malakhi&quot; (מלאכי) corrects lax religious and social behaviour.

==== Ketuvim ====
Ketuvim (in &quot;writings&quot;) is the third and final section of the Tanakh. The Ketuvim are believed to have been written under the inspiration of Ruach HaKodesh (the Holy Spirit) but with one level less authority than that of prophecy.

In Masoretic manuscripts (and some printed editions), Psalms, Proverbs and Job are presented in a special two-column form emphasizing their internal parallelism, which was found early in the study of Hebrew poetry. &quot;Stichs&quot; are the lines that make up a verse &quot;the parts of which lie parallel as to form and content&quot;. Collectively, these three books are known as &quot;Sifrei Emet&quot; (an acronym of the titles in Hebrew, איוב, משלי, תהלים yields &quot;Emet&quot; אמ&quot;ת, which is also the Hebrew for &quot;truth&quot;). Hebrew cantillation is the manner of chanting ritual readings as they are written and notated in the Masoretic Text of the Bible. Psalms, Job and Proverbs form a group with a &quot;special system&quot; of accenting used only in these three books.

===== The five scrolls =====
The five relatively short books of Song of Songs, Book of Ruth, the Book of Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, and Book of Esther are collectively known as the &quot;Hamesh Megillot&quot;. These are the latest books collected and designated as authoritative in the Jewish canon even though they were not complete until the second century CE.

===== Other books =====

The books of Esther, Daniel, Ezra-Nehemiah and Chronicles share a distinctive style that no other Hebrew literary text, biblical or extra-biblical, shares. They were not written in the normal style of Hebrew of the post-exilic period. The authors of these books must have chosen to write in their own distinctive style for unknown reasons.
* Their narratives all openly describe relatively late events (i.e., the Babylonian captivity and the subsequent restoration of Zion).
* The Talmudic tradition ascribes late authorship to all of them.
* Two of them (Daniel and Ezra) are the only books in the Tanakh with significant portions in Aramaic.

===== Book order =====
The following list presents the books of Ketuvim in the order they appear in most current printed editions.
* &quot;Tehillim&quot; (Psalms) תְהִלִּים is an anthology of individual Hebrew religious hymns.
* &quot;Mishlei&quot; (Book of Proverbs) מִשְלֵי is a &quot;collection of collections&quot; on values, moral behaviour, the meaning of life and right conduct, and its basis in faith.
* &quot;Iyov&quot; (Book of Job) אִיּוֹב is about faith, without understanding or justifying suffering.
* &quot;Shir ha-Shirim&quot; (Song of Songs) or (Song of Solomon) שִׁיר הַשִׁירִים (Passover) is poetry about love and sex.
* &quot;Ruth&quot; (Book of Ruth) רוּת (Shavuot) tells of the Moabite woman Ruth, who decides to follow the God of the Israelites, and remains loyal to her mother-in-law, who is then rewarded.
* &quot;Eikha&quot; (Lamentations) איכה (Ninth of Av) [Also called &quot;Kinnot&quot; in Hebrew.] is a collection of poetic laments for the destruction of Jerusalem in 586 BCE.
* &quot;Qoheleth&quot; (Ecclesiastes) קהלת (Sukkot) contains wisdom sayings disagreed over by scholars. Is it positive and life-affirming, or deeply pessimistic?
* &quot;Ester&quot; (Book of Esther) אֶסְתֵר (Purim) tells of a Hebrew woman in Persia who becomes queen and thwarts a genocide of her people.
* &quot;Dani’el&quot; (Book of Daniel) דָּנִיֵּאל combines prophecy and eschatology (end times) in story of God saving Daniel just as He will save Israel.
* &quot;‘Ezra&quot; (Book of Ezra–Book of Nehemiah) עזרא tells of rebuilding the walls of Jerusalem after the Babylonian exile.
* &quot;Divrei ha-Yamim&quot; (Chronicles) דברי הימים contains genealogy.

The Jewish textual tradition never finalized the order of the books in Ketuvim. The Babylonian Talmud (Bava Batra 14b–15a) gives their order as Ruth, Psalms, Job, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, Lamentations of Jeremiah, Daniel, Scroll of Esther, Ezra, Chronicles.

One of the large scale differences between the Babylonian and the Tiberian biblical traditions is the order of the books. Isaiah is placed after Ezekiel in the Babylonian, while Chronicles opens the Ketuvim in the Tiberian, and closes it in the Babylonian.

The Ketuvim is the last of the three portions of the Tanakh to have been accepted as canonical. While the Torah may have been considered canon by Israel as early as the fifth century BCE and the Former and Latter Prophets were canonized by the second century BCE, the Ketuvim was not a fixed canon until the second century CE.

Evidence suggests, however, that the people of Israel were adding what would become the Ketuvim to their holy literature shortly after the canonization of the prophets. As early as 132 BCE references suggest that the Ketuvim was starting to take shape, although it lacked a formal title. &quot;Against Apion&quot;, the writing of Josephus in 95 CE, treated the text of the Hebrew Bible as a closed canon to which &quot;... no one has ventured either to add, or to remove, or to alter a syllable...&quot; For an extended period after 95CE, the divine inspiration of Esther, the Song of Songs, and Ecclesiastes was often under scrutiny.

=== Septuagint ===

The Septuagint (&quot;the Translation of the Seventy&quot;, also called &quot;the LXX&quot;), is a Koine Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible begun in the late third century BCE.

As the work of translation progressed, the Septuagint expanded: the collection of prophetic writings had various hagiographical works incorporated into it. In addition, some newer books such as the Books of the Maccabees and the Wisdom of Sirach were added. These are among the &quot;apocryphal&quot; books, (books whose authenticity is doubted). The inclusion of these texts, and the claim of some mistranslations, contributed to the Septuagint being seen as a &quot;careless&quot; translation and its eventual rejection as a valid Jewish scriptural text.

The apocrypha are Jewish literature, mostly of the Second Temple period (c. 550 BCE – 70 CE); they originated in Israel, Syria, Egypt or Persia; were originally written in Hebrew, Aramaic, or Greek, and attempt to tell of biblical characters and themes. Their provenance is obscure. One older theory of where they came from asserted that an &quot;Alexandrian&quot; canon had been accepted among the Greek-speaking Jews living there, but that theory has since been abandoned. Indications are that they were not accepted when the rest of the Hebrew canon was. It is clear the Apocrypha were used in New Testament times, but &quot;they are never quoted as Scripture.&quot; In modern Judaism, none of the apocryphal books are accepted as authentic and are therefore excluded from the canon. However, &quot;the Ethiopian Jews, who are sometimes called Falashas, have an expanded canon, which includes some Apocryphal books&quot;.

The rabbis also wanted to distinguish their tradition from the newly emerging tradition of Christianity. Finally, the rabbis claimed a divine authority for the Hebrew language, in contrast to Aramaic or Greek – even though these languages were the &quot;lingua franca&quot; of Jews during this period (and Aramaic would eventually be given the status of a sacred language comparable to Hebrew).

==== Incorporations from Theodotion ====
The Book of Daniel is preserved in the 12-chapter Masoretic Text and in two longer Greek versions, the original Septuagint version, , and the later Theodotion version from . Both Greek texts contain three additions to Daniel: The Prayer of Azariah and Song of the Three Holy Children; the story of Susannah and the Elders; and the story of Bel and the Dragon. Theodotion&#x27;s translation was so widely copied in the Early Christian church that its version of the Book of Daniel virtually superseded the Septuagint&#x27;s. The priest Jerome, in his preface to Daniel (407 CE), records the rejection of the Septuagint version of that book in Christian usage: &quot;I ... wish to emphasize to the reader the fact that it was not according to the Septuagint version but according to the version of Theodotion himself that the churches publicly read Daniel.&quot; Jerome&#x27;s preface also mentions that the &quot;Hexapla&quot; had notations in it, indicating several major differences in content between the Theodotion Daniel and the earlier versions in Greek and Hebrew.

Theodotion&#x27;s Daniel is closer to the surviving Hebrew Masoretic Text version, the text which is the basis for most modern translations. Theodotion&#x27;s Daniel is also the one embodied in the authorized edition of the Septuagint published by Sixtus V in 1587.

==== Final form ====

Textual critics are now debating how to reconcile the earlier view of the Septuagint as &#x27;careless&#x27; with content from the Dead Sea Scrolls at Qumran, scrolls discovered at Wadi Murabba&#x27;at, Nahal Hever, and those discovered at Masada. These scrolls are 1000–1300 years older than the Leningrad text, dated to 1008 CE, which forms the basis of the Masoretic text. The scrolls have confirmed much of the Masoretic text, but they have also differed from it, and many of those differences agree with the Septuagint, the Samaritan Pentateuch or the Greek Old Testament instead.

Copies of some texts later declared apocryphal are also among the Qumran texts. Ancient manuscripts of the book of Sirach, the &quot;Psalms of Joshua&quot;, Tobit, and the Epistle of Jeremiah are now known to have existed in a Hebrew version. The Septuagint version of some biblical books, such as the Book of Daniel and Book of Esther, are longer than those in the Jewish canon. In the Septuagint, Jeremiah is shorter than in the Masoretic text, but a shortened Hebrew Jeremiah has been found at Qumran in cave 4. The scrolls of Isaiah, Exodus, Jeremiah, Daniel and Samuel exhibit striking and important textual variants from the Masoretic text. The Septuagint is now seen as a careful translation of a different Hebrew form or recension (revised addition of the text) of certain books, but debate on how best to characterize these varied texts is ongoing.

=== Pseudepigraphal books ===

Pseudepigrapha are works whose authorship is wrongly attributed. A written work can be pseudepigraphical and not be a forgery, as forgeries are intentionally deceptive. With pseudepigrapha, authorship has been mistransmitted for any one of a number of reasons. For example, the Gospel of Barnabas claims to be written by Barnabas the companion of the Apostle Paul, but both its manuscripts date from the Middle Ages. 

Apocryphal and pseudepigraphic works are not the same. Apocrypha includes all the writings claiming to be sacred that are outside the canon because they are not accepted as authentically being what they claim to be. Pseudepigrapha is a literary category of all writings whether they are canonical or apocryphal. They may or may not be authentic in every sense except a misunderstood authorship.

The term &quot;pseudepigrapha&quot; is commonly used to describe numerous works of Jewish religious literature written from about 300 BCE to 300 CE. Not all of these works are actually pseudepigraphical. (It also refers to books of the New Testament canon whose authorship is questioned.) The Old Testament pseudepigraphal works include the following:
* 3 Maccabees
* 4 Maccabees
* Assumption of Moses
* Ethiopic Book of Enoch (1 Enoch)
* Slavonic Book of Enoch (2 Enoch)
* Hebrew Book of Enoch (3 Enoch) (also known as &quot;The Revelation of Metatron&quot; or &quot;The Book of Rabbi Ishmael the High Priest&quot;)
* Book of Jubilees
* Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch (2 Baruch)
* Letter of Aristeas (Letter to Philocrates regarding the translating of the Hebrew scriptures into Greek)
* Life of Adam and Eve
* Martyrdom and Ascension of Isaiah
* Psalms of Solomon
* Sibylline Oracles
* Greek Apocalypse of Baruch (3 Baruch)
* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs

==== Book of Enoch ====
Notable pseudepigraphal works include the Books of Enoch such as 1 Enoch, 2 Enoch, which survives only in Old Slavonic, and 3 Enoch, surviving in Hebrew of the CE. These are ancient Jewish religious works, traditionally ascribed to the prophet Enoch, the great-grandfather of the patriarch Noah. The fragment of Enoch found among the Qumran scrolls attest to it being an ancient work. The older sections (mainly in the Book of the Watchers) are estimated to date from about 300 BCE, and the latest part (Book of Parables) was probably composed at the end of the first century BCE.

Enoch is not part of the biblical canon used by most Jews, apart from Beta Israel. Most Christian denominations and traditions may accept the Books of Enoch as having some historical or theological interest or significance. Part of the Book of Enoch is quoted in the Epistle of Jude and the Book of Hebrews (parts of the New Testament), but Christian denominations generally regard the Books of Enoch as non-canonical. The exceptions to this view are the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church and Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church.

The Ethiopian Bible is not based on the Greek Bible, and the Ethiopian Church has a slightly different understanding of canon than other Christian traditions. In Ethiopia, canon does not have the same degree of fixedness, (yet neither is it completely open). Enoch has long been seen there as inspired scripture, but being scriptural and being canon are not always seen the same. The official Ethiopian canon has 81 books, but that number is reached in different ways with various lists of different books, and the book of Enoch is sometimes included and sometimes not. Current evidence confirms Enoch as canonical in both Ethiopia and in Eritrea.

=== Christian Bible ===

A Christian Bible is a set of books divided into the Old and New Testament that a Christian denomination has, at some point in their past or present, regarded as divinely inspired scripture by the Holy Spirit. The Early Church primarily used the Septuagint, as it was written in Greek, the common tongue of the day, or they used the Targums among Aramaic speakers. Modern English translations of the Old Testament section of the Christian Bible are based on the Masoretic Text. The Pauline epistles and the gospels were soon added, along with other writings, as the New Testament.

==== Old Testament ====
The Old Testament has been important to the life of the Christian church from its earliest days. Bible scholar N. T. Wright says &quot;Jesus himself was profoundly shaped by the scriptures.&quot; Wright adds that the earliest Christians searched those same Hebrew scriptures in their effort to understand the earthly life of Jesus. They regarded the &quot;holy writings&quot; of the Israelites as necessary and instructive for the Christian, as seen from Paul&#x27;s words to Timothy (2 Timothy 3:15), as pointing to the Messiah, and as having reached a climactic fulfilment in Jesus generating the &quot;new covenant&quot; prophesied by Jeremiah.

The Protestant Old Testament of the 21st century has a 39-book canon. The number of books (although not the content) varies from the Jewish Tanakh only because of a different method of division. The term &quot;Hebrew scriptures&quot; is often used as being synonymous with the Protestant Old Testament, since the surviving scriptures in Hebrew include only those books.

However, the Roman Catholic Church recognizes 46 books as its Old Testament (45 if Jeremiah and Lamentations are counted as one), and the Eastern Orthodox Churches recognize six additional books. These additions are also included in the Syriac versions of the Bible called the &quot;Peshitta&quot; and the Ethiopian Bible.

Because the canon of Scripture is distinct for Jews, Eastern Orthodox, Roman Catholics, and Western Protestants, the contents of each community&#x27;s Apocrypha are unique, as is its usage of the term. For Jews, none of the apocryphal books are considered canonical. Catholics refer to this collection as &quot;Deuterocanonical books&quot; (second canon) and the Orthodox Church refers to them as &quot;Anagignoskomena&quot; (that which is read).

Books included in the Catholic, Orthodox, Greek, and Slavonic Bibles are: Tobit, Judith, the Wisdom of Solomon, Sirach (or Ecclesiasticus), Baruch, the Letter of Jeremiah (also called the Baruch Chapter 6), 1 Maccabees, 2 Maccabees, the Greek Additions to Esther and the Greek Additions to Daniel.

The Greek Orthodox Church, and the Slavonic churches (Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, North Macedonia, Montenegro, Poland, Ukraine, Russia, Serbia, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovenia and Croatia) also add:
* 3 Maccabees
* 1 Esdras
* Prayer of Manasseh
* Psalm 151
2 Esdras (4 Esdras), which is not included in the Septuagint, does not exist in Greek, though it does exist in Latin. There is also 4 Maccabees which is only accepted as canonical in the Georgian Church. It is in an appendix to the Greek Orthodox Bible, and it is therefore sometimes included in collections of the Apocrypha.

The Syriac Orthodox Church also includes:
* Psalms 151–155
* The Apocalypse of Baruch
* The Letter of Baruch

The Ethiopian Old Testament Canon uses Enoch and Jubilees (that only survived in Ge&#x27;ez), 1–3 Meqabyan, Greek Ezra, 2 Esdras, and Psalm 151.

The Revised Common Lectionary of the Lutheran Church, Moravian Church, Reformed Churches, Anglican Church and Methodist Church uses the apocryphal books liturgically, with alternative Old Testament readings available. Therefore, editions of the Bible intended for use in the Lutheran Church and Anglican Church include the fourteen books of the Apocrypha, many of which are the deuterocanonical books accepted by the Catholic Church, plus 1 Esdras, 2 Esdras and the Prayer of Manasseh, which were in the Vulgate appendix.

The Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches use most of the books of the Septuagint, while Protestant churches usually do not. After the Protestant Reformation, many Protestant Bibles began to follow the Jewish canon and exclude the additional texts, which came to be called &quot;apocryphal&quot;. The Apocrypha are included under a separate heading in the King James Version of the Bible, the basis for the Revised Standard Version.

==== New Testament ====

The New Testament is the name given to the second portion of the Christian Bible. While some scholars assert that Aramaic was the original language of the New Testament, the majority view says it was written in the vernacular form of Koine Greek. Still, there is reason to assert that it is a heavily Semitized Greek: its syntax is like conversational Greek, but its style is largely Semitic. Koine Greek was the common language of the western Roman Empire from the Conquests of Alexander the Great (335–323 BCE) until the evolution of Byzantine Greek () while Aramaic was the language of Jesus, the Apostles and the ancient Near East. The term &quot;New Testament&quot; came into use in the second century during a controversy over whether the Hebrew Bible should be included with the Christian writings as sacred scripture.

It is generally accepted that the New Testament writers were Jews who took the inspiration of the Old Testament for granted. This is probably stated earliest in : &quot;All scripture is given by inspiration of God&quot;. Scholarship on how and why ancient Jewish–Christians came to create and accept new texts as equal to the established Hebrew texts has taken three forms. First, John Barton writes that ancient Christians probably just continued the Jewish tradition of writing and incorporating what they believed were inspired, authoritative religious books. The second approach separates those various inspired writings based on a concept of &quot;canon&quot; which developed in the second century. The third involves formalizing canon. According to Barton, these differences are only differences in terminology; the ideas are reconciled if they are seen as three stages in the formation of the New Testament.

The first stage was completed remarkably early if one accepts &#x27;s view that &quot;canon&quot; and &quot;scripture&quot; are separate things, with &quot;scripture&quot; having been recognized by ancient Christians long before &quot;canon&quot; was. Barton says Theodor Zahn concluded &quot;there was already a Christian canon by the end of the first century&quot;, but this is not the canon of later centuries. Accordingly, Sundberg asserts that in the first centuries, there was no criterion for inclusion in the &quot;sacred writings&quot; beyond inspiration, and that no one in the first century had the idea of a closed canon. The gospels were accepted by early believers as handed down from those Apostles who had known Jesus and been taught by him. Later biblical criticism has questioned the authorship and dating of the gospels.

At the end of the second century, it is widely recognized that a Christian canon similar to its modern version was asserted by the church fathers in response to the plethora of writings claiming inspiration that contradicted orthodoxy: (heresy). The third stage of development as the final canon occurred in the fourth century with a series of synods that produced a list of texts of the canon of the Old Testament and the New Testament that are still used today. Most notably the Synod of Hippo in 393 CE and that of &quot;c&quot;. 400. Jerome produced a definitive Latin edition of the Bible (the Vulgate), the canon of which, at the insistence of the Pope, was in accord with the earlier Synods. This process effectively set the New Testament canon.

New Testament books already had considerable authority in the late first and early second centuries. Even in its formative period, most of the books of the NT that were seen as scripture were already agreed upon. Linguistics scholar Stanley E. Porter says &quot;evidence from the apocryphal non-Gospel literature is the same as that for the apocryphal Gospelsin other words, that the text of the Greek New Testament was relatively well established and fixed by the time of the second and third centuries&quot;. By the time the fourth century Fathers were approving the &quot;canon&quot;, they were doing little more than codifying what was already universally accepted.

The New Testament is a collection of 27 books of 4 different genres of Christian literature (Gospels, one account of the Acts of the Apostles, Epistles and an Apocalypse). These books can be grouped into:

The Gospels are narratives of Jesus&#x27;s last three years of life, his death and resurrection.
* Synoptic Gospels
** Gospel of Matthew
** Gospel of Mark
** Gospel of Luke
* Gospel of John

The narrative literature provides an account and history of the very early Apostolic age.
* Acts of the Apostles

The Pauline epistles are written to individual church groups to address problems, provide encouragement and give instruction.

* Epistle to the Romans
* First Epistle to the Corinthians
* Second Epistle to the Corinthians
* Epistle to the Galatians
* Epistle to the Ephesians
* Epistle to the Philippians
* Epistle to the Colossians
* First Epistle to the Thessalonians
* Second Epistle to the Thessalonians
The pastoral epistles discuss the pastoral oversight of churches, Christian living, doctrine and leadership.

* First Epistle to Timothy
* Second Epistle to Timothy
* Epistle to Titus
* Epistle to Philemon
* Epistle to the Hebrews
The Catholic epistles, also called the general epistles or lesser epistles.

* Epistle of James encourages a lifestyle consistent with faith.
* First Epistle of Peter addresses trial and suffering.
* Second Epistle of Peter more on suffering&#x27;s purposes, Christology, ethics and eschatology.
* First Epistle of John covers how to discern true Christians: by their ethics, their proclamation of Jesus in the flesh, and by their love.
* Second Epistle of John warns against docetism.
* Third Epistle of John encourage, strengthen and warn.
* Epistle of Jude condemns opponents.
The apocalyptic literature (prophetical)
* Book of Revelation, or the Apocalypse, predicts end time events.

Catholicism, Protestantism, and Eastern Orthodox currently have the same 27-book New Testament Canon. They are ordered differently in the Slavonic tradition, the Syriac tradition and the Ethiopian tradition.

==== Canon variations ====
===== Peshitta =====

The Peshitta ( &quot;or&quot; &quot;&quot;) is the standard version of the Bible for churches in the Syriac tradition. The consensus within biblical scholarship, although not universal, is that the Old Testament of the Peshitta was translated into Syriac from biblical Hebrew, probably in the 2nd century CE, and that the New Testament of the Peshitta was translated from the Greek. This New Testament, originally excluding certain disputed books (2 Peter, 2 John, 3 John, Jude, Revelation), had become a standard by the early 5th century. The five excluded books were added in the Harklean Version (616 CE) of Thomas of Harqel.

===== Catholic Church canon =====
The canon of the Catholic Church was affirmed by the Council of Rome (382), the Synod of Hippo (393), the Council of Carthage (397), the Council of Carthage (419), the Council of Florence (1431–1449) and finally, as an article of faith, by the Council of Trent (1545–1563) establishing the canon consisting of 46 books in the Old Testament and 27 books in the New Testament for a total of 73 books in the Catholic Bible.

===== Ethiopian Orthodox canon =====

The canon of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church is wider than the canons used by most other Christian churches. There are 81 books in the Ethiopian Orthodox Bible. In addition to the books found in the Septuagint accepted by other Orthodox Christians, the Ethiopian Old Testament Canon uses Enoch and Jubilees (ancient Jewish books that only survived in Ge&#x27;ez, but are quoted in the New Testament), Greek Ezra and the Apocalypse of Ezra, 3 books of Meqabyan, and Psalm 151 at the end of the Psalter. The three books of Meqabyan are not to be confused with the books of Maccabees. The order of the books is somewhat different in that the Ethiopian Old Testament follows the Septuagint order for the Minor Prophets rather than the Jewish order.

===New Testament Apocryphal books===

The New Testament apocrypha are a number of writings by early professed Christians that give accounts of Jesus and his teachings, the nature of God, or the teachings of his Apostles and of their activities. Some of these writings were cited as Scripture by some early Christians, but since the fifth century a widespread consensus emerged limiting the New Testament to the 27 books of the modern canon. Roman Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Western Protestant churches do not view the New Testament apocrypha as part of the inspired Bible. Although some Oriental Orthodox canons to some extent have. The Armenian Apostolic church at times has included the Third Epistle to the Corinthians, but does not always list it with the other 27 canonical New Testament books. The New Testament of the Coptic Bible, adopted by the Egyptian Church, includes the two Epistles of Clement.

==Textual history==

The original autographs, that is, the original Greek writings and manuscripts written by the original authors of the New Testament, have not survived. But, historically, &quot;copies&quot; of those original autographs exist and were transmitted and preserved in a number of manuscript traditions. The three main textual traditions of the Greek New Testament are sometimes called the Alexandrian text-type (generally minimalist), the Byzantine text-type (generally maximalist), and the Western text-type (occasionally wild). Together they comprise most of the ancient manuscripts. Very early on, Christianity replaced scrolls with codexes, the forerunner of bound books, and by the 3rd century, collections of biblical books began being copied as a set.

Since all ancient texts were written by hand, often by copying from another handwritten text, they are not exactly alike in the manner of printed works. The differences between them are considered generally minor and are called textual variants. A variant is simply any variation between two texts. The majority of variants are accidental, but some are intentional. Intentional changes were made to improve grammar, to eliminate discrepancies, to make Liturgical changes such as the doxology of the Lord&#x27;s prayer, to harmonize parallel passages or to combine and simplify multiple variant readings into one.

==Influence==
With a literary tradition spanning two millennia, the Bible is one of the most influential works ever written. From practices of personal hygiene to philosophy and ethics, the Bible has directly and indirectly influenced politics and law, war and peace, sexual morals, marriage and family life, letters and learning, the arts, economics, social justice, medical care and more.

The Bible is the world&#x27;s most published book, with estimated total sales of over five billion copies. As such, the Bible has had a profound influence, especially in the Western world, where the Gutenberg Bible was the first book printed in Europe using movable type. It has contributed to the formation of Western law, art, literature, and education.

===Politics and law===
The Bible has been used to support and oppose political power. It has inspired revolution and &quot;a reversal of power&quot; because God is so often portrayed as choosing what is &quot;weak and humble...(the stammering Moses, the infant Samuel, Saul from an insignificant family, David confronting Goliath, etc.)...to confound the mighty&quot;. Biblical texts have been the catalyst for political concepts like democracy, religious toleration and religious freedom. These have, in turn, inspired movements ranging from abolitionism in the 18th and 19th century, to the civil rights movement, the Anti-Apartheid Movement, and liberation theology in Latin America. The Bible has been the source of many peace movements and efforts at reconciliation around the world .

The roots of many modern laws can be found in the Bible&#x27;s teachings on due process, fairness in criminal procedures, and equity in the application of the law. Judges are told not to accept bribes (Deuteronomy 16:19), are required to be impartial to native and stranger alike (Leviticus 24:22; Deuteronomy 27:19), to the needy and the powerful alike (Leviticus 19:15), and to rich and poor alike (Deuteronomy 1:16, 17; Exodus 23:2–6). The right to a fair trial, and fair punishment, are also found in the Bible (Deuteronomy 19:15; Exodus 21:23–25). Those most vulnerable in a patriarchal societychildren, women, and strangersare singled out in the Bible for special protection (Psalm 72:2, 4).

The Bible has been noted by scholars as a significant influence on the development of nationhood and nationalism, first among ancient Jews and later in Christian societies. For the ancient Jews, it served as &quot;both a national history and a source of law&quot;, providing a framework that established shared ancestry, common history, legal codes, and cultural markers that defined Jewish collective identity. It has been suggested that the practice of regular public readings of biblical texts during the Second Temple period facilitated the transmission of these identity-forming narratives across the wider Jewish public. Several scholars argue that substantial portions of the Hebrew Bible—particularly the Deuteronomistic History and the Tetrateuch—were composed specifically to establish and reinforce a distinct Israelite ethnic and national identity. Some scholars of nationalism, such as Adrian Hastings, contend that the model of ancient Israel presented in the Hebrew Bible provided the world with the original concept of nationhood, influencing the development of nationalism and European nation-states.

===Social responsibility===
The philosophical foundation of human rights is in the Bible&#x27;s teachings of natural law. The prophets of the Hebrew Bible repeatedly admonish the people to practice justice, charity, and social responsibility. H. A. Lockton writes that &quot;The Poverty and Justice Bible (The Bible Society (UK), 2008) claims there are more than 2000 verses in the Bible dealing with the justice issues of rich-poor relations, exploitation and oppression&quot;. Judaism practised charity and healing the sick but tended to limit these practices to their own people. For Christians, the Old Testament statements are enhanced by multiple verses such as Matthew 10:8, Luke 10:9 and 9:2, and Acts 5:16 that say &quot;heal the sick&quot;. Authors Vern and Bonnie Bullough write in &quot;The care of the sick: the emergence of modern nursing,&quot; that this is seen as an aspect of following Jesus&#x27;s example, since so much of his public ministry focused on healing.

In the process of following this command, monasticism in the third century transformed health care. This produced the first hospital for the poor in Caesarea in the fourth century. The monastic health care system was innovative in its methods, allowing the sick to remain within the monastery as a special class afforded special benefits; it destigmatized illness, legitimized the deviance from the norm that sickness includes, and formed the basis for future modern concepts of public health care. The biblical practices of feeding and clothing the poor, visiting prisoners, supporting widows and orphan children have had sweeping impact.

The Bible&#x27;s emphasis on learning has had formidable influence on believers and western society. For centuries after the fall of the western Roman Empire, all schools in Europe were Bible-based church schools, and outside of monastic settlements, almost no one had the ability to read or write. These schools eventually led to the West&#x27;s first universities (created by the church) in the Middle Ages which have spread around the world in the modern day. Protestant Reformers wanted all members of the church to be able to read the Bible, so compulsory education for both boys and girls was introduced. Translations of the Bible into local vernacular languages have supported the development of national literatures and the invention of alphabets.

Biblical teachings on sexual morality changed the Roman empire, the millennium that followed, and have continued to influence society. Rome&#x27;s concept of sexual morality was centered on social and political status, power, and social reproduction (the transmission of social inequality to the next generation). The biblical standard was a &quot;radical notion of individual freedom centered around a libertarian paradigm of complete sexual agency&quot;. Classicist Kyle Harper describes the change biblical teaching evoked as &quot;a revolution in the rules of behavior, but also in the very image of the human being&quot;.

===Literature and the arts===
The Bible has directly and indirectly influenced literature: St Augustine&#x27;s Confessions is widely considered the first autobiography in Western Literature. The &quot;Summa Theologica&quot;, written 1265–1274, is &quot;one of the classics of the history of philosophy and one of the most influential works of Western literature.&quot; These both influenced the writings of Dante&#x27;s epic poetry and his &quot;Divine Comedy&quot;, and in turn, Dante&#x27;s creation and sacramental theology has contributed to influencing writers such as J. R. R. Tolkien and William Shakespeare.

Many masterpieces of Western art were inspired by biblical themes: from Michelangelo&#x27;s &quot;David&quot; and &quot;Pietà&quot; sculptures, to Leonardo da Vinci&#x27;s &quot;Last Supper&quot; and Raphael&#x27;s various &quot;Madonna&quot; paintings. There are hundreds of examples. Eve, the temptress who disobeys God&#x27;s commandment, is probably the most widely portrayed figure in art. The Renaissance preferred the sensuous female nude, while the &quot;femme fatale&quot; Delilah from the nineteenth century onward demonstrates how the Bible and art both shape and reflect views of women.

The Bible has many rituals of purification which speak of clean and unclean in both literal and metaphorical terms. The biblical toilet etiquette encourages washing after all instances of defecation, hence the invention of the bidet.

===Criticism===

Critics view certain biblical texts to be morally problematic. The Bible neither calls for nor condemns slavery outright, but there are verses that address dealing with it, and these verses have been used to support it. Some have written that supersessionism begins in the book of Hebrews where others locate its beginnings in the culture of the fourth century Roman empire. The Bible has been used to support the death penalty, patriarchy, sexual intolerance, the violence of total war, and colonialism.

In the Christian Bible, the violence of war is addressed four ways: pacifism, non-resistance; just war, and preventive war which is sometimes called crusade. In the Hebrew Bible, there is &quot;just war&quot; and &quot;preventive war&quot; which includes the Amalekites, Canaanites, Moabites, and the record in Exodus, Deuteronomy, Joshua, and both books of Kings. John J. Collins writes that people throughout history have used these biblical texts to justify violence against their enemies. Anthropologist Leonard B. Glick offers the modern example of Jewish fundamentalists in Israel, such as Shlomo Aviner a prominent theorist of the Gush Emunim movement, who considers the Palestinians to be like biblical Canaanites, and therefore suggests that Israel &quot;must be prepared to destroy&quot; the Palestinians if the Palestinians do not leave the land.

Nur Masalha argues that genocide is inherent in these commandments, and that they have served as inspirational examples of divine support for slaughtering national opponents. However, the &quot;applicability of the term [genocide] to earlier periods of history&quot; is questioned by sociologists Frank Robert Chalk and Kurt Jonassohn. Since most societies of the past endured and practised genocide, it was accepted at that time as &quot;being in the nature of life&quot; because of the &quot;coarseness and brutality&quot; of life; the moral condemnation associated with terms like genocide are products of modern morality. The definition of what constitutes violence has broadened considerably over time. The Bible reflects how perceptions of violence changed for its authors.

Phyllis Trible, in her now famous work &quot;Texts of Terror,&quot; tells four Bible stories of suffering in ancient Israel where women are the victims. Tribble describes the Bible as &quot;a mirror&quot; that reflects humans, and human life, in all its &quot;holiness and horror&quot;.

John Riches, professor of divinity and biblical criticism at the University of Glasgow, provides the following view of the diverse historical influences of the Bible:
== Interpretation and inspiration ==

Biblical texts have always required interpretation, and this has given rise to multiple views and approaches according to the interplay between various religions and the book.

The primary source of Jewish commentary and interpretation of the Hebrew Bible is the Talmud. The Talmud, (which means study and learning), is a summary of ancient oral law and commentary on it. It is the primary source of Jewish Law. Adin Steinsaltz writes that &quot;if the Bible is the cornerstone of Judaism, then the Talmud is the central pillar&quot;. Seen as the backbone of Jewish creativity, it is &quot;a conglomerate of law, legend and philosophy, a blend of unique logic and shrewd pragmatism, of history and science, anecdotes and humor&quot; all aimed toward the purpose of studying biblical Torah.

Christians often treat the Bible as a single book, and while John Barton says they are &quot;some of the most profound texts humanity has ever produced&quot;, liberals and moderates see it as a collection of books that are not perfect. Conservative and fundamentalist Christians see the Bible differently and interpret it differently. Christianity interprets the Bible differently than Judaism does with Islam providing yet another view. How inspiration works and what kind of authority it means the Bible has are different for different traditions.

The Second Epistle to Timothy claims, &quot;All Scripture is breathed out by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness&quot; (). Various related but distinguishable views on divine inspiration include:
* the view of the Bible as the inspired word of God: the belief that God, through the Holy Spirit, intervened and influenced the words, message, and collation of the Bible
* the view that the Bible is also infallible, and incapable of error in matters of faith and practice, but not necessarily in historic or scientific matters
* the view that the Bible represents the inerrant word of God, without error in any aspect, spoken by God and written down in its perfect form by humans

Within these broad beliefs many schools of hermeneutics operate. &quot;Bible scholars claim that discussions about the Bible must be put into its context within church history and then into the context of contemporary culture.&quot; Fundamentalist Christians are associated with the doctrine of biblical literalism, where the Bible is not only inerrant, but the meaning of the text is clear to the average reader.

Jewish antiquity attests to belief in sacred texts, and a similar belief emerges in the earliest of Christian writings. Various texts of the Bible mention divine agency in relation to its writings. In their book &quot;A General Introduction to the Bible&quot;, Norman Geisler and William Nix write: &quot;The process of inspiration is a mystery of the providence of God, but the result of this process is a verbal, plenary, inerrant, and authoritative record.&quot; Most evangelical biblical scholars associate inspiration with only the original text; for example some American Protestants adhere to the 1978 Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy which asserted that inspiration applied only to the autographic text of scripture. Among adherents of biblical literalism, a minority, such as followers of the King-James-Only Movement, extend the claim of inerrancy only to a particular version.

===Religious significance===

Both Judaism and Christianity see the Bible as religiously and intellectually significant. It provides insight into its time and into the composition of the texts, and it represents an important step in the development of thought. It is used in communal worship, recited and memorized, provides personal guidance, a basis for counseling, church doctrine, religious culture (teaching, hymns and worship), and ethical standards.The Bible is centrally important to both Judaism and Christianity, but not as a holy text out of which entire religious systems can somehow be read. Its contents illuminate the origins of Christianity and Judaism, and provide spiritual classics on which both faiths can draw; but they do not constrain subsequent generations in the way that a written constitution would. They are simply not that kind of thing. They are a repository of writings, both shaping and shaped by the two religions...&quot; As a result, there are teachings and creeds in Christianity and laws in Judaism that are seen by those religions as derived from the Bible which are not directly in the Bible.

For the Hebrew Bible, canonization is reserved for written texts, while sacralization reaches far back into oral tradition. When sacred stories, such as those that form the narrative base of the first five books of the Bible, were performed, &quot;not a syllable [could] be changed in order to ensure the magical power of the words to &#x27;presentify&#x27; the divine&quot;. Inflexibility protected the texts from a changing world. When sacred oral texts began the move to written transmission, commentary began being worked in, but once the text was closed by canonization, commentary needed to remain outside. Commentary still had significance. Sacred written texts were thereafter accompanied by commentary, and such commentary was sometimes written and sometimes orally transmitted, as is the case in the Islamic Madrasa and the Jewish Yeshiva. Arguing that Torah has had a definitive role in developing Jewish identity from its earliest days, John J. Collins explains that regardless of genetics or land, it has long been true that one could become Jewish by observing the laws in the Torah, and that remains true in the modern day.

The Christian religion and its sacred book are connected and influence one another, but the significance of the written text has varied throughout history. For Christianity, holiness did not reside in the written text, or in any particular language, it resided in the Christ the text witnessed to. David M. Carr writes that this gave early Christianity a more &#x27;flexible&#x27; view of the written texts. Wilfred Cantwell Smith points out that &quot;in the Islamic system, the Quran fulfills a function comparable to the role... played by the person of Jesus Christ, while a closer counterpart to Christian scriptures are the Islamic Hadith &#x27;Traditions&#x27;.&quot; For centuries the written text had less significance than the will of the church as represented by the Pope, since the church saw the text as having been created by the church. One cause of the Reformation was the perceived need to reorient Christianity around its early text as authoritative. Some Protestant churches still focus on the idea of &quot;sola scriptura&quot;, which sees scripture as the only legitimate religious authority. Some denominations today support the use of the Bible as the only infallible source of Christian teaching. Others, though, advance the concept of &quot;prima scriptura&quot; in contrast, meaning scripture primarily or scripture mainly.

In the 21st century, attitudes towards the significance of the Bible continue to differ. Roman Catholics, High Church Anglicans, Methodists and Eastern Orthodox Christians stress the harmony and importance of both the Bible and sacred tradition in combination. United Methodists see Scripture as the major factor in Christian doctrine, but they also emphasize the importance of tradition, experience, and reason. Lutherans teach that the Bible is the sole source for Christian doctrine. Muslims view the Bible as reflecting the true unfolding revelation from God; but revelation which had been corrupted or distorted (in Arabic: &quot;tahrif&quot;), and therefore necessitated correction by giving the Quran to the Islamic prophet Muhammad. The Rastafari view the Bible as essential to their religion, while the Unitarian Universalists view it as &quot;one of many important religious texts&quot;.

== Versions and translations ==

The original texts of the Tanakh were almost entirely written in Hebrew with about one per cent in Aramaic. The earliest translation of any Bible text is the Septuagint which translated the Hebrew into Greek. As the first translation of any biblical literature, the translation that became the Septuagint was an unparalleled event in the ancient world. This translation was made possible by a common Mediterranean culture where Semitism had been foundational to Greek culture. In the Talmud, Greek is the only language officially allowed for translation. The Targum Onkelos is the Aramaic translation of the Hebrew Bible believed to have been written in the second century CE. These texts attracted the work of various scholars, but a standardized text was not available before the 9th century.

There were different ancient versions of the Tanakh in Hebrew. These were copied and edited in three different locations producing slightly varying results. Masoretic scholars in Tiberias in ancient Palestine copied the ancient texts in Tiberian Hebrew. A copy was recovered from the &quot;Cave of Elijah&quot; (the synagogue of Aleppo in the Judean desert) and is therefore referred to as the Aleppo Codex which dates to around 920. This codex, which is over a thousand years old, was originally the oldest codex of the complete Tiberian Hebrew Bible. Babylonian masoretes had also copied the early texts, and the Tiberian and Babylonian were later combined, using the Aleppo Codex and additional writings, to form the Ben-Asher masoretic tradition which is the standardized Hebrew Bible of today. The Aleppo Codex is no longer the oldest complete manuscript because, during riots in 1947, the Aleppo Codex was removed from its location, and about 40% of it was subsequently lost. It must now rely on additional manuscripts, and as a result, the Aleppo Codex contains the most comprehensive collection of variant readings. The oldest complete version of the Masoretic tradition is the Leningrad Codex from 1008. It is the source for all modern Jewish and Christian translations.

Levidas writes that, &quot;The Koine Greek New Testament is a non-translated work; most scholars agree on thisdespite disagreement on the possibility that some passages may have appeared initially in Aramaic... It is written in the Koine Greek of the first century [CE]&quot;. Early Christians translated the New Testament into Old Syriac, Coptic, Ethiopic, and Latin, among other languages. The earliest Latin translation was the Old Latin text, or &quot;Vetus Latina&quot;, which, from internal evidence, seems to have been made by several authors over a period of time.

Pope Damasus I (366–383) commissioned Jerome to produce a reliable and consistent text by translating the original Greek and Hebrew texts into Latin. This translation became known as the Latin Vulgate Bible, in the 4th century CE (although Jerome expressed in his prologues to most deuterocanonical books that they were non-canonical). In 1546, at the Council of Trent, Jerome&#x27;s Vulgate translation was declared by the Roman Catholic Church to be the only authentic and official Bible in the Latin Church. The Greek-speaking East continued to use the Septuagint translations of the Old Testament, and they had no need to translate the Greek New Testament. This contributed to the East-West Schism.

Many ancient translations coincide with the invention of the alphabet and the beginning of vernacular literature in those languages. According to British Academy professor N. Fernández Marcos, these early translations represent &quot;pioneer works of enormous linguistic interest, as they represent the oldest documents we have for the study of these languages and literature&quot;.

Translations to English can be traced to the seventh century, Alfred the Great in the 9th century, the &quot;Toledo School of Translators&quot; in the 12th and 13th century, Roger Bacon (1220–1292), an English Franciscan friar of the 13th century, and multiple writers of the Renaissance. The Wycliffite Bible, which is &quot;one of the most significant in the development of a written standard&quot;, dates from the late Middle English period. William Tyndale&#x27;s translation of 1525 is seen by several scholars as having influenced the form of English Christian discourse as well as impacting the development of the English language itself. Martin Luther translated the New Testament into German in 1522, and both Testaments with Apocrypha in 1534, thereby contributing to the multiple wars of the Age of Reformation and Counter-Reformation. Important biblical translations of this period include the Polish &quot;Jakub Wujek Bible&quot; (Biblia Jakuba Wujka) from 1535, and the English King James/Authorized Version (1604–1611). The King James Version was the most widespread English Bible of all time, but it has largely been superseded by modern translations.
Some New Testaments verses found to be later additions to the text are not included in modern English translations, despite appearing in older English translations such as the King James Version.

Some denominations have additional canonical texts beyond the Bible, including the Standard Works of the Latter Day Saints movement and &quot;Divine Principle&quot; in the Unification Church.

Nearly all modern English translations of the Old Testament are based on a single manuscript, the Leningrad Codex, copied in 1008 or 1009. It is a complete example of the Masoretic Text, and its published edition is used by the majority of scholars. The Aleppo Codex is the basis of the Hebrew University Bible Project in Jerusalem.

Since the Reformation era, Bible translations have been made into the common vernacular of many languages. The Bible continues to be translated to new languages, largely by Christian organizations such as Wycliffe Bible Translators, New Tribes Mission and Bible societies. Lamin Sanneh writes that tracing the impact on the local cultures of translating the Bible into local vernacular language shows it has produced &quot;the movements of indigenization and cultural liberation&quot;. &quot;The translated scripture ... has become the benchmark of awakening and renewal&quot;.

== Archaeological and historical research ==

Biblical archaeology is a subsection of archaeology that relates to and sheds light upon the Hebrew scriptures and the New Testament. It is used to help determine the lifestyle and practices of people living in biblical times. There are a wide range of interpretations in the field of biblical archaeology. One broad division includes biblical maximalism, which generally takes the view that most of the Old Testament or the Hebrew Bible is based on history although it is presented through the religious viewpoint of its time. According to historian Lester L. Grabbe, there are &quot;few, if any&quot; maximalists in mainstream scholarship. It is considered to be the extreme opposite of biblical minimalism which considers the Bible to be a purely post-exilic (5th century BCE and later) composition. According to Mary-Joan Leith, professor of religious studies, many minimalists have ignored evidence for the antiquity of the Hebrew language in the Bible, and few take archaeological evidence into consideration. Most biblical scholars and archaeologists fall somewhere on a spectrum between these two.

The biblical account of events of the Exodus from Egypt in the Torah, the migration to the Promised Land, and the period of Judges are sources of heated ongoing debate. There is an absence of evidence for the presence of Israel in Egypt from any Egyptian source, historical or archaeological. Yet, as William Dever points out, these biblical traditions were written long after the events they describe, and they are based in sources now lost and older oral traditions.

The Hebrew Bible/Old Testament, ancient non–biblical texts, and archaeology support the Babylonian captivity beginning around 586 BCE. Excavations in southern Judah show a pattern of destruction consistent with the Neo-Assyrian devastation of Judah at the end of the eighth century BCE and 2 Kings 18:13. In 1993, at Tel Dan, archaeologist Avraham Biran unearthed a fragmentary Aramaic inscription, the Tel Dan stele, dated to the late ninth or early eighth century that mentions a &quot;king of Israel&quot; as well as a &quot;house of David&quot; (bet David). This shows David could not be a late sixth-century invention, and implies that Judah&#x27;s kings traced their lineage back to someone named David. However, there is no current archaeological evidence for the existence of King David and Solomon or the First Temple as far back as the tenth century BCE where the Bible places them.

In the nineteenth and early twentieth century, surveys demonstrated that Acts of the Apostles (Acts) scholarship was divided into two traditions, &quot;a conservative (largely British) tradition which had great confidence in the historicity of Acts and a less conservative (largely German) tradition which had very little confidence in the historicity of Acts&quot;. Subsequent surveys show that little has changed. Author Thomas E. Phillips writes that &quot;In this two-century-long debate over the historicity of Acts and its underlying traditions, only one assumption seemed to be shared by all: Acts was intended to be read as history&quot;. This too is now being debated by scholars as: what genre does Acts actually belong to? There is a growing consensus, however, that the question of genre is unsolvable and would not, in any case, solve the issue of historicity: &quot;Is Acts history or fiction? In the eyes of most scholars, it is historybut not the kind of history that precludes fiction.&quot; says Phillips.

== Biblical criticism ==

Biblical criticism refers to the analytical investigation of the Bible as a text, and addresses questions such as history, authorship, dates of composition, and authorial intention. It is not the same as criticism of the Bible, which is an assertion against the Bible being a source of information or ethical guidance, nor is it criticism of possible translation errors.

Biblical criticism made study of the Bible secularized, scholarly, and more democratic, while it also permanently altered the way people understood the Bible. The Bible is no longer thought of solely as a religious artefact, and its interpretation is no longer restricted to the community of believers. Michael Fishbane writes, &quot;There are those who regard the desacralization of the Bible as the fortunate condition for&quot; the development of the modern world. For many, biblical criticism &quot;released a host of threats&quot; to the Christian faith. For others biblical criticism &quot;proved to be a failure, due principally to the assumption that diachronic, linear research could master any and all of the questions and problems attendant on interpretation&quot;. Still others believed that biblical criticism, &quot;shorn of its unwarranted arrogance,&quot; could be a reliable source of interpretation. Michael Fishbane compares biblical criticism to Job, a prophet who destroyed &quot;self-serving visions for the sake of a more honest crossing from the divine &quot;textus&quot; to the human one&quot;. Or as Rogerson says: biblical criticism has been liberating for those who want their faith &quot;intelligently grounded and intellectually honest&quot;.

== Bible museums ==
* The Dunham Bible Museum is located at Houston Baptist University in Houston, Texas. It is known for its collection of rare Bibles from around the world and for having many different Bibles of various languages.
* The Museum of the Bible opened in Washington, D.C. in November 2017. The museum states that its intent is to &quot;share the historical relevance and significance of the sacred scriptures in a nonsectarian way&quot;, but this has been questioned.
* The Bible Museum in St Arnaud, Victoria in Australia opened in 2009. , it is closed for relocation.
* There is a Bible Museum at &quot;The Great Passion Play&quot; in Eureka Springs, Arkansas.
* The Bible Museum on the Square in Collierville, Tennessee opened in 1997.
* Biedenharn Museum and Gardens in Monroe, Louisiana includes a Bible Museum.

== Illustrations ==
The grandest medieval Bibles were illuminated manuscripts in which the text is supplemented by the addition of decoration, such as decorated initials, borders (marginalia) and miniature illustrations. Up to the 12th century, most manuscripts were produced in monasteries in order to add to the library or after receiving a commission from a wealthy patron. Larger monasteries often contained separate areas for the monks who specialized in the production of manuscripts called a scriptorium, where &quot;separate little rooms were assigned to book copying; they were situated in such a way that each scribe had to himself a window open to the cloister walk.&quot; By the 14th century, the cloisters of monks writing in the scriptorium started to employ laybrothers from the urban scriptoria, especially in Paris, Rome and the Netherlands.
Demand for manuscripts grew to an extent that the Monastic libraries were unable to meet with the demand, and began employing secular scribes and illuminators. These individuals often lived close to the monastery and, in certain instances, dressed as monks whenever they entered the monastery, but were allowed to leave at the end of the day. A notable example of an illuminated manuscript is the Book of Kells, produced circa the year 800 containing the four Gospels of the New Testament together with various prefatory texts and tables.

The manuscript was &quot;sent to the rubricator, who added (in red or other colours) the titles, headlines, the initials of chapters and sections, the notes and so on; and then – if the book was to be illustrated – it was sent to the illuminator.&quot; In the case of manuscripts that were sold commercially, the writing would &quot;undoubtedly have been discussed initially between the patron and the scribe (or the scribe&#x27;s agent,) but by the time that the written gathering were sent off to the illuminator there was no longer any scope for innovation.&quot;

== Gallery ==
== See also ==
* Additional and alternative scriptures relating to Christianity
* Bible box
* Bible case
* Bible paper
* Biblical software
* Christian theology
* Code of Hammurabi
* Family Bible (book)
* International Bible Contest
* Lectionary – schedule of ceremonial Bible readings which varies by denomination
* List of major biblical figures
* List of nations mentioned in the Bible
* Theodicy and the Bible
* Typology (theology)
== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Works cited ===
* 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* &quot;The &quot;Bible&quot; collected news and commentary&quot; &quot;The New York Times&quot;.
* &quot;The &quot;Bible&quot; collected news and commentary&quot; &quot;The Guardian&quot;.
* The British Library: Discovering Sacred Texts – Christianity 
* The National Library of Israel – Over 15,000 scanned manuscripts of the Old Testament
* Trinity College Digital Collections images of complete manuscript of the Book of Kells.
* Check out different versions of the Christian Bible</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="4" end="9" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="29" end="43" title="religious text" label="religious text"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="80" end="86" title="sacredness" label="sacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="90" end="102" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="118" end="125" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981696" start="127" end="139" title="Samaritanism" label="Samaritanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="141" end="146" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="152" end="164" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="176" end="195" title="Abrahamic religions" label="Abrahamic religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="213" end="222" title="anthology" label="anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056756" start="270" end="288" title="biblical languages" label="originally written"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="292" end="298" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="300" end="307" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="313" end="324" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="524" end="538" title="biblical canon" label="biblical canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q870945" start="580" end="609" title="Biblical inspiration" label="product of divine inspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q508069" start="659" end="677" title="Biblical hermeneutics" label="interpret the text"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="860" end="865" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="869" end="875" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q216383" start="1021" end="1033" title="Nevi&amp;#x27;im" label="Nevi&amp;#x27;im"/>
<link wikidata="Q208190" start="1062" end="1069" title="Ketuvim" label="Ketuvim"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="1129" end="1135" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1307" end="1308" title="Bible" label="T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1341" end="1342" title="Bible" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1386" end="1387" title="Bible" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q380669" start="1422" end="1436" title="Masoretic Text" label="Masoretic Text"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="1577" end="1593" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="Rabbinic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="1599" end="1609" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1738" end="1750" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4205363" start="1776" end="1797" title="Second Temple Judaism" label="Second Temple Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="1840" end="1853" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="1859" end="1871" title="early Church" label="early Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="1992" end="1998" title="gospel" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="2054" end="2059" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="2076" end="2092" title="Pauline epistles" label="Pauline epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290800" start="2110" end="2127" title="Development of the New Testament canon" label="quickly coalesced"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="2137" end="2150" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="2305" end="2320" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q373665" start="2391" end="2409" title="biblical criticism" label="biblical criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q86860" start="2483" end="2516" title="Bible translations" label="translated or is being translated"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002558" start="2739" end="2766" title="Ethics in the Bible" label="source of ethical teachings"/>
<link wikidata="Q961711" start="2831" end="2876" title="The Bible and slavery" label="there are verses that address dealing with it"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="2996" end="3008" title="abolitionism" label="abolitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q792023" start="3043" end="3058" title="supersessionism" label="supersessionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128608" start="3076" end="3091" title="Book of Hebrews" label="Book of Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3167" end="3179" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="3216" end="3226" title="monotheism" label="monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077064" start="3228" end="3235" title="Charity (practice)" label="charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="3237" end="3247" title="healthcare" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811480" start="3249" end="3262" title="family values" label="family values"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="3315" end="3328" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="3330" end="3340" title="patriarchy" label="patriarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774220" start="3342" end="3361" title="anti-LGBTQ rhetoric" label="anti-LGBTQ rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q179742" start="3366" end="3373" title="bigotry" label="bigotry"/>
<link wikidata="Q154605" start="3391" end="3400" title="total war" label="total war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="3406" end="3417" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="3479" end="3491" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="3540" end="3543" title="Old Testament" label="Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="3548" end="3561" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3588" end="3593" title=":wikt:Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q720106" start="3710" end="3716" title="scroll" label="scroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="3900" end="3909" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173532" start="3919" end="3925" title="Byblos" label="Byblos"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="3969" end="3976" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602777" start="4082" end="4098" title="Hellenistic Jews" label="Hellenistic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q181778" start="4163" end="4174" title="F. F. Bruce" label="F. F. Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q43706" start="4186" end="4201" title="John Chrysostom" label="John Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="4566" end="4580" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="5003" end="5021" title="oral tradition" label="orally transmitted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178041" start="5394" end="5429" title="Authorship of the Bible" label="written and compiled by many people"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="5643" end="5650" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="6049" end="6057" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q145780" start="6066" end="6082" title="Dead Sea Scrolls" label="Dead Sea Scrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q223399" start="6111" end="6117" title="Qumran" label="Qumran"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="6243" end="6255" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q440608" start="6345" end="6357" title="Paleo-Hebrew alphabet" label="paleo-Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="6369" end="6378" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="7025" end="7031" title="sacredness" label="sacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="7137" end="7151" title="biblical canon" label="biblical canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="7277" end="7282" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266769" start="7415" end="7427" title="Development of the Hebrew Bible canon" label="Jewish canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q216383" start="7524" end="7536" title="Nevi&amp;#x27;im" label="Nevi&amp;#x27;im"/>
<link wikidata="Q208190" start="7631" end="7638" title="Ketuvim" label="Ketuvim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="7845" end="7860" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Biblical Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="7881" end="7888" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="7914" end="7926" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148801" start="7953" end="7965" title="Hebrew abbreviations" label="abbreviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266076" start="8084" end="8103" title="biblical manuscript" label="historical versions"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="8111" end="8123" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="8129" end="8139" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q380669" start="8145" end="8159" title="Masoretic Text" label="Masoretic Text"/>
<link wikidata="Q149441" start="8169" end="8189" title="Samaritan Pentateuch" label="Samaritan Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602777" start="8518" end="8531" title="Hellenistic Judaism" label="Hellenic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="8542" end="8552" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q39576" start="8634" end="8657" title="Ptolemy II Philadelphus" label="Ptolemy II Philadelphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q756227" start="9185" end="9194" title="Masoretes" label="Masoretes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="9248" end="9254" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q843235" start="9259" end="9266" title="Biblical Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="9295" end="9307" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="9311" end="9327" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="Rabbinic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777790" start="9543" end="9555" title="niqqud" label="vocalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q772497" start="9560" end="9572" title="Hebrew cantillation" label="accentuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q733492" start="10318" end="10333" title="Leningrad Codex" label="Leningrad Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="10402" end="10407" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="10426" end="10435" title="Samaritan" label="Samaritan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10662" end="10679" title="Authorship of the Bible#Divine authorship" label="divine authorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q870945" start="10683" end="10694" title="Biblical inspiration" label="inspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943041" start="10737" end="10761" title="Book of Joshua (Samaritan)" label="Samaritan Book of Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q47680" start="10798" end="10812" title="Book of Joshua" label="Book of Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q213924" start="10906" end="10911" title="codex" label="codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="11409" end="11421" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="12021" end="12041" title="early church fathers" label="early church fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q201346" start="12048" end="12055" title="Marcion" label="Marcion"/>
<link wikidata="Q210752" start="12068" end="12075" title="Didache" label="Didache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398963" start="12378" end="12388" title="Syriac versions of the Bible" label="Old Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="12390" end="12396" title="Coptic language" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35667" start="12398" end="12406" title="Ge&amp;#x27;ez language" label="Ethiopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="12412" end="12417" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127876" start="12441" end="12452" title="Bart Ehrman" label="Bart Ehrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517110" start="13763" end="13774" title="Alexandrian text-type" label="Alexandrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q749877" start="13776" end="13783" title="Western text-type" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150043" start="13785" end="13794" title="Caesarean text-type" label="Caesarean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569230" start="13800" end="13809" title="Byzantine text-type" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q591016" start="13846" end="13860" title="Catholic Bible" label="Catholic Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281392" start="13893" end="13908" title="Council of Rome" label="Council of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745306" start="13938" end="13943" title="Council of Hippo" label="Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13955" end="13963" title="Council of Carthage#Synod of 397" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="14049" end="14061" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="14135" end="14142" title="Vulgate" label="Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q51645" start="14186" end="14204" title="ecumenical council" label="ecumenical council"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="14247" end="14263" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="14322" end="14344" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="14522" end="14537" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="14574" end="14584" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q179829" start="14622" end="14656" title="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church" label="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q363134" start="15230" end="15241" title="Emanuel Tov" label="Emanuel Tov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236903" start="15523" end="15533" title="David M. Carr" label="David Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978420" start="16312" end="16327" title="Bruce Waltke" label="Bruce K. Waltke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835038" start="18562" end="18576" title="Michael V. Fox" label="Michael V. Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q445511" start="19553" end="19567" title="Michael Walzer" label="Michael Walzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q733492" start="20300" end="20315" title="Leningrad Codex" label="Leningrad Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="20471" end="20477" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="20545" end="20550" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q216383" start="20575" end="20587" title="Nevi&amp;#x27;im" label="Nevi&amp;#x27;im"/>
<link wikidata="Q208190" start="20615" end="20622" title="Ketuvim" label="Ketuvim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="20842" end="20857" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Biblical Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q843235" start="20956" end="20972" title="Biblical Aramaic" label="Biblical Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="21012" end="21025" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="21143" end="21148" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="21162" end="21172" title="Pentateuch" label="Pentateuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188831" start="21268" end="21285" title="Mosaic authorship" label="dictated to Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753709" start="21561" end="21583" title="Composition of the Torah" label="the Torah was composed"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="21678" end="21695" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="21744" end="21762" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161138" start="21830" end="21841" title="Incipit" label="first words"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="21917" end="21924" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9190" start="21959" end="21965" title="Book of Exodus" label="Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41490" start="21995" end="22004" title="Book of Leviticus" label="Leviticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43099" start="22036" end="22043" title="Book of Numbers" label="Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42614" start="22076" end="22087" title="Book of Deuteronomy" label="Deuteronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="22179" end="22187" title="Genesis creation narrative" label="creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005024" start="22358" end="22366" title="biblical covenant" label="covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189541" start="22376" end="22395" title="Patriarchs (Bible)" label="biblical patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="22396" end="22403" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q671872" start="22405" end="22410" title="Isaac" label="Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q289957" start="22415" end="22420" title="Jacob" label="Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366978" start="22434" end="22440" title="Israel (name)" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="22479" end="22497" title="Children of Israel" label="Children of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q145746" start="22516" end="22522" title="Joseph (Hebrew Bible)" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373099" start="22606" end="22608" title="Ur of the Chaldees" label="Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="22646" end="22652" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="22764" end="22769" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="22869" end="22882" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q169924" start="22928" end="22939" title="Mount Sinai (Bible)" label="Mount Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="23130" end="23150" title="Halakha" label="Jewish religious law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637842" start="23184" end="23200" title="613 commandments" label="613 commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q245248" start="23555" end="23576" title="Twelve Minor Prophets" label="Twelve Minor Prophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185305" start="23629" end="23644" title="Kingdom of Israel (united monarchy)" label="Hebrew monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q230407" start="23685" end="23702" title="Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)" label="Kingdom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48685" start="23711" end="23727" title="Kingdom of Judah" label="Kingdom of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="23763" end="23773" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="23891" end="23897" title="Yahweh" label="Yahweh"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="24125" end="24144" title="Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="Neo-Assyrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="24202" end="24223" title="neo-Babylonian Empire" label="neo-Babylonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q223644" start="24251" end="24270" title="Solomon&amp;#x27;s Temple" label="Temple in Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q44536" start="24542" end="24555" title="Promised Land" label="Promised Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524915" start="24612" end="24625" title="Kings of Judah" label="king of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q47680" start="24737" end="24751" title="Book of Joshua" label="Book of Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q81240" start="24811" end="24825" title="Book of Judges" label="Book of Judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q181620" start="24953" end="24968" title="Books of Samuel" label="Books of Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701168" start="25041" end="25055" title="Davidic line" label="House of David"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224666" start="25095" end="25109" title="Books of Kings" label="Books of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q131458" start="25165" end="25171" title="Book of Isaiah" label="Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q131590" start="25173" end="25181" title="Book of Jeremiah" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q178390" start="25183" end="25190" title="Book of Ezekiel" label="Ezekiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q245248" start="25199" end="25220" title="Twelve Minor Prophets" label="Twelve Minor Prophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q184030" start="25250" end="25255" title="Book of Hosea" label="Hosea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131643" start="25396" end="25400" title="Book of Joel" label="Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q174677" start="25476" end="25480" title="Book of Amos" label="Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q174753" start="25619" end="25626" title="Book of Obadiah" label="Obadiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q178819" start="25715" end="25720" title="Book of Jonah" label="Jonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q178076" start="25792" end="25797" title="Book of Micah" label="Micah"/>
<link wikidata="Q179755" start="25919" end="25924" title="Book of Nahum" label="Nahum"/>
<link wikidata="Q179760" start="25992" end="26000" title="Book of Habakkuk" label="Habakkuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188563" start="26067" end="26076" title="Book of Zephaniah" label="Zephaniah"/>
<link wikidata="Q178338" start="26173" end="26179" title="Book of Haggai" label="Haggai"/>
<link wikidata="Q179769" start="26231" end="26240" title="Book of Zechariah" label="Zechariah"/>
<link wikidata="Q51675" start="26316" end="26323" title="Book of Malachi" label="Malachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604769" start="26568" end="26582" title="Holy Spirit in Judaism" label="Ruach HaKodesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q214267" start="26648" end="26656" title="prophecy" label="prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51670" start="27516" end="27529" title="Song of Songs" label="Song of Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80038" start="27531" end="27543" title="Book of Ruth" label="Book of Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q179058" start="27549" end="27569" title="Book of Lamentations" label="Book of Lamentations"/>
<link wikidata="Q131072" start="27571" end="27583" title="Ecclesiastes" label="Ecclesiastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131068" start="27589" end="27603" title="Book of Esther" label="Book of Esther"/>
<link wikidata="Q131068" start="27855" end="27861" title="Book of Esther" label="Esther"/>
<link wikidata="Q80115" start="27863" end="27869" title="Book of Daniel" label="Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816643" start="27871" end="27884" title="Ezra–Nehemiah" label="Ezra-Nehemiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q161953" start="27889" end="27899" title="Books of Chronicles" label="Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q843235" start="28477" end="28484" title="Biblical Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="28642" end="28648" title="Psalms" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579" start="28737" end="28753" title="Book of Proverbs" label="Book of Proverbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577" start="28917" end="28928" title="Book of Job" label="Book of Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q51670" start="29031" end="29044" title="Song of Songs" label="Song of Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="29085" end="29093" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q80038" start="29145" end="29157" title="Book of Ruth" label="Book of Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q201196" start="29165" end="29172" title="Shavuot" label="Shavuot"/>
<link wikidata="Q179058" start="29339" end="29351" title="Book of Lamentations" label="Lamentations"/>
<link wikidata="Q211349" start="29359" end="29370" title="Ninth of Av" label="Ninth of Av"/>
<link wikidata="Q131072" start="29519" end="29531" title="Ecclesiastes" label="Ecclesiastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="29539" end="29545" title="Sukkot" label="Sukkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131068" start="29678" end="29692" title="Book of Esther" label="Book of Esther"/>
<link wikidata="Q180115" start="29703" end="29708" title="Purim" label="Purim"/>
<link wikidata="Q80115" start="29823" end="29837" title="Book of Daniel" label="Book of Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131635" start="29976" end="29988" title="Book of Ezra" label="Book of Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q131640" start="29989" end="30005" title="Book of Nehemiah" label="Book of Nehemiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q161953" start="30114" end="30124" title="Books of Chronicles" label="Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="30242" end="30259" title="Talmud" label="Babylonian Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q811988" start="30261" end="30271" title="Bava Batra" label="Bava Batra"/>
<link wikidata="Q331135" start="31313" end="31326" title="Against Apion" label="Against Apion"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="31349" end="31357" title="Flavius Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51670" start="31592" end="31609" title="the Song of Songs" label="the Song of Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131072" start="31615" end="31627" title="Ecclesiastes" label="Ecclesiastes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208190" start="31969" end="31983" title="hagiographa" label="hagiographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q524457" start="32054" end="32076" title="Books of the Maccabees" label="Books of the Maccabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q155980" start="32085" end="32101" title="Sirach" label="Wisdom of Sirach"/>
<link wikidata="Q133485" start="33458" end="33463" title="rabbi" label="rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="33594" end="33607" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q839470" start="33696" end="33711" title="sacred language" label="sacred language"/>
<link wikidata="Q246467" start="33925" end="33935" title="Theodotion" label="Theodotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q912549" start="33982" end="34001" title="additions to Daniel" label="additions to Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471572" start="34007" end="34060" title="Prayer of Azariah and Song of the Three Holy Children" label="Prayer of Azariah and Song of the Three Holy Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930210" start="34075" end="34098" title="Susanna (Book of Daniel)" label="Susannah and the Elders"/>
<link wikidata="Q218087" start="34117" end="34135" title="Bel and the Dragon" label="Bel and the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="34195" end="34210" title="Early Christian" label="Early Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80115" start="34242" end="34256" title="Book of Daniel" label="Book of Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="34312" end="34318" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q839739" start="34689" end="34696" title="Hexapla" label="Hexapla"/>
<link wikidata="Q133350" start="35097" end="35105" title="Sixtus V" label="Sixtus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q808428" start="36893" end="36911" title="Gospel of Barnabas" label="Gospel of Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q223169" start="37784" end="37795" title="3 Maccabees" label="3 Maccabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q230255" start="37798" end="37809" title="4 Maccabees" label="4 Maccabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619114" start="37812" end="37831" title="Assumption of Moses" label="Assumption of Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q220890" start="37843" end="37856" title="Book of Enoch" label="Book of Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q516792" start="37878" end="37891" title="Second Book of Enoch" label="Book of Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257262" start="37911" end="37924" title="3 Enoch" label="Book of Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q843946" start="38049" end="38065" title="Book of Jubilees" label="Book of Jubilees"/>
<link wikidata="Q619838" start="38068" end="38095" title="Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch" label="Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q615046" start="38109" end="38127" title="Letter of Aristeas" label="Letter of Aristeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810885" start="38216" end="38236" title="Life of Adam and Eve" label="Life of Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234994" start="38239" end="38272" title="Martyrdom and Ascension of Isaiah" label="Martyrdom and Ascension of Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418058" start="38275" end="38292" title="Psalms of Solomon" label="Psalms of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q740092" start="38295" end="38312" title="Sibylline Oracles" label="Sibylline Oracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q619703" start="38315" end="38341" title="Greek Apocalypse of Baruch" label="Greek Apocalypse of Baruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277578" start="38355" end="38390" title="Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs" label="Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q220890" start="38481" end="38488" title="1 Enoch" label="1 Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q516792" start="38490" end="38497" title="Second Book of Enoch" label="2 Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="38522" end="38534" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257262" start="38540" end="38547" title="3 Enoch" label="3 Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="38562" end="38568" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="38598" end="38604" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q213027" start="38660" end="38665" title="Enoch (Biblical figure)" label="Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="38706" end="38710" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="39051" end="39055" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q202812" start="39068" end="39079" title="Beta Israel" label="Beta Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131466" start="39265" end="39280" title="Epistle of Jude" label="Epistle of Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q128608" start="39289" end="39304" title="Book of Hebrews" label="Book of Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q179829" start="39453" end="39487" title="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church" label="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q844083" start="39492" end="39525" title="Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church" label="Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="40284" end="40306" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="40399" end="40410" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="40416" end="40428" title="Early Christianity" label="Early Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q623703" start="40535" end="40541" title="Targum" label="Targum"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="40549" end="40556" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q380669" start="40664" end="40678" title="Masoretic Text" label="Masoretic Text"/>
<link wikidata="Q335125" start="40919" end="40931" title="N. T. Wright" label="N. T. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672123" start="41413" end="41425" title="new covenant" label="new covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q158825" start="41446" end="41454" title="Jeremiah" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="41461" end="41471" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398963" start="42065" end="42093" title="Syriac versions of the Bible" label="Syriac versions of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104501" start="42134" end="42149" title="Orthodox Tewahedo biblical canon" label="Ethiopian Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q201410" start="42463" end="42485" title="Deuterocanonical books" label="Deuterocanonical books"/>
<link wikidata="Q201410" start="42555" end="42570" title="Anagignoskomena" label="Anagignoskomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q131737" start="42674" end="42679" title="Book of Tobit" label="Tobit"/>
<link wikidata="Q202129" start="42681" end="42687" title="Book of Judith" label="Judith"/>
<link wikidata="Q202135" start="42693" end="42710" title="Book of Wisdom" label="Wisdom of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q155980" start="42712" end="42718" title="Sirach" label="Sirach"/>
<link wikidata="Q211746" start="42740" end="42746" title="Book of Baruch" label="Baruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q757010" start="42752" end="42770" title="Letter of Jeremiah" label="Letter of Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q161985" start="42807" end="42818" title="1 Maccabees" label="1 Maccabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q209748" start="42820" end="42831" title="2 Maccabees" label="2 Maccabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q131068" start="42837" end="42862" title="Additions to Esther" label="Greek Additions to Esther"/>
<link wikidata="Q912549" start="42871" end="42896" title="Additions to Daniel" label="Greek Additions to Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="42903" end="42924" title="Greek Orthodox Church" label="Greek Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q223169" start="43122" end="43133" title="3 Maccabees" label="3 Maccabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200049" start="43136" end="43144" title="1 Esdras" label="1 Esdras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337449" start="43147" end="43165" title="Prayer of Manasseh" label="Prayer of Manasseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052253" start="43168" end="43177" title="Psalm 151" label="Psalm 151"/>
<link wikidata="Q230150" start="43178" end="43186" title="2 Esdras" label="2 Esdras"/>
<link wikidata="Q230255" start="43310" end="43321" title="4 Maccabees" label="4 Maccabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q192173" start="43365" end="43380" title="Georgian Orthodox Church" label="Georgian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q210540" start="43509" end="43531" title="Syriac Orthodox Church" label="Syriac Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317857" start="43549" end="43563" title="Psalms 152–155" label="Psalms 151–155"/>
<link wikidata="Q619838" start="43570" end="43590" title="Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch" label="Apocalypse of Baruch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43593" end="43613" title="2 Baruch#The Letter of Baruch" label="The Letter of Baruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104501" start="43619" end="43648" title="Orthodox Tewahedo biblical canon" label="Ethiopian Old Testament Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q220890" start="43654" end="43659" title="Book of Enoch" label="Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q843946" start="43664" end="43672" title="Jubilees" label="Jubilees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246385" start="43709" end="43721" title="Meqabyan" label="1–3 Meqabyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200049" start="43723" end="43733" title="1 Esdras" label="Greek Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q230150" start="43735" end="43743" title="2 Esdras" label="2 Esdras"/>
<link wikidata="Q119510" start="43765" end="43790" title="Revised Common Lectionary" label="Revised Common Lectionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="43798" end="43813" title="Lutheran Church" label="Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="43815" end="43830" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="43832" end="43847" title="Reformed Church" label="Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="43851" end="43866" title="Anglican Church" label="Anglican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="43871" end="43887" title="Methodist Church" label="Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200049" start="44200" end="44208" title="1 Esdras" label="1 Esdras"/>
<link wikidata="Q230150" start="44210" end="44218" title="2 Esdras" label="2 Esdras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337449" start="44227" end="44245" title="Prayer of Manasseh" label="Prayer of Manasseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="44288" end="44302" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="44307" end="44323" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="44380" end="44390" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="44426" end="44448" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="44570" end="44579" title="apocrypha" label="apocrypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="44647" end="44665" title="King James Version" label="King James Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270198" start="44698" end="44722" title="Revised Standard Version" label="Revised Standard Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="44754" end="44767" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="45163" end="45178" title="lingua franca" label="common language"/>
<link wikidata="Q551888" start="45216" end="45248" title="Conquests of Alexander the Great" label="Conquests of Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q36387" start="45286" end="45301" title="Byzantine Greek" label="Byzantine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="45339" end="45344" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193040" start="45958" end="45969" title="John Barton (theologian)" label="John Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q89662" start="46757" end="46769" title="Theodor Zahn" label="Theodor Zahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q383258" start="47559" end="47568" title="orthodoxy" label="orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="47571" end="47577" title="Heresy in Christianity" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="47678" end="47683" title="synod" label="synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745306" start="47815" end="47829" title="Synod of Hippo" label="Synod of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903192" start="47879" end="47914" title="Bible translations into Latin" label="produced a definitive Latin edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="47933" end="47940" title="Vulgate" label="Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599574" start="48321" end="48338" title="Stanley E. Porter" label="Stanley E. Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="48820" end="48826" title="genres" label="genres"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="48852" end="48859" title="Gospels" label="Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="48880" end="48900" title="Acts of the Apostles" label="Acts of the Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q215495" start="48902" end="48910" title="Epistles" label="Epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199667" start="48918" end="48928" title="Apocalyptic literature" label="Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="48969" end="48976" title="Gospel" label="Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q106046" start="49064" end="49080" title="Synoptic Gospels" label="Synoptic Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q392302" start="49084" end="49101" title="Gospel of Matthew" label="Gospel of Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388" start="49105" end="49119" title="Gospel of Mark" label="Gospel of Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q39939" start="49123" end="49137" title="Gospel of Luke" label="Gospel of Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="49140" end="49154" title="Gospel of John" label="Gospel of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677805" start="49160" end="49180" title="Acts of the Apostles (genre)" label="narrative literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="49248" end="49268" title="Acts of the Apostles" label="Acts of the Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="49274" end="49290" title="Pauline epistles" label="Pauline epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q48203" start="49399" end="49420" title="Epistle to the Romans" label="Epistle to the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q80355" start="49423" end="49455" title="First Epistle to the Corinthians" label="First Epistle to the Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q123808" start="49458" end="49491" title="Second Epistle to the Corinthians" label="Second Epistle to the Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q128620" start="49494" end="49518" title="Epistle to the Galatians" label="Epistle to the Galatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q408673" start="49521" end="49545" title="Epistle to the Ephesians" label="Epistle to the Ephesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q51613" start="49548" end="49574" title="Epistle to the Philippians" label="Epistle to the Philippians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131095" start="49577" end="49602" title="Epistle to the Colossians" label="Epistle to the Colossians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131115" start="49605" end="49639" title="First Epistle to the Thessalonians" label="First Epistle to the Thessalonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q131107" start="49642" end="49677" title="Second Epistle to the Thessalonians" label="Second Epistle to the Thessalonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q369042" start="49682" end="49699" title="pastoral epistles" label="pastoral epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q131180" start="49790" end="49814" title="First Epistle to Timothy" label="First Epistle to Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131489" start="49817" end="49842" title="Second Epistle to Timothy" label="Second Epistle to Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131493" start="49845" end="49861" title="Epistle to Titus" label="Epistle to Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131104" start="49864" end="49883" title="Epistle to Philemon" label="Epistle to Philemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q128608" start="49886" end="49908" title="Epistle to the Hebrews" label="Epistle to the Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q755655" start="49913" end="49930" title="Catholic epistles" label="Catholic epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q131097" start="49988" end="50004" title="Epistle of James" label="Epistle of James"/>
<link wikidata="Q131119" start="50053" end="50075" title="First Epistle of Peter" label="First Epistle of Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131178" start="50109" end="50132" title="Second Epistle of Peter" label="Second Epistle of Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131101" start="50207" end="50228" title="First Epistle of John" label="First Epistle of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q131453" start="50348" end="50370" title="Second Epistle of John" label="Second Epistle of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q207674" start="50385" end="50393" title="docetism" label="docetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131462" start="50397" end="50418" title="Third Epistle of John" label="Third Epistle of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q131466" start="50453" end="50468" title="Epistle of Jude" label="Epistle of Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199667" start="50493" end="50515" title="apocalyptic literature" label="apocalyptic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="50532" end="50550" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14096452" start="50736" end="50754" title="Slavonic translations of the Bible" label="Slavonic tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398963" start="50760" end="50766" title="Syriac versions of the Bible" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q80292" start="50957" end="50973" title="Syriac Christianity" label="Syriac tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="51104" end="51110" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="51116" end="51131" title="biblical Hebrew" label="biblical Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705056" start="51288" end="51302" title="Antilegomena" label="disputed books"/>
<link wikidata="Q131178" start="51304" end="51311" title="2 Peter" label="2 Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131453" start="51313" end="51319" title="2 John" label="2 John"/>
<link wikidata="Q131462" start="51321" end="51327" title="3 John" label="3 John"/>
<link wikidata="Q131466" start="51329" end="51333" title="Epistle of Jude" label="Jude"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="51335" end="51345" title="Book of Revelation" label="Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196853" start="51438" end="51454" title="Harklean Version" label="Harklean Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q55167728" start="51467" end="51483" title="Thomas of Harqel" label="Thomas of Harqel"/>
<link wikidata="Q179829" start="51997" end="52031" title="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church" label="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="52186" end="52196" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q220890" start="52275" end="52280" title="Book of Enoch" label="Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q843946" start="52285" end="52293" title="Jubilees" label="Jubilees"/>
<link wikidata="Q35667" start="52338" end="52348" title="Ge&amp;#x27;ez language" label="Ge&amp;#x27;ez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200049" start="52388" end="52398" title="1 Esdras" label="Greek Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q230150" start="52407" end="52425" title="Jewish Apocalypse of Ezra" label="Apocalypse of Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246385" start="52438" end="52446" title="Meqabyan" label="Meqabyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052253" start="52452" end="52461" title="Psalm 151" label="Psalm 151"/>
<link wikidata="Q956165" start="52480" end="52487" title="Psalter" label="Psalter"/>
<link wikidata="Q51663" start="52876" end="52881" title="Jesus in Christianity" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="52901" end="52918" title="God in Christianity" label="the nature of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="52944" end="52952" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290800" start="53144" end="53172" title="Development of the New Testament canon" label="27 books of the modern canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="53325" end="53342" title="Oriental Orthodox Churches" label="Oriental Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q683724" start="53375" end="53393" title="Armenian Apostolic" label="Armenian Apostolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223342" start="53427" end="53459" title="Third Epistle to the Corinthians" label="Third Epistle to the Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010242" start="53563" end="53575" title="Coptic Bible" label="Coptic Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q171396" start="53592" end="53607" title="Christianity in Egypt" label="Egyptian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q26261737" start="53626" end="53645" title="Epistles of Clement" label="Epistles of Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872572" start="53682" end="53691" title="autograph" label="autograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266076" start="53735" end="53746" title="Biblical manuscript" label="manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53943" end="53964" title="Bible manuscript#Textual criticism" label="manuscript traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517110" start="54052" end="54073" title="Alexandrian text-type" label="Alexandrian text-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631377" start="54085" end="54095" title="biblical minimalism" label="minimalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569230" start="54102" end="54121" title="Byzantine text-type" label="Byzantine text-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845147" start="54133" end="54143" title="biblical maximalism" label="maximalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q749877" start="54154" end="54171" title="Western text-type" label="Western text-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q213924" start="54299" end="54304" title="codex" label="codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744058" start="54651" end="54667" title="Textual variants in the New Testament" label="textual variants"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="55603" end="55616" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q158075" start="55628" end="55643" title="Gutenberg Bible" label="Gutenberg Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q426853" start="55687" end="55699" title="movable type" label="movable type"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988499" start="55740" end="55751" title="Western law" label="Western law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243117" start="55753" end="55756" title="Western art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q116476" start="55758" end="55768" title="Western literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="56221" end="56230" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086472" start="56232" end="56252" title="religious toleration" label="religious toleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="56257" end="56274" title="Freedom of religion" label="religious freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q169390" start="56329" end="56341" title="abolitionism" label="abolitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="56379" end="56400" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583158" start="56406" end="56429" title="Anti-Apartheid Movement" label="Anti-Apartheid Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q206898" start="56435" end="56454" title="liberation theology" label="liberation theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266" start="57362" end="57372" title="Nation" label="nationhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="57377" end="57388" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146163" start="57667" end="57686" title="collective identity" label="collective identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q475346" start="57989" end="58012" title="Deuteronomistic History" label="Deuteronomistic History"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="58107" end="58113" title="Ethnicity" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880695" start="58118" end="58135" title="national identity" label="national identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="58455" end="58467" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q319242" start="59528" end="59536" title="Caesarea Maritima" label="Caesarea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000047" start="59573" end="59591" title="Health system" label="health care system"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="59662" end="59671" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="59721" end="59734" title="Social stigma" label="destigmatized"/>
<link wikidata="Q623184" start="59760" end="59768" title="Deviance (sociology)" label="deviance"/>
<link wikidata="Q25423384" start="61007" end="61026" title="social reproduction" label="social reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q61711527" start="61245" end="61256" title="Kyle Harper" label="Kyle Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="61496" end="61508" title="St Augustine" label="St Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q372941" start="61516" end="61527" title="Confessions (St. Augustine)" label="Confessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q116476" start="61576" end="61594" title="Western Literature" label="Western Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q653871" start="61606" end="61622" title="Summa Theologica" label="Summa Theologica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="61812" end="61817" title="Dante" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="61851" end="61864" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="61979" end="61995" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="62000" end="62019" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243117" start="62043" end="62054" title="Western art" label="Western art"/>
<link wikidata="Q179900" start="62120" end="62125" title="David (Michelangelo)" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q223689" start="62142" end="62147" title="Pietà" label="Pietà"/>
<link wikidata="Q128910" start="62200" end="62211" title="The Last Supper (Leonardo da Vinci)" label="Last Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="62417" end="62432" title="The Renaissance" label="The Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="62978" end="62985" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q792023" start="63117" end="63132" title="supersessionism" label="supersessionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="63288" end="63301" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="63303" end="63313" title="patriarchy" label="patriarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="63339" end="63347" title="violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q154605" start="63351" end="63360" title="total war" label="total war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="63366" end="63377" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="63448" end="63456" title="pacifism" label="pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049575" start="63458" end="63472" title="non-resistance" label="non-resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q847198" start="63474" end="63482" title="just war" label="just war"/>
<link wikidata="Q969619" start="63488" end="63502" title="preventive war" label="preventive war"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="63529" end="63536" title="crusade" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240990" start="63745" end="63760" title="John J. Collins" label="John J. Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q102070078" start="63888" end="63904" title="Leonard Glick" label="Leonard B. Glick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782381" start="63934" end="63956" title="Jewish fundamentalism" label="Jewish fundamentalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926898" start="63976" end="63989" title="Shlomo Aviner" label="Shlomo Aviner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506923" start="64018" end="64029" title="Gush Emunim" label="Gush Emunim"/>
<link wikidata="Q201190" start="64058" end="64070" title="Palestinians" label="Palestinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745723" start="64239" end="64250" title="Nur Masalha" label="Nur Masalha"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="64263" end="64271" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q200325" start="64492" end="64499" title="Human history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q16093401" start="65020" end="65034" title="Phyllis Trible" label="Phyllis Trible"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="65373" end="65394" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="65776" end="65782" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193040" start="66365" end="66376" title="John Barton (theologian)" label="John Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="67197" end="67208" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235794" start="67317" end="67327" title="Biblical infallibility" label="infallible"/>
<link wikidata="Q158857" start="67481" end="67501" title="biblical inerrancy" label="inerrant word of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="67637" end="67649" title="hermeneutics" label="hermeneutics"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="67827" end="67852" title="Christian fundamentalism" label="Fundamentalist Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q856690" start="67889" end="67908" title="biblical literalism" label="biblical literalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193748" start="68009" end="68025" title="History of ancient Israel and Judah" label="Jewish antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10337407" start="68270" end="68284" title="Norman Geisler" label="Norman Geisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071810" start="68618" end="68657" title="Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy" label="Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872572" start="68710" end="68719" title="autograph" label="autograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411760" start="68818" end="68842" title="King-James-Only Movement" label="King-James-Only Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="70146" end="70160" title="oral tradition" label="oral tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q132834" start="70856" end="70863" title="Madrasa" label="Madrasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q154773" start="70879" end="70886" title="Yeshiva" label="Yeshiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236903" start="71476" end="71489" title="David M. Carr" label="David M. Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="71815" end="71821" title="Hadith" label="Hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="72046" end="72057" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="72151" end="72161" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q310430" start="72204" end="72218" title="sola scriptura" label="sola scriptura"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235794" start="72357" end="72367" title="Biblical infallibility" label="infallible"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243021" start="72443" end="72458" title="prima scriptura" label="prima scriptura"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="72617" end="72632" title="Roman Catholics" label="Roman Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070069" start="72634" end="72645" title="High Church" label="High Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="72646" end="72655" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="72657" end="72667" title="Methodism" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="72672" end="72688" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055765" start="72756" end="72772" title="sacred tradition" label="sacred tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155369" start="73015" end="73037" title="Islamic view of the Bible" label="Muslims view the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="73071" end="73081" title="revelation" label="revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095353" start="73087" end="73090" title="God in Islam" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810992" start="73163" end="73169" title="tahrif" label="tahrif"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="73230" end="73235" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="73243" end="73258" title="Prophets of Islam" label="Islamic prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="73259" end="73267" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q101462" start="73273" end="73282" title="Rastafari" label="Rastafari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622507" start="73340" end="73363" title="Unitarian Universalism" label="Unitarian Universalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508627" start="74019" end="74033" title="Targum Onkelos" label="Targum Onkelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q637584" start="74650" end="74662" title="Aleppo Codex" label="Aleppo Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q302952" start="74976" end="74985" title="Aaron ben Moses ben Asher" label="Ben-Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q380669" start="74986" end="74995" title="Masoretic Text" label="masoretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398963" start="75865" end="75875" title="Syriac versions of the Bible" label="Old Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="75877" end="75883" title="Coptic language" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35667" start="75885" end="75893" title="Ge&amp;#x27;ez language" label="Ethiopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12289" start="75968" end="75977" title="Old Latin" label="Old Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170093" start="75993" end="76005" title="Vetus Latina" label="Vetus Latina"/>
<link wikidata="Q130997" start="76111" end="76125" title="Pope Damasus I" label="Pope Damasus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="76149" end="76155" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="76298" end="76317" title="Vulgate" label="Latin Vulgate Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="76463" end="76479" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="76608" end="76620" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="76796" end="76812" title="East-West Schism" label="East-West Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="77261" end="77277" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q69199" start="77308" end="77336" title="Toledo School of Translators" label="Toledo School of Translators"/>
<link wikidata="Q171677" start="77373" end="77384" title="Roger Bacon" label="Roger Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="77475" end="77486" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626958" start="77492" end="77508" title="Wycliffe&amp;#x27;s Bible" label="Wycliffite Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462802" start="77644" end="77678" title="Tyndale Bible" label="William Tyndale&amp;#x27;s translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="77845" end="77858" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="78002" end="78044" title="Reformation" label="Age of Reformation and Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="78238" end="78256" title="King James Version" label="King James Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272119" start="78438" end="78481" title="List of New Testament verses not included in modern English translations" label="not included in modern English translations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78588" end="78614" title="List of religious texts#Christianity" label="additional canonical texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847515" start="78647" end="78661" title="Standard Works" label="Standard Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="78669" end="78695" title="Latter Day Saints movement" label="Latter Day Saints movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="78706" end="78722" title="Divine Principle" label="Divine Principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="78736" end="78754" title="Unification Church" label="Unification Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q733492" start="78855" end="78870" title="Leningrad Codex" label="Leningrad Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q637584" start="79011" end="79023" title="Aleppo Codex" label="Aleppo Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q86860" start="79118" end="79136" title="Bible translations" label="Bible translations"/>
<link wikidata="Q327884" start="79296" end="79322" title="Wycliffe Bible Translators" label="Wycliffe Bible Translators"/>
<link wikidata="Q552944" start="79324" end="79342" title="New Tribes Mission" label="New Tribes Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280834" start="79347" end="79362" title="Bible society" label="Bible societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481881" start="79364" end="79376" title="Lamin Sanneh" label="Lamin Sanneh"/>
<link wikidata="Q609819" start="79716" end="79736" title="Biblical archaeology" label="Biblical archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="79756" end="79767" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845147" start="80051" end="80070" title="biblical maximalism" label="biblical maximalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429292" start="80267" end="80283" title="Lester L. Grabbe" label="Lester L. Grabbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631377" start="80405" end="80424" title="biblical minimalism" label="biblical minimalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q961603" start="80466" end="80477" title="post-exilic" label="post-exilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290338" start="80861" end="80878" title="Exodus from Egypt" label="Exodus from Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44536" start="80914" end="80927" title="Promised Land" label="Promised Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q621421" start="80947" end="80953" title="Biblical judges" label="Judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="81381" end="81401" title="Babylonian captivity" label="Babylonian captivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q516354" start="81696" end="81709" title="Tel Dan stele" label="Tel Dan stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q435174" start="83442" end="83464" title="criticism of the Bible" label="criticism of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="83589" end="83600" title="translation" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179962" start="84576" end="84579" title="Job (biblical figure)" label="Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916417" start="84944" end="84970" title="Houston Baptist University" label="Houston Baptist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="84974" end="84981" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="84983" end="84988" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20980966" start="85123" end="85142" title="Museum of the Bible" label="Museum of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="85153" end="85169" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2403511" start="85388" end="85407" title="St Arnaud, Victoria" label="St Arnaud, Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85503" end="85525" title="Passion Play#United States" label="The Great Passion Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q79824" start="85535" end="85559" title="Eureka Springs, Arkansas" label="Eureka Springs, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940361" start="85597" end="85620" title="Collierville, Tennessee" label="Collierville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904330" start="85639" end="85668" title="Biedenharn Museum and Gardens" label="Biedenharn Museum and Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q947115" start="85672" end="85689" title="Monroe, Louisiana" label="Monroe, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="85770" end="85792" title="illuminated manuscript" label="illuminated manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q378408" start="85877" end="85884" title="initial" label="initial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572441" start="85896" end="85906" title="marginalia" label="marginalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8362" start="85912" end="85935" title="Miniature (illuminated manuscript)" label="miniature illustrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q760089" start="86059" end="86069" title="Commission (art)" label="commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="86151" end="86156" title="monks" label="monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q655185" start="86215" end="86226" title="scriptorium" label="scriptorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430154" start="86425" end="86434" title="cloisters" label="cloisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q204221" start="86972" end="86985" title="Book of Kells" label="Book of Kells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365156" start="87152" end="87162" title="rubricator" label="rubricator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313396" start="87212" end="87221" title="headlines" label="headlines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87714" end="87776" title="List of religious texts#Christianity" label="Additional and alternative scriptures relating to Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903119" start="87779" end="87788" title="Bible box" label="Bible box"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903121" start="87791" end="87801" title="Bible case" label="Bible case"/>
<link wikidata="Q634113" start="87804" end="87815" title="Bible paper" label="Bible paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q856108" start="87818" end="87835" title="Biblical software" label="Biblical software"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="87838" end="87856" title="Christian theology" label="Christian theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q93304" start="87859" end="87876" title="Code of Hammurabi" label="Code of Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433051" start="87879" end="87898" title="Family Bible (book)" label="Family Bible (book)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048744" start="87901" end="87928" title="International Bible Contest" label="International Bible Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q284465" start="87931" end="87941" title="Lectionary" label="Lectionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q794580" start="88013" end="88043" title="List of major biblical figures" label="List of major biblical figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630229" start="88046" end="88084" title="List of nations mentioned in the Bible" label="List of nations mentioned in the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781555" start="88087" end="88109" title="Theodicy and the Bible" label="Theodicy and the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480072" start="88112" end="88131" title="Typology (theology)" label="Typology (theology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q204221" start="88821" end="88834" title="Book of Kells" label="Book of Kells"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3392" wikidata="Q1973" url="?curid=3392" title="British Columbia">
<text>British Columbia is the westernmost province of Canada. Situated in the Pacific Northwest between the Pacific Ocean and the Rocky Mountains, the province has a diverse geography, with rugged landscapes that include rocky coastlines, sandy beaches, forests, lakes, mountains, inland deserts and grassy plains. British Columbia borders the province of Alberta to the east; the territories of Yukon and Northwest Territories to the north; the U.S. states of Washington, Idaho and Montana to the south, and Alaska to the northwest. With an estimated population of over 5.6million as of 2024, it is Canada&#x27;s third-most populous province. The capital of British Columbia is Victoria, while the province&#x27;s largest city is Vancouver. Vancouver and its suburbs together make up the third-largest metropolitan area in Canada, with the 2021 census recording 2.6million people in Metro Vancouver. British Columbia is Canada&#x27;s third-largest province in terms of total area, after Quebec and Ontario.

The first known human inhabitants of the area settled in British Columbia at least 10,000 years ago. Such groups include the Coast Salish, Tsilhqotʼin, and Haida peoples, among many others. One of the earliest British settlements in the area was Fort Victoria, established in 1843, which gave rise to the city of Victoria, the capital of the Colony of Vancouver Island. The Colony of British Columbia (1858–1866) was subsequently founded by Richard Clement Moody, and by the Royal Engineers, Columbia Detachment, in response to the Fraser Canyon Gold Rush. Moody selected the site for and founded the mainland colony&#x27;s capital New Westminster. The colonies of Vancouver Island and British Columbia were incorporated in 1866, subsequent to which Victoria became the united colony&#x27;s capital. In 1871, British Columbia entered Confederation as the sixth province of Canada, in enactment of the &quot;British Columbia Terms of Union&quot;.

British Columbia is a diverse and cosmopolitan province, drawing on a plethora of cultural influences from its British Canadian, European, and Asian diasporas, as well as the Indigenous population. Though the province&#x27;s ethnic majority originates from the British Isles, many British Columbians also trace their ancestors to continental Europe, East Asia, and South Asia. Indigenous Canadians constitute about 6 percent of the province&#x27;s total population. Christianity is the largest religion in the region, though the majority of the population is non-religious. English is the common language of the province, although Punjabi, Mandarin Chinese, and Cantonese also have a large presence in the Metro Vancouver region. The Franco-Columbian community is an officially recognized linguistic minority, and around one percent of British Columbians claim French as their mother tongue. British Columbia is home to at least 34 distinct Indigenous languages.

Major sectors of British Columbia&#x27;s economy include forestry, mining, filmmaking and video production, tourism, real estate, construction, wholesale, and retail. Its main exports include lumber and timber, pulp and paper products, copper, coal, and natural gas. British Columbia exhibits high property values and is a significant centre for maritime trade: the Port of Vancouver is the largest port in Canada and the most diversified port in North America. Although less than 5 percent of the province&#x27;s territory is arable land, significant agriculture exists in the Fraser Valley and Okanagan due to the warmer climate. British Columbia is home to 45% of all publicly listed companies in Canada.

==Origin of the name==
The province&#x27;s name was chosen by Queen Victoria, when the Colony of British Columbia (1858–1866), i.e., &quot;the Mainland&quot;, became a British colony in 1858. It refers to the Columbia District, the British name for the territory drained by the Columbia River, in southeastern British Columbia, which was the namesake of the pre-Oregon Treaty Columbia Department of the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company. Queen Victoria chose &quot;British&quot; Columbia to distinguish what was the British sector of the Columbia District from the United States&#x27; (&quot;American Columbia&quot; or &quot;Southern Columbia&quot;), which became the Oregon Territory on August 8, 1848, as a result of the treaty.

Ultimately, the &quot;Columbia&quot; in the name &quot;British Columbia&quot; is derived from the name of the &quot;Columbia Rediviva&quot;, an American ship which lent its name to the Columbia River and later the wider region; the &quot;Columbia&quot; in the name &quot;Columbia Rediviva&quot; came from the name &quot;Columbia&quot; for the New World or parts thereof, a reference to Christopher Columbus.

The governments of Canada and British Columbia recognize as the French name for the province.

==Geography==
British Columbia is bordered to the west by the Pacific Ocean and the American state of Alaska, to the north by Yukon and the Northwest Territories, to the east by the province of Alberta, and to the south by the American states of Washington, Idaho, and Montana. The southern border of British Columbia was established by the 1846 Oregon Treaty, although its history is tied with lands as far south as California. British Columbia&#x27;s land area is . British Columbia&#x27;s rugged coastline stretches for more than , and includes deep, mountainous fjords and about 6,000 islands, most of which are uninhabited. It is the only province in Canada that borders the Pacific Ocean. British Columbia&#x27;s highest mountain is Mount Fairweather; the highest mountain entirely within the province is Mount Waddington.

British Columbia&#x27;s capital is Victoria, at the southeastern tip of Vancouver Island. Only a narrow strip of Vancouver Island, from Campbell River to Victoria, is significantly populated. Much of the western part of Vancouver Island and the rest of the coast is covered by temperate rainforest.

The province&#x27;s most populous city is Vancouver, which is at the confluence of the Fraser River and Georgia Strait, in the mainland&#x27;s southwest corner (an area often called the Lower Mainland). By land area, Abbotsford is the largest city. Vanderhoof is near the geographic centre of the province.

The Coast Mountains and the Inside Passage&#x27;s many inlets provide some of British Columbia&#x27;s renowned and spectacular scenery, which forms the backdrop and context for a growing outdoor adventure and ecotourism industry. 75 percent of the province is mountainous (more than above sea level); 60 percent is forested; and only about 5 percent is arable.

The province&#x27;s mainland away from the coastal regions is somewhat moderated by the Pacific Ocean. Terrain ranges from dry inland forests and semi-arid valleys, to the range and canyon districts of the Central and Southern Interior, to boreal forest and subarctic prairie in the Northern Interior. High mountain regions both north and south have subalpine flora and subalpine climate.

The Okanagan wine area, extending from Vernon to Osoyoos at the Oroville–Osoyoos Border Crossing, is one of several wine and cider-producing regions in Canada. Other wine regions in British Columbia include the Cowichan Valley on Vancouver Island and the Fraser Valley.

The Southern Interior cities of Kamloops and Penticton have some of the warmest and longest summer climates in Canada (while higher elevations are cold and snowy), although their temperatures are often exceeded north of the Fraser Canyon, close to the confluence of the Fraser and Thompson rivers, where the terrain is rugged and covered with desert-type flora. Semi-desert grassland is found in large areas of the Interior Plateau, with land uses ranging from ranching at lower altitudes to forestry at higher ones.

The northern, mostly mountainous, two-thirds of the province is largely unpopulated and undeveloped, except for the area east of the Rockies, where the Peace River Country contains BC&#x27;s portion of the Canadian Prairies, centred at the city of Dawson Creek.

British Columbia is considered part of the Pacific Northwest and the Cascadia bioregion, along with the American states of Alaska, Idaho, (western) Montana, Oregon, Washington, and (northern) California.

===Climate===
Because of the many mountain ranges and rugged coastline, British Columbia&#x27;s climate varies dramatically across the province.

Coastal southern British Columbia has a mild and rainy climate influenced by the North Pacific Current. Most of the region is classified as oceanic, though pockets of warm-summer Mediterranean climate also exist in the far-southern parts of the coast. Precipitation averages above in almost all of the coastal region, and Hucuktlis Lake on Vancouver Island receives an average of of rain annually.

Due to the blocking presence of successive mountain ranges, the climate of some of the interior valleys of the province (such as the Thompson, parts of the Fraser Canyon, the southern Cariboo and parts of the Okanagan) is semi-arid with certain locations receiving less than in annual precipitation. The annual mean temperature in the most populated areas of the province is up to , the mildest anywhere in Canada.

The valleys of the Southern Interior have short winters with only brief bouts of cold or infrequent heavy snow, while those in the Cariboo, in the Central Interior, are colder because of increased altitude and latitude, but without the intensity or duration experienced at similar latitudes elsewhere in Canada. Outside of the driest valleys, the Southern and Central Interior generally have a humid continental climate with widely variable precipitation. For example, the average daily low in Prince George (roughly in the middle of the province) in January is . Small towns in the southern interior with high elevation such as Princeton are typically colder and snowier than cities in the valleys.

Heavy snowfall occurs in all elevated mountainous terrain providing bases for skiers in both south and central British Columbia. Annual snowfall on highway mountain passes in the southern interior rivals some of the snowiest cities in Canada, and freezing rain and fog are sometimes present on such roads as well. This can result in hazardous driving conditions, as people are usually travelling between warmer areas such as Vancouver or Kamloops, and may be unaware that the conditions may be slippery and cold.

Winters are generally severe in the Northern Interior which is generally in the subarctic climate zone, but even there, milder air can penetrate far inland. The coldest temperature in British Columbia was recorded in Smith River, where it dropped to on January 31, 1947, one of the coldest readings recorded anywhere in North America. Atlin in the province&#x27;s far northwest, along with the adjoining Southern Lakes region of Yukon, get midwinter thaws caused by the Chinook effect, which is also common (and much warmer) in more southerly parts of the Interior.

During winter on the coast, rainfall, sometimes relentless heavy rain, dominates because of consistent barrages of cyclonic low-pressure systems from the North Pacific. Average snowfall on the coast during a normal winter is between , but on occasion (and not every winter) heavy snowfalls with more than and well below freezing temperatures arrive when modified arctic air reaches coastal areas, typically for short periods, and can take temperatures below , even at sea level. Arctic outflow winds can occasionally result in wind chill temperatures at or even below . While winters are very wet, coastal areas are generally milder and dry during summer under the influence of stable anti-cyclonic high pressure.

Southern Interior valleys are hot in summer; for example, in Osoyoos, the July maximum temperature averages , making it the hottest month of any location in Canada; this hot weather sometimes spreads towards the coast or to the far north of the province. Temperatures often exceed in the lower elevations of valleys in the Interior during mid-summer, with the record high of being held in Lytton on June 29, 2021, during a record-breaking heat wave that year.
The extended summer dryness often creates conditions that spark forest fires, from dry-lightning or man-made causes. Many areas of the province are often covered by a blanket of heavy cloud and low fog during the winter months, in contrast to abundant summer sunshine. Annual sunshine hours vary from 2200 near Cranbrook and Victoria to less than 1300 in Prince Rupert, on the North Coast just south of Southeast Alaska.

The exception to British Columbia&#x27;s wet and cloudy winters is during the El Niño phase. During El Niño events, the jet stream is much farther south across North America, making the province&#x27;s winters milder and drier than normal. Winters are much wetter and cooler during the opposite phase, La Niña.

===Parks and protected areas===

There are 14 designations of parks and protected areas in the province that reflect the different administration and creation of these areas in a modern context. There are 141 ecological reserves, 35 provincial marine parks, 7 provincial heritage sites, 6 National Historic Sites of Canada, 4 national parks and 3 national park reserves. 12.5 percent of the province&#x27;s area () is considered protected under one of the 14 different designations that includes over 800 distinct areas.

British Columbia contains seven of Canada&#x27;s national parks and National Park Reserves:

* Glacier National Park
* Gulf Islands National Park Reserve
* Gwaii Haanas National Park Reserve and Haida Heritage Site
* Kootenay National Park
* Mount Revelstoke National Park
* Pacific Rim National Park Reserve
* Yoho National Park

British Columbia contains a large number of provincial parks, run by BC Parks under the aegis of the Ministry of Environment. British Columbia&#x27;s provincial parks system is the second largest parks system in Canada, the largest being Canada&#x27;s National Parks system.

Another tier of parks in British Columbia are regional parks, which are maintained and run by the province&#x27;s regional districts. The Ministry of Forests operates forest recreation sites.

In addition to these areas, over of arable land are protected by the Agricultural Land Reserve.

===Fauna===

Much of the province is undeveloped, so populations of many mammalian species that have become rare in much of the United States still flourish in British Columbia. Watching animals of various sorts, including a very wide range of birds, has long been popular. Bears (grizzly, black—including the Kermode bear or spirit bear) live here, as do deer, elk, moose, caribou, big-horn sheep, mountain goats, marmots, beavers, muskrats, coyotes, wolves, mustelids (such as wolverines, badgers and fishers), cougars, eagles, ospreys, herons, Canada geese, swans, loons, hawks, owls, ravens, harlequin ducks, and many other sorts of ducks. Smaller birds (robins, jays, grosbeaks, chickadees, and so on) also abound. Murrelets are known from Frederick Island, a small island off the coast of Haida Gwaii.

Many healthy populations of fish are present, including salmonids such as several species of salmon, trout, steelhead, and char. Besides salmon and trout, sport-fishers in BC also catch halibut, bass, and sturgeon. On the coast, harbour seals and river otters are common. Cetacean species native to the coast include the orca, humpback whale, grey whale, harbour porpoise, Dall&#x27;s porpoise, Pacific white-sided dolphin and minke whale.

Some endangered species in British Columbia are: Vancouver Island marmot, spotted owl, American white pelican, and badgers.

===Forests===
White spruce or Engelmann spruce and their hybrids occur in 12 of the 14 biogeoclimatic zones of British Columbia. Common types of trees present in BC&#x27;s forests include western redcedar, yellow-cedar, Rocky Mountain juniper, lodgepole pine, ponderosa or yellow pine, whitebark pine, limber pine, western white pine, western larch, tamarack, alpine larch, white spruce, Engelmann spruce, Sitka spruce, black spruce, grand fir, Amabilis fir, subalpine fir, western hemlock, mountain hemlock, Douglas-fir, western yew, Pacific dogwood, bigleaf maple, Douglas maple, vine maple, arbutus, black hawthorn, cascara, Garry oak, Pacific crab apple, choke cherry, pin cherry, bitter cherry, red alder, mountain alder, paper birch, water birch, black cottonwood, balsam poplar, trembling aspen.

===Traditional plant foods===
First Nations peoples of British Columbia used plants for food, and to produce material goods like fuel and building products. Plant foods included berries, and roots like camas.

===Ecozones===
Environment Canada subdivides British Columbia into six ecozones:

* Pacific Marine
* Pacific Maritime
* Boreal Cordillera
* Montane Cordillera
* Taiga Plains
* Boreal Plains Ecozones.

==History==
===Indigenous societies===
The area now known as British Columbia is home to First Nations groups that have a deep history with a significant number of indigenous languages. There are more than 200 First Nations in BC. Prior to contact (with non-Aboriginal people), human history is known from oral histories, archaeological investigations, and from early records from explorers encountering societies early in the period.

The arrival of Paleoindians from Beringia took place between 20,000 and 12,000 years ago. Hunter-gatherer families were the main social structure from 10,000 to 5,000 years ago. The nomadic population lived in non-permanent structures foraging for nuts, berries and edible roots while hunting and trapping larger and small game for food and furs. Around 5,000 years ago individual groups started to focus on resources available to them locally. Coast Salish peoples had complex land management practices linked to ecosystem health and resilience. Forest gardens on Canada&#x27;s northwest coast included crabapple, hazelnut, cranberry, wild plum, and wild cherry species. Thus with the passage of time there is a pattern of increasing regional generalization with a more sedentary lifestyle. These indigenous populations evolved over the next 5,000 years across a large area into many groups with shared traditions and customs.

To the northwest of the province are the peoples of the Na-Dene languages, which include the Athapaskan-speaking peoples and the Tlingit, who live on the islands of southern Alaska and northern British Columbia. The Na-Dene language group is believed to be linked to the Yeniseian languages of Siberia: the Dene of the western Arctic may represent a distinct wave of migration from Asia to North America. The Interior of British Columbia is home to the Salishan language groups such as the Shuswap (Secwepemc), Okanagan and Athabaskan language groups, primarily the Dakelh (Carrier) and the Tsilhqotʼin. The inlets and valleys of the British Columbia coast shelter large, distinctive populations, such as the Haida, Kwakwakaʼwakw and Nuu-chah-nulth, sustained by the region&#x27;s abundant salmon and shellfish. These peoples developed complex cultures dependent on the western red cedar that included wooden houses, seagoing whaling and war canoes and elaborately carved potlatch items and totem poles.

Contact with Europeans brought a series of devastating epidemics of diseases the people had no immunity to. The population dramatically collapsed, culminating in the 1862 smallpox outbreak in Victoria that spread throughout the coast. European settlement did not bode well for the remaining native population of British Columbia. Colonial officials deemed colonists could make better use of the land than the First Nations people, and thus the land should be owned by the colonists. To ensure colonists would be able to settle properly and make use of the land, First Nations were forcibly relocated onto reserves, which were often too small to support their way of life. By the 1930s, British Columbia had over 1500 reserves.

===Fur trade and colonial era===
Lands now known as British Columbia were added to the British Empire during the 19th century. Colonies originally begun with the support of the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company (Vancouver Island, the mainland) were amalgamated, then entered Confederation as British Columbia in 1871 as part of the Dominion of Canada.

During the 1770s, smallpox killed at least 30 percent of the Pacific Northwest First Nations. This devastating epidemic was the first in a series; the 1862 Pacific Northwest smallpox epidemic killed about half to two-thirds of the native population of what became British Columbia.

The arrival of Europeans began around the mid-18th century, as fur traders entered the area to harvest sea otters. While it is thought Francis Drake may have explored the British Columbian coast in 1579, it was Juan Pérez who completed the first documented voyage, which took place in 1774. Juan Francisco de la Bodega y Quadra explored the coast in 1775. In doing so, Pérez and Quadra reasserted the Spanish claim for the Pacific coast, first made by Vasco Núñez de Balboa in 1513.

The explorations of James Cook in 1778 and George Vancouver in 1792 and 1793 established British jurisdiction over the coastal area north and west of the Columbia River. In 1793, Alexander Mackenzie was the first European to journey across North America overland to the Pacific Ocean, inscribing a stone marking his accomplishment on the shoreline of Dean Channel near Bella Coola. His expedition theoretically established British sovereignty inland, and a succession of other fur company explorers charted the maze of rivers and mountain ranges between the Canadian Prairies and the Pacific. Mackenzie and other explorers—notably John Finlay, Simon Fraser, Samuel Black, and David Thompson—were primarily concerned with extending the fur trade, rather than political considerations. In 1794, by the third of a series of agreements known as the Nootka Conventions, Spain conceded its claims of exclusivity in the Pacific. This opened the way for formal claims and colonization by other powers, including Britain, but because of the Napoleonic Wars, there was little British action on its claims in the region until later.

The establishment of trading posts by the North West Company and the Hudson&#x27;s Bay Company (HBC), effectively established a permanent British presence in the region. The Columbia District was broadly defined as being south of 54°40′ north latitude, (the southern limit of Russian America), north of Mexican-controlled California, and west of the Rocky Mountains. It was, by the Anglo-American Convention of 1818, under the &quot;joint occupancy and use&quot; of citizens of the United States and subjects of Britain. This co-occupancy was ended with the Oregon Treaty of 1846.

The major supply route was the York Factory Express between Hudson Bay and Fort Vancouver. Some of the early outposts grew into settlements, communities and cities. Among the places in British Columbia that began as fur trading posts are Fort St. John (established 1794); Hudson&#x27;s Hope (1805); Fort Nelson (1805); Fort St. James (1806); Prince George (1807); Kamloops (1812); Fort Langley (1827); Fort Victoria (1843); Yale (1848); and Nanaimo (1853). Fur company posts that became cities in what is now the United States include Vancouver, Washington (Fort Vancouver), formerly the &quot;capital&quot; of Hudson&#x27;s Bay operations in the Columbia District, Colville and Walla Walla (old Fort Nez Percés).
With the amalgamation of the two fur trading companies in 1821, modern-day British Columbia existed in three fur-trading departments. The bulk of the central and northern interior was organized into the New Caledonia district, administered from Fort St. James. The interior south of the Thompson River watershed and north of the Columbia was organized into the Columbia District, administered from Fort Vancouver on the lower Columbia River. The northeast corner of the province east of the Rockies, known as the Peace River Block, was attached to the much larger Athabasca District, headquartered in Fort Chipewyan, in present-day Alberta.

Until 1849, these districts were a wholly unorganized area of British North America under the de facto jurisdiction of HBC administrators; however, unlike Rupert&#x27;s Land to the north and east, the territory was not a concession to the company. Rather, it was simply granted a monopoly to trade with the First Nations inhabitants. All that was changed with the westward extension of American exploration and the concomitant overlapping claims of territorial sovereignty, especially in the southern Columbia Basin (within present day Washington and Oregon). In 1846, the Oregon Treaty divided the territory along the 49th parallel to the Strait of Georgia, with the area south of this boundary (excluding Vancouver Island and the Gulf Islands) transferred to sole American sovereignty. The Colony of Vancouver Island was created in 1849, with Victoria designated as the capital. New Caledonia, as the whole of the mainland rather than just its north-central Interior came to be called, continued to be an unorganized territory of British North America, &quot;administered&quot; by individual HBC trading post managers.

===Colony of British Columbia (1858–1866)===

With the Fraser Canyon Gold Rush in 1858, an influx of Americans into New Caledonia prompted the colonial office to designate the mainland as the Colony of British Columbia. When news of the Fraser Canyon Gold Rush reached London, Richard Clement Moody was hand-picked by the Colonial Office, under Edward Bulwer-Lytton, to establish British order and to transform the newly established Colony of British Columbia into the British Empire&#x27;s &quot;bulwark in the farthest west&quot; and &quot;found a second England on the shores of the Pacific&quot;. Lytton desired to send to the colony &quot;representatives of the best of British culture, not just a police force&quot;: he sought men who possessed &quot;courtesy, high breeding and urbane knowledge of the world&quot; and he decided to send Moody, whom the government considered to be the &quot;English gentleman and British Officer&quot; to lead the Royal Engineers, Columbia Detachment.

Moody and his family arrived in British Columbia in December 1858, commanding the Royal Engineers, Columbia Detachment. He was sworn in as the first lieutenant governor of British Columbia and appointed Chief Commissioner of Lands and Works for British Columbia. On the advice of Lytton, Moody hired Robert Burnaby as his personal secretary.
In British Columbia, Moody &quot;wanted to build a city of beauty in the wilderness&quot; and planned his city as an iconic visual metaphor for British dominance, &quot;styled and located with the objective of reinforcing the authority of the crown and of the robe&quot;. Subsequent to the enactment of the &quot;Pre-emption Act&quot; of 1860, Moody settled the Lower Mainland. He selected the site and founded the new capital, New Westminster. He selected the site due to the strategic excellence of its position and the quality of its port. He was also struck by the majestic beauty of the site, writing in his letter to Blackwood,


Lord Lytton &quot;forgot the practicalities of paying for clearing and developing the site and the town&quot; and the efforts of Moody&#x27;s engineers were continuously hampered by insufficient funds, which, together with the continuous opposition of Governor James Douglas, whom Thomas Frederick Elliot described as &quot;like any other fraud&quot;, &quot;made it impossible for [Moody&#x27;s] design to be fulfilled&quot;.

Moody and the Royal Engineers also built an extensive road network, including what would become Kingsway, connecting New Westminster to False Creek, the North Road between Port Moody and New Westminster, and the Cariboo Road and Stanley Park. He named Burnaby Lake after his private secretary Robert Burnaby and named Port Coquitlam&#x27;s 400-foot &quot;Mary Hill&quot; after his wife. As part of the surveying effort, several tracts were designated &quot;government reserves&quot;, which included Stanley Park as a military reserve (a strategic location in case of an American invasion). The &quot;Pre-emption Act&quot; did not specify conditions for distributing the land, so large parcels were snapped up by speculators, including by Moody himself. For this he was criticized by local newspapermen for land grabbing. Moody designed the first coat of arms of British Columbia. Port Moody is named after him. It was established at the end of a trail that connected New Westminster with Burrard Inlet to defend New Westminster from potential attack from the US.

By 1862, the Cariboo Gold Rush, attracting an additional 5000 miners, was underway, and Douglas hastened construction of the Great North Road (commonly known now as the Cariboo Wagon Road) up the Fraser Canyon to the prospecting region around Barkerville. By the time of this gold rush, the character of the colony was changing, as a more stable population of British colonists settled in the region, establishing businesses, opening sawmills, and engaging in fishing and agriculture. With this increased stability, objections to the colony&#x27;s absentee governor and the lack of responsible government began to be vocalized, led by the influential editor of the New Westminster &quot;British Columbian&quot; and future premier, John Robson. A series of petitions requesting an assembly were ignored by Douglas and the colonial office until Douglas was eased out of office in 1864. Finally, the colony would have both an assembly and a resident governor.

===Later gold rushes===
A series of gold rushes in various parts of the province followed, the largest being the Cariboo Gold Rush in 1862, forcing the colonial administration into deeper debt as it struggled to meet the extensive infrastructure needs of far-flung boom communities like Barkerville and Lillooet, which sprang up overnight. The Vancouver Island colony was facing financial crises of its own, and pressure to merge the two eventually succeeded in 1866, when the colony of British Columbia was amalgamated with the Colony of Vancouver Island to form the Colony of British Columbia (1866–1871), which was, in turn, succeeded by the present day province of British Columbia following the Canadian Confederation of 1871.

===Rapid growth and development (1860s to 1910s)===

The Confederation League led the chorus pressing for the colony to join Canada, which had been created out of three British North American colonies in 1867 (the Province of Canada, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick). With the agreement by the Canadian government to extend the Canadian Pacific Railway to British Columbia and assume the colony&#x27;s debt, British Columbia became the sixth province to join Confederation on July 20, 1871. The Treaty of Washington sent the Pig War San Juan Islands Border dispute to arbitration in 1871 and in 1903, the province&#x27;s territory shrank again after the Alaska boundary dispute settled the vague boundary of the Alaska Panhandle.

Population in British Columbia continued to expand as the mining, forestry, agriculture, and fishing sectors were developed. Mining activity was notable throughout the Mainland, that a common epithet it, even after provincehood, was &quot;the Gold Colony&quot;. Agriculture attracted settlers to the fertile Fraser Valley. Cattle ranchers and later fruit growers came to the drier grasslands of the Thompson Rivers, the Cariboo, the Chilcotin, and the Okanagan. Forestry drew workers to the temperate rainforests of the coast, which was also the locus of a growing fishery.

The completion of the railway in 1885 contributed to the economy, facilitating the transportation of the region&#x27;s considerable resources to the east. The milltown of Granville, also known as Gastown was selected as the terminus. This prompted the incorporation of the city of Vancouver in 1886. The completion of the Port of Vancouver spurred rapid growth, and in less than fifty years the city surpassed Winnipeg, Manitoba, as the largest in Western Canada. The early decades of the province were ones in which issues of land use—specifically, its settlement and development—were paramount. This included expropriation from First Nations people of their land, control over its resources, as well as the ability to trade in some resources, such as fishing.

Establishing a labour force to develop the province was problematic, and British Columbia was a destination of immigration from Europe, China, Japan and India. The influx of a non-European population stimulated resentment from the dominant ethnic groups, resulting in agitation and an attempt to restrict the ability of Asian people to immigrate to British Columbia through the imposition of the Chinese head tax. This resentment culminated in mob attacks against Chinese and Japanese immigrants in Vancouver in 1887 and 1907.

===20th century===
In World War I, the province responded strongly to the call to assist the British Empire against its German foes in French and Belgian battlefields. About 55,570 of the province&#x27;s 400,000 residents, the highest per-capita rate in Canada, responded to the military&#x27;s need. About 6,225 men from the province died in combat.

In 1914, a second transcontinental rail line, the Grand Trunk Pacific, was completed. This opened up the North Coast and Bulkley Valley region to new economic opportunities. What had previously been an almost exclusively fur-trading and subsistence economy soon became an area for forestry, farming, and mining. This sector attracted workers from Asia and Europe, leading to a diverse but conflict-ridden society. The early 20th century saw significant interaction between immigrants, First Nations, and economic forces. There was a rise in the labour movement, marked by strikes and conflicts such as the 1935 docker&#x27;s strike at Ballantyne Pier and the On-to-Ottawa Trek. These events underscored tensions between workers and big business, often mediated by the Communist Party. Racial and ethnic relations were strained, with legislation reflecting the era&#x27;s racial prejudices, notably against Asian immigrants and First Nations. The early and mid-20th century was marred by incidents like the Komagata Maru incident, highlighting anti-Asian sentiment.

The interwar period and World War II introduced significant changes, including prohibition and its eventual repeal, and the internment of Japanese Canadians. The post-war era saw coalition governments and a booming economy, spearheaded by infrastructure projects and industrial expansion. The Social Credit Party, under W.A.C. Bennett, dominated BC politics, initiating major projects and laying the groundwork for future economic growth. The 1970s and 1980s brought economic challenges and political shifts, culminating in the Expo 86 world&#x27;s fair and the end of Social Credit dominance. This period also saw significant social movements, such as Operation Solidarity. There was a transition to New Democratic Party governance in the 1990s, focusing on environmental conservation and economic struggles. In its second term especially, the NDP government faced political scandals, such as the fast ferry scandal, that ultimately contributed to its downfall.

===21st century===

In the 2001 provincial election, Gordon Campbell&#x27;s Liberals defeated the NDP, gaining 77 out of 79 total seats in the provincial legislature. Campbell instituted reforms and removed some of the NDP&#x27;s policies, along with selling off the previous government&#x27;s &quot;fast ferries&quot;, lowering income taxes, and instituting the controversial long-term lease of BC Rail to Canadian National Railway. Campbell led his party to victory in the 2005 provincial election against a substantially strengthened NDP opposition and won a third term in the 2009 provincial election.

The province won a bid to host the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver and Whistler. In 2003, Vancouver&#x27;s residents had voted in a referendum accepting the responsibilities of the host city should it win its bid. 64 percent of residents voted in favour of hosting. After the Olympic joy faded, Campbell&#x27;s popularity fell. His management style, implementation of the Harmonized Sales Tax (HST) despite election promises not to introduce it, and cancellation of the BC Rail corruption trial led to low approval ratings and loss of caucus support: he resigned in November 2010. In early 2011, former deputy premier Christy Clark became leader of the Liberals. Early Clark government actions included raising the minimum wage, creating a new statutory holiday in February called &quot;Family Day&quot;, and pushing the development of BC&#x27;s liquefied natural gas industry. In the lead-up to the 2013 election, the Liberals lagged behind the NDP by a double-digit gap in the polls but were able to achieve a surprise victory, winning a majority and making Clark the first woman to lead a party to victory in BC. Her government went on to balance the budget, implement changes to liquor laws and continue with the question of the proposed Enbridge Northern Gateway Pipelines. In the 2017 election, the NDP formed a minority government with the support of the Green Party through a confidence and supply agreement. In July 2017, NDP leader John Horgan was sworn in as a premier. Clark resigned and Andrew Wilkinson became leader of the BC Liberals. In the 2020 British Columbia general election, the NDP won 57 seats and formed a majority government. Wilkinson resigned as the leader of the BC Liberals.

British Columbia has been significantly affected by demographic changes within Canada and around the world. Vancouver was a major destination for many immigrants from Hong Kong who left the former UK colony prior to its handover to China. Trends of urbanization mean the Greater Vancouver area now includes 51 percent of the province&#x27;s population, followed by Greater Victoria with 8 percent. These two metropolitan regions have dominated the demographics of BC.

By 2018, housing prices in Vancouver were the second-least affordable in the world. Many experts point to evidence of money-laundering from China as a contributing factor. The high price of residential real estate has led to the implementation of an empty homes tax, a housing speculation and vacancy tax, and a foreign buyers&#x27; tax on housing. The net number of people coming to BC from other provinces in 2016 was almost four times larger than in 2012 and BC was the largest net recipient of interprovincial migrants in Canada. In 2023, British Columbia experienced a net population loss of 8,624; a substantial percentage of which were people who moved to Alberta.

By 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic had had a major effect on the province, with over 2,000 deaths and 250,000 confirmed cases. However, the COVID-19 vaccine reduced the spread, with 78 percent of people in BC over the age of five having been fully vaccinated. Also in 2021 but unrelated to COVID-19, the unmarked gravesites of hundreds of Indigenous children were discovered at three former Indian residential schools (Kamloops, St. Eugene&#x27;s Mission, Kuper Island). 

==Demographics==

===Population===

Statistics Canada&#x27;s 2021 Canadian census recorded a population of 5,000,879 — making British Columbia Canada&#x27;s third-most populous province after Ontario and Quebec.

====Cities====
Half of all British Columbians live in the Metro Vancouver Regional District, which includes Vancouver, Surrey, Burnaby, Richmond, Coquitlam, Langley (district municipality), Delta, North Vancouver (district municipality), Maple Ridge, New Westminster, Port Coquitlam, North Vancouver (city), West Vancouver, Port Moody, Langley (city), White Rock, Pitt Meadows, Bowen Island, Anmore, Lions Bay, and Belcarra, with adjacent unincorporated areas (including the University Endowment Lands) represented in the regional district as the electoral area known as Greater Vancouver Electoral Area A. The metropolitan area has seventeen Indian reserves, but they are outside of the regional district&#x27;s jurisdiction and are not represented in its government.

The second largest concentration of British Columbia population is at the southern tip of Vancouver Island, which is made up of the 13 municipalities of Greater Victoria, Victoria, Saanich, Esquimalt, Oak Bay, View Royal, Highlands, Colwood, Langford, Central Saanich/Saanichton, North Saanich, Sidney, Metchosin, Sooke, which are part of the Capital Regional District. The metropolitan area also includes several Indian reserves (the governments of which are not part of the regional district). Almost half of the Vancouver Island population is in Greater Victoria.




===Cultural origins===
British Columbia is the most diverse province in Canada; as of 2021, the province had the highest proportion of visible minorities in the country. The five largest pan-ethnic groups in the province are Europeans (60 percent), East Asians (14 percent), South Asians (10 percent), Indigenous (6 percent) and Southeast Asians (5 percent).

=== Visible minorities and Indigenous peoples ===

In 2021, 34.4 percent of the population consisted of visible minorities and 5.9 percent of the population was Indigenous, mostly of First Nations and Métis descent.

===Religion===
According to the 2021 census, religious groups in British Columbia included:
*Irreligion (2,559,250 persons or 52.1%)
*Christianity (1,684,870 persons or 34.3%)
*Sikhism (290,870 persons or 5.9%)
*Islam (125,915 persons or 2.6%)
*Buddhism (83,860 persons or 1.7%)
*Hinduism (81,320 persons or 1.7%)
*Judaism (26,850 persons or 0.5%)
*Indigenous spirituality (11,570 persons or 0.2%)
*Other (51,440 persons or 1.0%)

===Language===

As of the 2021 Canadian Census, the ten most spoken languages in the province included English (4,753,280 or 96.69%), French (327,350 or 6.66%), Punjabi (315,000 or 6.41%), Mandarin (312,625 or 6.36%), Cantonese (246,045 or 5.01%), Spanish (143,900 or 2.93%), Hindi (134,950 or 2.75%), Tagalog (133,780 or 2.72%), German (84,325 or 1.72%), and Korean (69,935 or 1.42%). The question on knowledge of languages allows for multiple responses.

Of the 4,648,055 population counted by the 2016 census, 4,598,415 people completed the section about language. Of these, 4,494,995 gave singular responses to the question regarding their first language. The languages most commonly reported were the following:

While these languages all reflect the last centuries of colonialism and recent immigration, British Columbia is home to 34 Indigenous languages. They are spoken by about 6000 people in total, with 4000 people fluent in their Indigenous languages.

==Economy==

BC&#x27;s economy is diverse, with service-producing industries accounting for the largest portion of the province&#x27;s GDP. It is the terminus of two transcontinental railways, and the site of 27 major marine cargo and passenger terminals. Though less than 5 percent of its vast land is arable, the province is agriculturally rich (particularly in the Fraser and Okanagan valleys), because of milder weather near the coast and in certain sheltered southern valleys. Its climate encourages outdoor recreation and tourism, though its economic mainstay has long been resource extraction, principally logging, farming, and mining. Vancouver, the province&#x27;s largest city, serves as the headquarters of many western-based natural resource companies. It also benefits from a strong housing market and a per capita income well above the national average. While the coast of British Columbia and some valleys in the south-central part of the province have mild weather, the majority of its land mass experiences a cold-winter-temperate climate similar to the rest of Canada. The Northern Interior region has a subarctic climate with very cold winters. The climate of Vancouver is by far the mildest winter climate of the major Canadian cities, with nighttime January temperatures averaging above the freezing point.

British Columbia has a history of being a resource dominated economy, centred on the forestry industry but also with fluctuating importance in mining. Employment in the resource sector has fallen steadily as a percentage of employment, and new jobs are mostly in the construction and retail/service sectors. It now has the highest percentage of service industry jobs in the west, constituting 72 percent of industry (compared to 60 percent Western Canadian average). The largest section of this employment is in finance, insurance, real estate and corporate management; however, many areas outside of metropolitan areas are still heavily reliant on resource extraction. With its film industry known as Hollywood North, the Vancouver region is the third-largest feature film production location in North America, after Los Angeles and New York City.

The economic history of British Columbia is replete with tales of dramatic upswings and downswings, and this boom and bust pattern has influenced the politics, culture and business climate of the province. Economic activity related to mining in particular has widely fluctuated with changes in commodity prices over time, with documented costs to community health.

In 2020, British Columbia had the third-largest GDP in Canada, with a GDP of $309 billion and a GDP per capita of $60,090. British Columbia&#x27;s debt-to-GDP ratio is edging up to 15.0 percent in fiscal year 2019–20, and it is expected to reach 16.1 percent by 2021–22. British Columbia&#x27;s economy experienced strong growth in recent years with a total growth rate of 9.6% from 2017 to 2021, a growth rate that was second in the country.

==Government and politics==


The lieutenant governor, Wendy Lisogar-Cocchia, is the Crown&#x27;s representative in the province. During the absence of the lieutenant governor, the Governor in Council (federal Cabinet) may appoint an administrator to execute the duties of the office. This is usually the chief justice of British Columbia. British Columbia is divided into &quot;regional districts&quot; as a means to better enable municipalities and rural areas to work together at a regional level.

British Columbia has an 87-member elected Legislative Assembly, elected by the plurality voting system, though from 2003 to 2009 there was significant debate about switching to a single transferable vote system called BC-STV. The government of the day appoints ministers for various portfolios, what are officially part of the Executive Council, of whom the premier is chair.

The province is currently governed by the British Columbia New Democratic Party (BC NDP) under Premier David Eby. The 2017 provincial election saw the Liberal Party take 43 seats, the NDP take 41, and the British Columbia Green Party take 3. No party met the minimum of 44 seats for a majority, therefore leading to the first minority government since 1953. Following the election, the Greens entered into negotiations with both the Liberals and NDP, eventually announcing they would support an NDP minority government. Previously, the right-of-centre British Columbia Liberal Party governed the province for 16 years between 2001 and 2017, and won the largest landslide election in British Columbia history in 2001, with 77 of 79 seats. The legislature became more evenly divided between the Liberals and NDP following the 2005 (46 Liberal seats of 79) and 2009 (49 Liberal seats of 85) provincial elections. The NDP and its predecessor the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (CCF) have been the main opposition force to right-wing parties since the 1930s and have governed with majority governments in 1972–1975, 1991–2001 and since 2020 (with a minority government from 2017 to 2020). The Green Party plays a larger role in the politics of British Columbia than Green parties do in most other jurisdictions in Canada. After a breakthrough election in 2001 (12.39 percent), the party&#x27;s vote share declined (2005 – 9.17 percent, 2009 – 8.09 percent, 2013 – 8.13 percent) before increasing again to a record high of 16.84 percent at the 2017 election.

The British Columbia Liberal Party is not related to the federal Liberal Party and does not share the same ideology. Instead, the BC Liberal party is a rather diverse coalition, made up of the remnants of the Social Credit Party, many federal Liberals, federal Conservatives, and those who would otherwise support right-of-centre or free enterprise parties. In 2022, Kevin Falcon was elected leader of the BC Liberals, promising to rename the party in an effort to distance themselves from their federal counterparts. In 2023, the party rebranded as BC United. Historically, there have commonly been third parties present in the legislature (including the Liberals themselves from 1952 to 1975); the BC Green Party is the current third party in British Columbia, with three seats in the legislature.

Prior to the rise of the Liberal Party, British Columbia&#x27;s main political party was the BC Social Credit Party, which governed the province for 20 years. While sharing some ideology with the subsequent Liberal government, they were more right-wing, although they undertook nationalization of various important monopolies, notably BC Hydro and BC Ferries.
British Columbia is known for having politically active labour unions who have traditionally supported the NDP or its predecessor, the CCF.

British Columbia&#x27;s political history is typified by scandal and a cast of colourful characters, beginning with various colonial-era land scandals and abuses of power by early officials (such as those that led to McGowan&#x27;s War in 1858–59). Notable scandals in Social Credit years included the Robert Bonner Affair and the Fantasy Gardens scandal which forced Premier Bill Vander Zalm to resign and ended the Social Credit era. NDP scandals included Bingogate, which brought down NDP Premier Mike Harcourt, and the alleged scandal named Casinogate which drove NDP Premier Glen Clark to resign. A variety of scandals plagued the 2001–2017 Liberal government, including Premier Gordon Campbell&#x27;s arrest for drunk driving in Maui and the resignation of various cabinet ministers because of conflict-of-interest allegations. A raid on the Parliament Buildings on December 28, 2003, in Victoria, including the Premier&#x27;s Office, resulted in charges only for ministerial aides, although key cabinet members from the time resigned. Campbell eventually resigned in late 2010 due to opposition to his government&#x27;s plan to introduce a Harmonized Sales Tax (HST) and was replaced by Christy Clark as premier in the 2011 BC Liberal leadership election.

British Columbia is underrepresented in the Senate of Canada, leading Premier Christy Clark to refuse to cooperate with the federal government&#x27;s reforms for senate appointments to be made based on the recommendations of an advisory board that would use non-partisan criteria. Hours after that plan was unveiled in Ottawa on December 3, 2015, Clark issued a statement that it did &quot;not address what&#x27;s been wrong with the Senate since the beginning&quot;.

The imbalance in representation in that House is apparent when considering population size. The six senators from BC constitute only one for every 775,000 people vs. one for every 75,000 in Prince Edward Island, which has four senators. Nova Scotia and New Brunswick have much smaller populations than BC, yet each has ten senators according to a Global News summary. Correcting this imbalance would require a constitutional amendment, but that is unlikely to be supported by the Atlantic provinces.

===Official symbols===

The government of British Columbia has designated several official symbols:

* Flag: Flag of British Columbia
* Coat of arms: Coat of arms of British Columbia
* Floral emblem: Pacific dogwood
* Mineral emblem: Jade
* Tree emblem: Western red cedar
* Bird emblem: Steller&#x27;s jay
* Mammal emblem: &quot;Spirit&quot; or Kermode bear
* Fish emblem: Pacific salmon
* Tartan emblem: British Columbia Tartan

==Transportation==
Transportation played a huge role in British Columbia&#x27;s history. The Rocky Mountains and the ranges west of them constituted a significant obstacle to overland travel until the completion of the transcontinental railway in 1885. The Peace River Canyon through the Rocky Mountains was the route the earliest explorers and fur traders used. Fur trade routes were only marginally used for access to British Columbia through the mountains. Travel from the rest of Canada before 1885 meant the difficulty of overland travel via the United States, around Cape Horn or overseas from Asia. Nearly all travel and freight to and from the region occurred via the Pacific Ocean, primarily through the ports of Victoria and New Westminster.

Until the 1930s, rail was the only means of overland travel to and from the rest of Canada; travellers using motor vehicles needed to journey through the United States. With the construction of the Inter-Provincial Highway in 1932 (now known as the Crowsnest Pass Highway), and later the Trans-Canada Highway, road transportation evolved into the preferred mode of overland travel to and from the rest of the country.

, the number of electric vehicles sold in British Columbia (as a percentage of total vehicle sales) was the highest of any Canadian province or U.S. state.

===Roads and highways===
Because of its size and rugged, varying topography, British Columbia requires thousands of kilometres of provincial highways to connect its communities. British Columbia&#x27;s roads systems were notoriously poorly maintained and dangerous until a concentrated program of improvement was initiated in the 1950s and 1960s. There are now freeways in Greater Victoria, the Lower Mainland, and Central Interior of the province. Much of the rest of the province, where traffic volumes are generally low, is accessible by well-maintained generally high-mobility two-lane arterial highways with additional passing lanes in mountainous areas and usually only a few stop-controlled intersections outside the main urban areas.
A couple of busy intercity corridors outside Greater Vancouver feature more heavily signalized limited-mobility arterial highways that are mostly four-lane and often divided by portable median traffic barriers. Highway 1 on Vancouver Island and Highway 97 through the Okanagan Valley are medium- to high-volume roadways with variable posted speeds that range from to maximums just slightly lower than the principal grade-separated highways. Numerous traffic lights operate in place of interchanges on both arterials as long-term cost-cutting measures. Signalization along both these highways is heaviest through urban areas and along inter-urban sections where traffic volumes are similar to and sometimes higher than the freeways, but where funding is not available for upgrades to interchanges or construction of high-mobility alternative routes or bypasses. The building and maintenance of provincial highways is the responsibility of the British Columbia Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure.

There are only five major routes to the rest of Canada. From south to north they are: BC Highway 3 through the Crowsnest Pass, the Vermilion Pass (Highway 93 in both British Columbia and Alberta), the Kicking Horse Pass, the latter being used by the Trans-Canada Highway entering Alberta through Banff National Park, the Yellowhead Highway (16) through Jasper National Park, and Highway 2 through Dawson Creek. There are also several highway crossings to the adjoining American states of Washington, Idaho, and Montana. The longest highway is Highway 97, running from the British Columbia-Washington border at Osoyoos north to Watson Lake, Yukon and which includes the British Columbia portion of the Alaska Highway.

===Public transit===
Prior to 1979, surface public transit in the Vancouver and Victoria metropolitan areas was administered by BC Hydro, the provincially owned electricity utility. Subsequently, the province established BC Transit to oversee and operate all municipal transportation systems. In 1998, the Greater Vancouver Transportation Authority, now TransLink, a separate authority for routes within the Greater Vancouver Regional District, was established. Some smaller island communities, such as Gabriola Island and, formerly, Pender Island operate routes independent of BC Transit or TransLink. BC Transit has recently expanded to provide intercity routes, particularly in the Northern region of British Columbia. Other intercity routes were introduced connecting southern communities in preparation of the cancellation of Greyhound Canada&#x27;s pullout from Western Canada, though options for intercity bus travel are still extremely limited.

Public transit in British Columbia consists mainly of diesel buses, although Vancouver is also serviced by a fleet of trolley buses. Several experimental buses are being tested such as hybrid buses that have both gasoline and electric engines. Additionally, there are CNG-fuelled buses being tested and used in Nanaimo and Kamloops systems. British Columbia also tested a fleet of Hydrogen-fuelled buses for the Vancouver-Whistler Winter Olympics in 2010. TransLink operates SkyTrain, an automated metro system serving the cities of Vancouver, Burnaby, New Westminster, Surrey, Richmond, Coquitlam, and Port Moody. In 2009, the Canada Line SkyTrain was completed, linking Vancouver International Airport and the city of Richmond to downtown Vancouver bringing the total to three operating metro lines.

A new extension to Coquitlam and Port Moody (the Evergreen Extension of the Millennium Line) was completed in December 2016. Construction of an extension of the Millennium Line westwards through Vancouver to Arbutus Street began in February 2021, with future plans to extend the line farther west from Arbutus station to the University of British Columbia. Fare gates have been added to all existing stations, though in the past, SkyTrain used a proof of payment honour system. In the capital city of Victoria, BC Transit and the provincial government&#x27;s infrastructure ministry are working together to create a bus rapid transit from the Westshore communities to downtown Victoria. In Kamloops, there is a bus rapid transit GPS trial underway to see how bus rapid transit affects smaller cities, rather than larger ones, like Victoria and Vancouver.

===Rail===
Rail development expanded greatly in the decades after the Canadian Pacific Railway was completed, in 1885, and was the chief mode of long-distance surface transportation until the expansion and improvement of the provincial highways system began in the 1950s. Two major routes through the Yellowhead Pass competed with the Canadian Pacific Railway – the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway, terminating at Prince Rupert, and the Canadian Northern Railway, terminating at Vancouver.

The British Columbia Electric Railway provided rail services in Victoria and Vancouver between the nineteenth century and mid twentieth century.

The Pacific Great Eastern line supplemented this service, providing a north–south route between interior resource communities and the coast. The Pacific Great Eastern (later known as British Columbia Railway and now owned by Canadian National Railway) connects Fort St James, Fort Nelson, and Tumbler Ridge with North Vancouver. The E&amp;N Railway, rebranded as the Island Rail Corridor, formerly served the commercial and passenger train markets of Vancouver Island. Service along the route is now minimal. Vancouver Island was also host to the last logging railway in North America until its closure in 2017.

Current passenger services in British Columbia are limited. Via Rail operates 10 long-distance trains per week on two lines. Local services are limited to two regions, with TransLink providing rapid transit and commuter services in the Lower Mainland and by the Seton Lake Indian Band South of Lillooet with the Kaoham Shuttle. Amtrak runs international passenger service between Vancouver, Seattle, and intermediate points.

Several heritage railways operate within the province, including the White Pass and Yukon Route that runs between Alaska and the Yukon via British Columbia.

===Water===

BC Ferries was established as a provincial crown corporation in 1960 to provide passenger and vehicle ferry service between Vancouver Island and the Lower Mainland as a cheaper and more reliable alternative to the service operated by the Canadian Pacific Railway and other private operators. It now operates 25 routes among the islands of British Columbia, as well as between the islands and the mainland. Ferry service to Washington is offered by the Washington State Ferries (between Sidney and Anacortes) and Black Ball Transport (between Victoria and Port Angeles, Washington). Ferry service over inland lakes and rivers is provided by the Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure. Various other coastal ferries are operated privately.

Commercial ocean transport is of vital importance. Major ports are at Vancouver, Roberts Bank (near Tsawwassen), Prince Rupert, and Victoria.

Vancouver, Victoria, and Prince Rupert are also major ports of call for cruise ships. In 2007, a large maritime container port was opened in Prince Rupert with an inland sorting port in Prince George.

===Air===

There are over 200 airports throughout British Columbia, the major ones being the Vancouver International Airport, the Victoria International Airport, the Kelowna International Airport, and the Abbotsford International Airport, the first three of which each served over 1,000,000 passengers in 2005. , Vancouver International Airport is the 2nd busiest airport in the country and the second biggest International Gateway on the west coast (after Los Angeles) with an estimated 26.4 million travellers passing through in 2019.

==Arts and culture==
===Visual arts===
The earliest known visual art produced in the Pacific Northwest, and what would become British Columbia, was by First Nations such as the Coast Salish, Haida, Heiltsuk, and Tsimshian, among others. Such Indigenous work comes particularly in the form of woodcarving, as seen in totem poles, transformation masks, and canoes, as well as textile arts like Chilkat weaving and button blankets. Traditional Indigenous art of the Pacific Northwest is typically distinguished by the formline style, which is defined as &quot;continuous, flowing, curvilinear lines that turn, swell and diminish in a prescribed manner. They are used for figure outlines, internal design elements and in abstract compositions.&quot;

Western styles and forms were introduced to the region through the establishment of British North American settlements in the late 18th century. Notable English-Canadian artists of 19th and early 20th century British Columbia include architect Francis Rattenbury, designer James Blomfield, and painter Emily Carr.

Vancouver&#x27;s art scene was dominated by lyrical abstraction and surrealist landscape painting in the mid-20th century through such artists as B. C. Binning, Jack Shadbolt, Gordon A. Smith, Takao Tanabe, Don Jarvis, and Toni Onley. In the following decades, the city would undergo more artistic diversification with the emergence of conceptual art, communication art, video art, and performance art.

The Vancouver School of conceptual photography encompasses a cohort of Vancouver-based artists who gained notoriety in the 1980s. This school is generally considered to include artists Jeff Wall, Ian Wallace, Ken Lum, Roy Arden, Stan Douglas, and Rodney Graham.

Vancouver maintains roughly 350 works of outdoor public art. Some notable works include &quot;A-maze-ing Laughter&quot;, &quot;Digital Orca&quot;, &quot;Girl in a Wetsuit&quot;, &quot;Angel of Victory&quot;, &quot;The Birds&quot;, and the Brockton Point totem poles.

===Performing arts===

British Columbia is home to the Vancouver Opera, the City Opera of Vancouver, Ballet BC, contemporary dance companies Holy Body Tattoo, Kidd Pivot, Mascall Dance Society, and butoh dance troupe Kokoro Dance. It is also the home province for a plethora of independent theatre companies, including the Arts Club Theatre Company, the Shakespearean Bard on the Beach, and Theatre Under the Stars. Performing arts venues include the Queen Elizabeth Theatre, the Orpheum Theatre, and the Royal Theatre, among others.

====Music====

British Columbia is the third largest music-producing province in Canada and the local music industry generates an estimated yearly revenue of $265million. The province is home to the Vancouver Symphony Orchestra, the Okanagan Symphony Orchestra, the Vancouver Metropolitan Orchestra, the Vancouver Youth Symphony Orchestra, the Richmond Delta Youth Orchestra, and the Victoria Symphony. Some important popular music acts include bands such as Spirit of the West, Theory of a Deadman, Trooper, Gob, and The New Pornographers, and solo artists such as Bryan Adams, Carly Rae Jepsen, Mac DeMarco, Michael Bublé, Nelly Furtado, and Diana Krall. Music festivals in BC have included the Squamish Valley Music Festival, Shambhala Music Festival, and Pemberton Music Festival.

===Cuisine===
British Columbian cuisine is commonly associated with healthy living, fusion, fresh local ingredients, and innovation. It can be divided into two broadly-defined traditions: cuisine associated with the west coast, which incorporates a variety of seafood elements, and cuisine associated with the interior of the province, which embraces local game meat, farm-to-table produce, and methods of curing and smoking. Seafood is an important staple of the province&#x27;s local food culture due to its proximity to the Pacific Ocean, as well as the region&#x27;s numerous rivers and lakes. BC is known for several unique dishes and is a producer of fruit, wine, and cheese.&lt;ref name=&quot;/ 2022 o454&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

Seafoods of British Columbia include sushi (BC roll, dynamite roll, California roll), dungeness crab (boiled, tacos), spot prawns, wild pacific salmon (smoked, candied, teriyaki, chowder, sandwich), and halibut (baked, lemon ginger), as well as delicacies like white sturgeon caviar and geoduck

British Columbia is also home to numerous unique non-seafood culinary staples. Some dishes include Doukhobour borscht, Salt Spring Island lamb, Japadog street food, and Butter chicken pizza. Some unique pastries include apple cranberry cinnamon buns, Nanaimo bars, and Victoria creams. British Columbia also produces several distinct local cheeses, such as kabritt, Castle Blue, and Comox Brie. The London Fog tea latte was invented in Vancouver and remains a popular beverage among coffee shops in the Pacific Northwest and Western Canada; it is referred to as a &quot;Vancouver Fog&quot; in Scotland.

The Okanagan produces many unique fruits originating from the region, including Ambrosia and Spartan apples, Stella and Skeena cherries, and Corontation grapes. Other fruits grown in the province include peaches, pears, plums, apricots, strawberries, blackberries, cranberries, and loganberries.

British Columbia is renowned for its wine production. The primary wine-producing regions include the Okanagan, the Similkameen Valley, Vancouver Island, the Gulf Islands, and the Fraser Valley. As of November 2014, there are 280 licensed grape wineries and 929 vineyards.

==Outdoor life and athletics==
Given its varied mountainous terrain and its coasts, lakes, rivers, and forests, British Columbia has long been enjoyed for pursuits like hiking and camping, rock climbing and mountaineering, hunting and fishing.

Water sports, both motorized and non-motorized, are enjoyed in many places. Sea kayaking opportunities abound on the British Columbia coast with its fjords. Whitewater rafting and kayaking are popular on many inland rivers. Sailing and sailboarding are widely enjoyed.

In winter, cross-country and telemark skiing are much enjoyed, and in recent decades high-quality downhill skiing has been developed in the Coast Mountain range and the Rockies, as well as in the southern areas of the Shuswap Highlands and the Columbia Mountains. Snowboarding has mushroomed in popularity since the early 1990s. The 2010 Winter Olympics downhill events were held in the Whistler Blackcomb area of the province, while the indoor events were conducted in the Vancouver area.

In Vancouver and Victoria (as well as some other cities), opportunities for joggers and bicyclists have been developed. Cross-country bike touring has been popular since the ten-speed bike became available many years ago. Since the advent of the more robust mountain bike, trails in more rugged and wild places have been developed for them. A 2016 poll on global biking website Pinkbike rated BC as the top destination mountain bikers would like to ride. Some of the province&#x27;s retired rail beds have been converted and maintained for hiking, biking, and cross-country skiing. Longboarding is also a popular activity because of the hilly geography of the region.

Horseback riding is enjoyed by many British Columbians. Opportunities for trail riding, often into especially scenic areas, have been established for tourists in numerous areas of the province.

British Columbia also has strong participation levels in many other sports, including golf, tennis, soccer, hockey, Canadian football, rugby union, lacrosse, baseball, softball, basketball, curling, disc golf, Ultimate and figure skating. British Columbia has produced many outstanding athletes, especially in aquatic and winter sports.

Consistent with both increased tourism and increased participation in diverse recreations by British Columbians has been the proliferation of lodges, chalets, bed and breakfasts, motels, hotels, fishing camps, and park-camping facilities in recent decades.

In certain areas, there are businesses, non-profit societies, or municipal governments dedicated to promoting ecotourism in their region. A number of British Columbia farmers offer visitors to combine tourism with farm work, for example, through the WWOOF Canada program.

===Sports===

==Education==
===K-12 education===

British Columbia is home to a comprehensive education system consisting of public schools and independent schools that is overseen by the provincial Ministry of Education. The public school system is divided in 59 anglophone school districts and one francophone school district, the &quot;Conseil scolaire francophone de la Colombie-Britannique,&quot; which operates French-language public schools throughout the province. The anglophone school districts are governed by school board trustees who are directly elected by the school district&#x27;s residents. Although 86 percent of students are enrolled in the public school system, British Columbia has one of the highest shares of independent school enrolment among Canadian province, at 14 percent of the student population, due to its relatively generous funding model; most independent schools receive 50 percent of the operating funding that their public counterparts receive from the government. A very small percentage (less than 1 percent) of students are home schooled.

Like most other provinces in Canada, education is compulsory from ages 6 to 16 (grades 1–10), although the vast majority of students remain in school until they graduate from high school (grade 12) at the age of 18. In order to graduate with a graduation certificate, known as a Dogwood Diploma in BC, students must take a minimum of 80 course credits during grades 10 to 12. These credits include a variety of required courses (e.g. in language arts, social studies, mathematics, and science), as well as elective courses.

Academic achievement in British Columbia is relatively good, although it has been slipping in recent years by some measures. In 2020, 86 percent of students in British Columbia graduated from high school within six years of entering grade 8. According to the 2018 Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) scores, students in British Columbia scored the second highest in reading ability, fourth highest in mathematic prowess, and fourth highest in science knowledge of the 10 Canadian provinces, although these scores have declined significantly since the 2000 and 2015 assessments.

====International students====
In September 2014, there were 11,000 international students in BC public K-12 schools and about 3,000 international students in other BC K-12 schools. 

===Higher education===
British Columbia has a diverse array of higher educational institutions, ranging from publicly funded universities, colleges, and institutes, to private universities, colleges, seminaries, and career institutes. Public institutions receive approximately half of their funding from grants from the provincial government, with the remaining revenue stemming from tuition charges and philanthropic donations. Each post-secondary institution sets its own admission requirements, although the standard requirement is the completion of high school.

Public universities and colleges include:

* University of British Columbia
* Simon Fraser University
* University of Victoria
* University of Northern British Columbia
* Vancouver Island University
* British Columbia Institute of Technology
* Kwantlen Polytechnic University
* Thompson Rivers University
* Emily Carr University of Art and Design
* Royal Roads University
* Capilano University
* University of the Fraser Valley
* Douglas College
* Camosun College
* Langara College
* Selkirk College
* College of New Caledonia
* College of the Rockies
* Okanagan College
* Coast Mountain College
* Justice Institute of BC

British Columbia is also home to 11 private colleges and universities located throughout the province, including:

* Quest University
* Trinity Western University
* Alexander College
* University Canada West
* Columbia College
* Coquitlam College
* Tamwood International College
* Ashton College
* Blanche Macdonald
* Vanwest College

Two American universities (Fairleigh Dickinson University and Northeastern University) also have degree-granting campuses in Vancouver.

==See also==

* Index of British Columbia–related articles
* Outline of British Columbia
* Symbols of British Columbia

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* Tourism British Columbia official website
* BC Weathercams: Webcams showing realtime conditions across the province 
* BC government news
* 
* BC government online map archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="0" end="16" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879" start="36" end="54" title="Provinces and territories of Canada" label="province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="72" end="89" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="102" end="115" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="124" end="139" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="350" end="357" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="390" end="395" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="400" end="421" title="Northwest Territories" label="Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="440" end="450" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="455" end="465" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="467" end="472" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="477" end="484" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="503" end="509" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q218436" start="608" end="636" title="Population of Canada by province and territory" label="third-most populous province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="673" end="681" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="725" end="734" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q368296" start="779" end="824" title="List of census metropolitan areas and agglomerations in Canada" label="the third-largest metropolitan area in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="835" end="846" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061069" start="878" end="893" title="Metro Vancouver Regional District" label="Metro Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="982" end="988" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="993" end="1000" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="1007" end="1018" title="First Nations in Canada" label="first known"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755154" start="1128" end="1140" title="Coast Salish" label="Coast Salish"/>
<link wikidata="Q495760" start="1142" end="1153" title="Tsilhqotʼin" label="Tsilhqotʼin"/>
<link wikidata="Q210332" start="1159" end="1164" title="Haida people" label="Haida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472227" start="1249" end="1262" title="Fort Victoria (British Columbia)" label="Fort Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510000" start="1345" end="1371" title="Colony of Vancouver Island" label="Colony of Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q918861" start="1377" end="1415" title="Colony of British Columbia (1858–1866)" label="Colony of British Columbia (1858–1866)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327869" start="1444" end="1465" title="Richard Clement Moody" label="Richard Clement Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374147" start="1478" end="1514" title="Royal Engineers, Columbia Detachment" label="Royal Engineers, Columbia Detachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451333" start="1535" end="1558" title="Fraser Canyon Gold Rush" label="Fraser Canyon Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q876122" start="1635" end="1650" title="New Westminster" label="New Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514958" start="1773" end="1786" title="Colony of British Columbia (1866–1871)" label="united colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="1837" end="1850" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630911" start="1910" end="1941" title="British Columbia Terms of Union" label="British Columbia Terms of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q110859231" start="2061" end="2077" title="British Canadians" label="British Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935814" start="2079" end="2087" title="European Canadians" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152160" start="2093" end="2098" title="Asian Canadians" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="2099" end="2107" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q210561" start="2125" end="2146" title="Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast" label="Indigenous population"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="2211" end="2224" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="2280" end="2298" title="continental Europe" label="continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="2300" end="2309" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="2315" end="2325" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="2327" end="2347" title="Indigenous peoples in Canada" label="Indigenous Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="2416" end="2428" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2524" end="2531" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="2581" end="2588" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="2590" end="2606" title="Standard Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="2612" end="2621" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082350" start="2684" end="2700" title="Franco-Columbian" label="Franco-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="2811" end="2840" title="French Canadians" label="French as their mother tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="2891" end="2911" title="Indigenous languages of the Americas" label="Indigenous languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q85758529" start="2931" end="2962" title="Economy of British Columbia" label="British Columbia&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="2971" end="2979" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="2981" end="2987" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="2989" end="2999" title="filmmaking" label="filmmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996592" start="3004" end="3020" title="video production" label="video production"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="3022" end="3029" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="3031" end="3042" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="3044" end="3056" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q220695" start="3058" end="3067" title="wholesale" label="wholesale"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="3073" end="3079" title="retail" label="retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="3106" end="3112" title="lumber" label="lumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="3117" end="3123" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283886" start="3125" end="3139" title="pulp and paper" label="pulp and paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="3150" end="3156" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="3158" end="3162" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="3168" end="3179" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="3207" end="3227" title="real estate" label="high property values"/>
<link wikidata="Q155930" start="3260" end="3274" title="maritime trade" label="maritime trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187234" start="3280" end="3297" title="Port of Vancouver" label="Port of Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="3361" end="3374" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="3441" end="3452" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554074" start="3492" end="3505" title="Fraser Valley" label="Fraser Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812222" start="3510" end="3518" title="Okanagan" label="Okanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="3685" end="3699" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q918861" start="3710" end="3748" title="Colony of British Columbia (1858–1866)" label="Colony of British Columbia (1858–1866)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980922" start="3832" end="3849" title="Columbia District" label="Columbia District"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="3901" end="3915" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q823433" start="3985" end="3998" title="Oregon Treaty" label="Oregon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980922" start="3999" end="4018" title="Columbia Department" label="Columbia Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="4026" end="4051" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420228" start="4283" end="4299" title="Oregon Territory" label="Oregon Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q383698" start="4463" end="4480" title="Columbia Rediviva" label="Columbia Rediviva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="4532" end="4546" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112443" start="4652" end="4716" title="Columbia (name)" label="the name &amp;quot;Columbia&amp;quot; for the New World or parts thereof"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="4733" end="4753" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="4913" end="4926" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="4953" end="4959" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="4977" end="4982" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="4991" end="5012" title="Northwest Territories" label="Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="5045" end="5052" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="5097" end="5107" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="5109" end="5114" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="5120" end="5127" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="5133" end="5168" title="Canada–United States border" label="southern border of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="5268" end="5278" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010627" start="5319" end="5359" title="British Columbia Coast" label="British Columbia&amp;#x27;s rugged coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544340" start="5590" end="5607" title="Mount Fairweather" label="Mount Fairweather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737059" start="5662" end="5678" title="Mount Waddington" label="Mount Waddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="5716" end="5724" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170479" start="5753" end="5769" title="Vancouver Island" label="Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030509" start="5817" end="5831" title="Campbell River, British Columbia" label="Campbell River"/>
<link wikidata="Q845725" start="5958" end="5978" title="temperate rainforest" label="temperate rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q269710" start="6068" end="6080" title="Fraser River" label="Fraser River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258" start="6085" end="6099" title="Georgia Strait" label="Georgia Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q206489" start="6167" end="6181" title="Lower Mainland" label="Lower Mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q271730" start="6198" end="6208" title="Abbotsford, British Columbia" label="Abbotsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q908439" start="6230" end="6240" title="Vanderhoof, British Columbia" label="Vanderhoof"/>
<link wikidata="Q920070" start="6293" end="6308" title="Coast Mountains" label="Coast Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664546" start="6317" end="6331" title="Inside Passage" label="Inside Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="6344" end="6350" title="fjord" label="inlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="6498" end="6508" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="6572" end="6587" title="above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="6797" end="6806" title="Semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153780" start="6857" end="6886" title="British Columbia Interior" label="Central and Southern Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="7001" end="7016" title="Subalpine zone" label="subalpine flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="7021" end="7038" title="subalpine climate" label="subalpine climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081806" start="7045" end="7063" title="Okanagan Valley (wine region)" label="Okanagan wine area"/>
<link wikidata="Q985671" start="7080" end="7086" title="Vernon, British Columbia" label="Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q917796" start="7090" end="7097" title="Osoyoos" label="Osoyoos"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190272" start="7105" end="7137" title="Oroville–Osoyoos Border Crossing" label="Oroville–Osoyoos Border Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q167296" start="7166" end="7171" title="cider" label="cider"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179709" start="7252" end="7267" title="Cowichan Valley" label="Cowichan Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554074" start="7296" end="7309" title="Fraser Valley" label="Fraser Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q473209" start="7344" end="7352" title="Kamloops" label="Kamloops"/>
<link wikidata="Q935519" start="7357" end="7366" title="Penticton" label="Penticton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936921" start="7536" end="7549" title="Fraser Canyon" label="Fraser Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143805" start="7593" end="7601" title="Thompson River" label="Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666113" start="7727" end="7743" title="Interior Plateau" label="Interior Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353201" start="7963" end="7970" title="Canadian Rockies" label="Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455584" start="7982" end="8001" title="Peace River Country" label="Peace River Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364746" start="8036" end="8053" title="Canadian Prairies" label="Canadian Prairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012625" start="8078" end="8090" title="Dawson Creek, British Columbia" label="Dawson Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="8136" end="8153" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16956033" start="8162" end="8180" title="Cascadia (bioregion)" label="Cascadia bioregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="8197" end="8212" title="U.S. state" label="American states"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="8250" end="8256" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="8274" end="8295" title="Northern California" label="(northern) California"/>
<link wikidata="Q143663" start="8525" end="8546" title="North Pacific Current" label="North Pacific Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="8584" end="8591" title="Oceanic climate" label="oceanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="8611" end="8644" title="Warm-summer Mediterranean" label="warm-summer Mediterranean climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q316478" start="8766" end="8780" title="Hucuktlis Lake" label="Hucuktlis Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q170479" start="8784" end="8800" title="Vancouver Island" label="Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="9065" end="9074" title="semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938768" start="9390" end="9397" title="Cariboo" label="Cariboo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9406" end="9422" title="British Columbia Interior#Central Interior" label="Central Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="9653" end="9678" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q590205" start="9753" end="9766" title="Prince George, British Columbia" label="Prince George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020218" start="9888" end="9897" title="Princeton, British Columbia" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q473209" start="10398" end="10406" title="Kamloops, British Columbia" label="Kamloops"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="10554" end="10571" title="subarctic climate" label="subarctic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545290" start="10691" end="10702" title="Smith River, British Columbia" label="Smith River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623078" start="10809" end="10814" title="Atlin, British Columbia" label="Atlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="10903" end="10908" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q898845" start="10944" end="10951" title="Chinook (wind)" label="Chinook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="11069" end="11077" title="rainfall" label="rainfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q917796" start="11817" end="11824" title="Osoyoos" label="Osoyoos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2957125" start="12145" end="12151" title="Lytton, British Columbia" label="Lytton"/>
<link wikidata="Q107370088" start="12177" end="12214" title="2021 Western North America heat wave" label="a record-breaking heat wave that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015639" start="12571" end="12584" title="Prince Rupert, British Columbia" label="Prince Rupert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12593" end="12604" title="British Columbia Coast#North Coast" label="North Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q198710" start="12619" end="12635" title="Southeast Alaska" label="Southeast Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="12716" end="12723" title="El Niño" label="El Niño"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524818" start="12940" end="12947" title="La Niña" label="La Niña"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568567" start="13239" end="13272" title="National Historic Sites of Canada" label="National Historic Sites of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q46169" start="13276" end="13289" title="national park" label="national park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896949" start="13507" end="13535" title="National Parks of Canada" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s national parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161253" start="13567" end="13588" title="Glacier National Park (Canada)" label="Glacier National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q775595" start="13591" end="13625" title="Gulf Islands National Park Reserve" label="Gulf Islands National Park Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q862285" start="13628" end="13686" title="Gwaii Haanas National Park Reserve and Haida Heritage Site" label="Gwaii Haanas National Park Reserve and Haida Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q903323" start="13689" end="13711" title="Kootenay National Park" label="Kootenay National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q862265" start="13714" end="13744" title="Mount Revelstoke National Park" label="Mount Revelstoke National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756401" start="13747" end="13780" title="Pacific Rim National Park Reserve" label="Pacific Rim National Park Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q828404" start="13783" end="13801" title="Yoho National Park" label="Yoho National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q52063214" start="13847" end="13862" title="provincial park" label="provincial park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063204" start="14125" end="14138" title="regional park" label="regional park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850674" start="14173" end="14211" title="List of regional districts of British Columbia" label="the province&amp;#x27;s regional districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="14308" end="14319" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693903" start="14341" end="14366" title="Agricultural Land Reserve" label="Agricultural Land Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="14650" end="14657" title="Grizzly bear" label="grizzly"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="14659" end="14664" title="American black bear" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q525781" start="14679" end="14691" title="Kermode bear" label="Kermode bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="14725" end="14729" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="14731" end="14734" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="14736" end="14741" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="14743" end="14750" title="Reindeer" label="caribou"/>
<link wikidata="Q189466" start="14752" end="14766" title="Bighorn sheep" label="big-horn sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q242602" start="14768" end="14781" title="mountain goat" label="mountain goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131567" start="14784" end="14790" title="marmot" label="marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542" start="14793" end="14799" title="beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q26283" start="14802" end="14809" title="muskrat" label="muskrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="14812" end="14818" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="14821" end="14827" title="Wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="14829" end="14838" title="mustelidae" label="mustelids"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="14848" end="14857" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q638105" start="14860" end="14866" title="badger" label="badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q584064" start="14872" end="14879" title="fisher (animal)" label="fishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="14882" end="14888" title="cougar" label="cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="14891" end="14896" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25332" start="14899" end="14905" title="osprey" label="osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18789" start="14908" end="14913" title="heron" label="heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q26733" start="14916" end="14928" title="Canada goose" label="Canada geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564928" start="14930" end="14934" title="swan" label="swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758978" start="14937" end="14941" title="loon" label="loon"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="14944" end="14948" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="14951" end="14954" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8335" start="14957" end="14962" title="raven" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q331179" start="14965" end="14979" title="harlequin duck" label="harlequin duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q460967" start="15028" end="15034" title="American robin" label="robins"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968813" start="15036" end="15039" title="jay" label="jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979298" start="15042" end="15050" title="grosbeak" label="grosbeak"/>
<link wikidata="Q168473" start="15053" end="15063" title="Tit (bird)" label="chickadees"/>
<link wikidata="Q210907" start="15164" end="15175" title="Haida Gwaii" label="Haida Gwaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q184238" start="15234" end="15243" title="salmonidae" label="salmonids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="15271" end="15277" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="15279" end="15284" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="15286" end="15295" title="Rainbow trout" label="steelhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q548682" start="15301" end="15305" title="Salvelinus" label="char"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074737" start="15364" end="15371" title="halibut" label="halibut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224135" start="15373" end="15377" title="bass (fish)" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q181871" start="15383" end="15391" title="sturgeon" label="sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="15407" end="15419" title="harbour seal" label="harbour seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q327028" start="15425" end="15437" title="North American river otter" label="river otters"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="15450" end="15457" title="Cetacea" label="Cetacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="15499" end="15503" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="15505" end="15519" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q179154" start="15521" end="15531" title="grey whale" label="grey whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q27027" start="15533" end="15549" title="harbour porpoise" label="harbour porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q738564" start="15551" end="15571" title="Dall&amp;#x27;s porpoise" label="Dall&amp;#x27;s porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q300946" start="15573" end="15600" title="Pacific white-sided dolphin" label="Pacific white-sided dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13612407" start="15605" end="15616" title="minke whale" label="minke whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q746636" start="15668" end="15691" title="Vancouver Island marmot" label="Vancouver Island marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q748921" start="15693" end="15704" title="spotted owl" label="spotted owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q735190" start="15706" end="15728" title="American white pelican" label="American white pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q165387" start="15774" end="15790" title="Picea engelmannii" label="Engelmann spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914847" start="15831" end="15871" title="biogeoclimatic zones of British Columbia" label="biogeoclimatic zones of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q147417" start="15932" end="15948" title="Thuja plicata" label="western redcedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17275264" start="15950" end="15962" title="Callitropsis nootkatensis" label="yellow-cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q533674" start="15964" end="15986" title="Juniperus scopulorum" label="Rocky Mountain juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q165091" start="15988" end="16002" title="Pinus contorta" label="lodgepole pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q460523" start="16004" end="16028" title="Pinus ponderosa" label="ponderosa or yellow pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q761480" start="16030" end="16044" title="Pinus albicaulis" label="whitebark pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q594993" start="16046" end="16057" title="Pinus flexilis" label="limber pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q261309" start="16059" end="16077" title="western white pine" label="western white pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q576585" start="16079" end="16092" title="Larix occidentalis" label="western larch"/>
<link wikidata="Q734085" start="16094" end="16102" title="Larix laricina" label="tamarack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404234" start="16104" end="16116" title="Larix lyallii" label="alpine larch"/>
<link wikidata="Q128116" start="16118" end="16130" title="Picea glauca" label="white spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q165387" start="16132" end="16148" title="Picea engelmannii" label="Engelmann spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q147426" start="16150" end="16162" title="Picea sitchensis" label="Sitka spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q218425" start="16164" end="16176" title="Picea mariana" label="black spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q147434" start="16178" end="16187" title="Abies grandis" label="grand fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q936498" start="16189" end="16201" title="Abies amabilis" label="Amabilis fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q978755" start="16203" end="16216" title="Abies lasiocarpa" label="subalpine fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144409" start="16218" end="16233" title="Tsuga heterophylla" label="western hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q593894" start="16235" end="16251" title="Tsuga mertensiana" label="mountain hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7255680" start="16253" end="16264" title="Pseudotsuga menziesii var. menziesii" label="Douglas-fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065540" start="16266" end="16277" title="Taxus brevifolia" label="western yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q220777" start="16279" end="16294" title="Cornus nuttallii" label="Pacific dogwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q599523" start="16296" end="16309" title="Acer macrophyllum" label="bigleaf maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q540650" start="16311" end="16324" title="Acer glabrum" label="Douglas maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q568923" start="16326" end="16336" title="Acer circinatum" label="vine maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q469695" start="16338" end="16345" title="Arbutus menziesii" label="arbutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q918920" start="16347" end="16361" title="Crataegus douglasii" label="black hawthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15540797" start="16363" end="16370" title="Rhamnus purshiana" label="cascara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029492" start="16372" end="16381" title="Quercus garryana" label="Garry oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564409" start="16383" end="16401" title="Malus fusca" label="Pacific crab apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q162829" start="16403" end="16415" title="Prunus virginiana" label="choke cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707920" start="16417" end="16427" title="Prunus pensylvanica" label="pin cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q591062" start="16429" end="16442" title="Prunus emarginata" label="bitter cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818806" start="16444" end="16453" title="Alnus rubra" label="red alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q157641" start="16455" end="16469" title="Alnus tenuifolia" label="mountain alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q76971" start="16471" end="16482" title="Betula papyrifera" label="paper birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926712" start="16484" end="16495" title="Betula occidentalis" label="water birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q149382" start="16497" end="16513" title="Populus trichocarpa" label="black cottonwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q149471" start="16515" end="16528" title="Populus balsamifera" label="balsam poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q469576" start="16530" end="16545" title="Populus tremuloides" label="trembling aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453439" start="16578" end="16619" title="First Nations in British Columbia" label="First Nations peoples of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810294" start="16750" end="16755" title="Camassia" label="camas"/>
<link wikidata="Q348789" start="16773" end="16791" title="Environment Canada" label="Environment Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333912" start="16829" end="16837" title="Ecozones of Canada" label="ecozones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122547" start="16842" end="16856" title="Pacific Marine Ecozone (CEC)" label="Pacific Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122550" start="16859" end="16875" title="Pacific Maritime Ecozone (CEC)" label="Pacific Maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944770" start="16878" end="16895" title="Boreal Cordillera" label="Boreal Cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904379" start="16898" end="16916" title="Montane Cordillera" label="Montane Cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675956" start="16919" end="16931" title="Taiga Plains Ecozone (CEC)" label="Taiga Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944774" start="16934" end="16956" title="Boreal Plains Ecozone (CEC)" label="Boreal Plains Ecozones"/>
<link wikidata="Q888099" start="17410" end="17422" title="Paleoindians" label="Paleoindians"/>
<link wikidata="Q190927" start="17428" end="17436" title="Beringia" label="Beringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="17485" end="17500" title="Hunter-gatherer" label="Hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349358" start="18166" end="18185" title="sedentary lifestyle" label="sedentary lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q26986" start="18380" end="18397" title="Na-Dene languages" label="Na-Dene languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q27475" start="18417" end="18444" title="Athapaskan languages" label="Athapaskan-speaking peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q536129" start="18453" end="18460" title="Tlingit people" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q27639" start="18595" end="18614" title="Yeniseian languages" label="Yeniseian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770873" start="18631" end="18635" title="Dene" label="Dene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153780" start="18733" end="18761" title="British Columbia Interior" label="Interior of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33985" start="18777" end="18794" title="Salishan languages" label="Salishan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q337550" start="18814" end="18833" title="Secwepemc" label="Shuswap (Secwepemc)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509140" start="18835" end="18843" title="Okanagan people" label="Okanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157736" start="18890" end="18896" title="Dakelh" label="Dakelh"/>
<link wikidata="Q495760" start="18915" end="18926" title="Chilcotin people" label="Tsilhqotʼin"/>
<link wikidata="Q210332" start="19033" end="19038" title="Haida people" label="Haida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137355" start="19040" end="19053" title="Kwakwakaʼwakw" label="Kwakwakaʼwakw"/>
<link wikidata="Q537784" start="19058" end="19072" title="Nuu-chah-nulth people" label="Nuu-chah-nulth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156603" start="19160" end="19176" title="Complex society" label="complex cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q147417" start="19194" end="19211" title="western red cedar" label="western red cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q756880" start="19296" end="19304" title="potlatch" label="potlatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q83809" start="19315" end="19326" title="totem poles" label="totem poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q155239" start="19934" end="19942" title="Indian reserve" label="reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="20144" end="20158" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q76039" start="20234" end="20259" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Bay Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="20420" end="20428" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="20481" end="20494" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100118" start="20553" end="20593" title="1862 Pacific Northwest smallpox epidemic" label="1862 Pacific Northwest smallpox epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="20748" end="20757" title="fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="20788" end="20797" title="sea otter" label="sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="20820" end="20833" title="Francis Drake" label="Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q977096" start="20896" end="20906" title="Juan José Pérez Hernández" label="Juan Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q599852" start="20976" end="21012" title="Juan Francisco de la Bodega y Quadra" label="Juan Francisco de la Bodega y Quadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="21086" end="21093" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q430265" start="21108" end="21121" title="Pacific coast" label="Pacific coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q19080" start="21137" end="21158" title="Vasco Núñez de Balboa" label="Vasco Núñez de Balboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="21189" end="21199" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q205485" start="21212" end="21228" title="George Vancouver" label="George Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q319657" start="21348" end="21367" title="Alexander Mackenzie (explorer)" label="Alexander Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246065" start="21520" end="21532" title="Dean Channel" label="Dean Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q815765" start="21538" end="21549" title="Bella Coola, British Columbia" label="Bella Coola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233165" start="21800" end="21811" title="John Finlay (fur trader)" label="John Finlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342427" start="21813" end="21825" title="Simon Fraser (explorer)" label="Simon Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410928" start="21827" end="21839" title="Samuel Black" label="Samuel Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q763043" start="21845" end="21859" title="David Thompson (explorer)" label="David Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="21904" end="21913" title="fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648086" start="22014" end="22031" title="Nootka Convention" label="Nootka Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="22034" end="22039" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="22201" end="22216" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q39463" start="22313" end="22325" title="trading post" label="trading post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142049" start="22334" end="22352" title="North West Company" label="North West Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345070" start="22568" end="22583" title="Russian colonization of the Americas" label="Russian America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="22642" end="22657" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q649599" start="22674" end="22707" title="Treaty of 1818" label="Anglo-American Convention of 1818"/>
<link wikidata="Q823433" start="22850" end="22863" title="Oregon Treaty" label="Oregon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043743" start="22905" end="22925" title="York Factory Express" label="York Factory Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="22934" end="22944" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438804" start="22949" end="22963" title="Fort Vancouver" label="Fort Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q23021" start="23112" end="23125" title="Fort St. John, British Columbia" label="Fort St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874625" start="23146" end="23164" title="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Hope" label="Hudson&amp;#x27;s Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q606045" start="23173" end="23184" title="Fort Nelson, British Columbia" label="Fort Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q177800" start="23193" end="23207" title="Fort St. James" label="Fort St. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q590205" start="23216" end="23229" title="Prince George, British Columbia" label="Prince George"/>
<link wikidata="Q905710" start="23255" end="23267" title="Fort Langley" label="Fort Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472227" start="23276" end="23289" title="Fort Victoria (British Columbia)" label="Fort Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q826427" start="23298" end="23302" title="Yale, British Columbia" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q234053" start="23409" end="23430" title="Vancouver, Washington" label="Vancouver, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438804" start="23432" end="23446" title="Fort Vancouver" label="Fort Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601326" start="23540" end="23548" title="Colville, Washington" label="Colville"/>
<link wikidata="Q222338" start="23553" end="23564" title="Walla Walla, Washington" label="Walla Walla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471758" start="23570" end="23585" title="Fort Nez Percés" label="Fort Nez Percés"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201031" start="23791" end="23804" title="New Caledonia (Canada)" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143805" start="23875" end="23889" title="Thompson River" label="Thompson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="23890" end="23899" title="drainage basin" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283393" start="24152" end="24170" title="District of Athabasca" label="Athabasca District"/>
<link wikidata="Q388559" start="24189" end="24203" title="Fort Chipewyan" label="Fort Chipewyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="24292" end="24313" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="24324" end="24332" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q738395" start="24385" end="24403" title="Rupert&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Rupert&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887539" start="24731" end="24745" title="Columbia River drainage basin" label="Columbia Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="24781" end="24787" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q823433" start="24803" end="24816" title="Oregon Treaty" label="Oregon Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256141" start="24849" end="24862" title="49th parallel north" label="49th parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258" start="24870" end="24887" title="Strait of Georgia" label="Strait of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q633848" start="24962" end="24974" title="Gulf Islands" label="Gulf Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510000" start="25022" end="25048" title="Colony of Vancouver Island" label="Colony of Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451333" start="25407" end="25430" title="Fraser Canyon Gold Rush" label="Fraser Canyon Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519998" start="25495" end="25510" title="Secretary of State for the Colonies" label="colonial office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451333" start="25589" end="25612" title="Fraser Canyon Gold Rush" label="Fraser Canyon Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110907" start="25674" end="25689" title="Colonial Office" label="Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q318462" start="25697" end="25717" title="Edward Bulwer-Lytton" label="Edward Bulwer-Lytton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374147" start="26306" end="26342" title="Royal Engineers, Columbia Detachment" label="Royal Engineers, Columbia Detachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374147" start="26427" end="26463" title="Royal Engineers, Columbia Detachment" label="Royal Engineers, Columbia Detachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544408" start="26494" end="26533" title="lieutenant governor of British Columbia" label="lieutenant governor of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342509" start="26645" end="26659" title="Robert Burnaby" label="Robert Burnaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q206489" start="27049" end="27063" title="Lower Mainland" label="Lower Mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q876122" start="27115" end="27130" title="New Westminster" label="New Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q358904" start="27575" end="27597" title="James Douglas (governor)" label="Governor James Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27604" end="27627" title="Thomas Frederick Elliot" label="Thomas Frederick Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558443" start="27846" end="27854" title="Kingsway (Vancouver)" label="Kingsway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394907" start="27886" end="27897" title="False Creek" label="False Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q776261" start="27922" end="27932" title="Port Moody" label="Port Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443997" start="27962" end="27974" title="Cariboo Road" label="Cariboo Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126258" start="27979" end="27991" title="Stanley Park" label="Stanley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q731136" start="28002" end="28014" title="Burnaby Lake" label="Burnaby Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342509" start="28043" end="28057" title="Robert Burnaby" label="Robert Burnaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126258" start="28249" end="28261" title="Stanley Park" label="Stanley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801901" start="28556" end="28569" title="land grabbing" label="land grabbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767872" start="28596" end="28628" title="coat of arms of British Columbia" label="coat of arms of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q776261" start="28630" end="28640" title="Port Moody" label="Port Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036104" start="28827" end="28844" title="Cariboo Gold Rush" label="Cariboo Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443997" start="28983" end="29001" title="Cariboo Wagon Road" label="Cariboo Wagon Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936921" start="29010" end="29023" title="Fraser Canyon" label="Fraser Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q808269" start="29057" end="29068" title="Barkerville" label="Barkerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="29248" end="29255" title="sawmill" label="sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="29274" end="29281" title="fishery" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="29396" end="29418" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q876122" start="29479" end="29494" title="New Westminster" label="New Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240349" start="29536" end="29543" title="Premier of British Columbia" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q361267" start="29545" end="29556" title="John Robson (politician)" label="John Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036104" start="29885" end="29902" title="Cariboo Gold Rush" label="Cariboo Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q808269" start="30059" end="30070" title="Barkerville, British Columbia" label="Barkerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q355257" start="30075" end="30083" title="Lillooet" label="Lillooet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514958" start="30221" end="30238" title="Colony of British Columbia (1866–71)" label="succeeded in 1866"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510000" start="30301" end="30327" title="Colony of Vancouver Island" label="Colony of Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514958" start="30340" end="30378" title="Colony of British Columbia (1866–1871)" label="Colony of British Columbia (1866–1871)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="30472" end="30494" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Canadian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121436" start="30719" end="30737" title="Province of Canada" label="Province of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="30739" end="30750" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="30755" end="30768" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="30831" end="30855" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="30962" end="30975" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064335" start="31028" end="31035" title="Pig War (1859)" label="Pig War"/>
<link wikidata="Q576036" start="31157" end="31180" title="Alaska boundary dispute" label="Alaska boundary dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q198710" start="31215" end="31231" title="Alaska Panhandle" label="Alaska Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="31292" end="31298" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="31300" end="31308" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="31310" end="31321" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="31327" end="31334" title="fishery" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072702" start="31667" end="31676" title="Chilcotin Country" label="Chilcotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495636" start="32005" end="32012" title="Gastown" label="Gastown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187234" start="32131" end="32148" title="Port of Vancouver" label="Port of Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="32219" end="32227" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145847" start="32257" end="32271" title="Western Canada" label="Western Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q13440398" start="32587" end="32599" title="labor force" label="labour force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="32752" end="32760" title="Ethnic groups in Europe" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q4058325" start="32892" end="32904" title="Asian people" label="Asian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405084" start="32968" end="32984" title="Chinese head tax" label="Chinese head tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q519576" start="33502" end="33521" title="Grand Trunk Pacific Railway" label="Grand Trunk Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996516" start="33573" end="33587" title="Bulkley Valley" label="Bulkley Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="33937" end="33950" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870400" start="34058" end="34102" title="Battle of Ballantyne Pier" label="1935 docker&amp;#x27;s strike at Ballantyne Pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090846" start="34111" end="34128" title="On-to-Ottawa Trek" label="On-to-Ottawa Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428056" start="34458" end="34480" title="Komagata Maru incident" label="Komagata Maru incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q46388" start="34597" end="34608" title="prohibition" label="prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153508" start="34642" end="34674" title="internment of Japanese Canadians" label="internment of Japanese Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q827958" start="34811" end="34830" title="British Columbia Social Credit Party" label="Social Credit Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536629" start="34838" end="34852" title="W.A.C. Bennett" label="W.A.C. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384656" start="35046" end="35053" title="Expo 86" label="Expo 86"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557983" start="35171" end="35191" title="Operation Solidarity" label="Operation Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436913" start="35416" end="35434" title="fast ferry scandal" label="fast ferry scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586315" start="35509" end="35533" title="2001 British Columbia general election" label="2001 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q627888" start="35535" end="35550" title="Gordon Campbell (Canadian politician)" label="Gordon Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q453211" start="35878" end="35885" title="BC Rail" label="BC Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="35889" end="35914" title="Canadian National Railway" label="Canadian National Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586316" start="35957" end="35981" title="2005 British Columbia general election" label="2005 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969818" start="36062" end="36086" title="2009 British Columbia general election" label="2009 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="36124" end="36144" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516340" start="36463" end="36483" title="Harmonized Sales Tax" label="Harmonized Sales Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835302" start="36561" end="36585" title="British Columbia Legislature raids" label="BC Rail corruption trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q460064" start="36709" end="36722" title="Christy Clark" label="Christy Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="36937" end="36958" title="liquefied natural gas" label="liquefied natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q322726" start="36991" end="37004" title="2013 British Columbia general election" label="2013 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375282" start="37333" end="37368" title="Enbridge Northern Gateway Pipelines" label="Enbridge Northern Gateway Pipelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205073" start="37373" end="37390" title="2017 British Columbia general election" label="the 2017 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="37475" end="37496" title="confidence and supply" label="confidence and supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020421" start="37591" end="37607" title="Andrew Wilkinson" label="Andrew Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30644243" start="37649" end="37687" title="2020 British Columbia general election" label="2020 British Columbia general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="37965" end="37974" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15251" start="38014" end="38026" title="Handover of Hong Kong" label="its handover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600798" start="38069" end="38086" title="Greater Vancouver" label="Greater Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893303" start="38163" end="38179" title="Greater Victoria, British Columbia" label="Greater Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q60766611" start="38765" end="38799" title="Interprovincial migration in Canada" label="interprovincial migrants in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="38930" end="38937" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="38953" end="38970" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q88082587" start="38979" end="39009" title="COVID-19 pandemic in British Columbia" label="a major effect on the province"/>
<link wikidata="Q87719492" start="39076" end="39092" title="COVID-19 vaccine" label="COVID-19 vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q107352355" start="39240" end="39294" title="Canadian Indian residential school gravesites" label="unmarked gravesites of hundreds of Indigenous children"/>
<link wikidata="Q945507" start="39327" end="39353" title="Canadian Indian residential school system" label="Indian residential schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211856" start="39355" end="39363" title="Kamloops Indian Residential School" label="Kamloops"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357477" start="39365" end="39390" title="Kootenay Indian Residential School" label="St. Eugene&amp;#x27;s Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q107338866" start="39392" end="39404" title="Kuper Island Indian Residential School" label="Kuper Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="39470" end="39490" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Canadian census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="39601" end="39608" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="39613" end="39619" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061069" start="39680" end="39713" title="Metro Vancouver Regional District" label="Metro Vancouver Regional District"/>
<link wikidata="Q390583" start="39741" end="39747" title="Surrey, British Columbia" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q244025" start="39749" end="39756" title="Burnaby" label="Burnaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q236837" start="39758" end="39766" title="Richmond, British Columbia" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q643215" start="39768" end="39777" title="Coquitlam" label="Coquitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805330" start="39779" end="39810" title="Langley, British Columbia (district municipality)" label="Langley (district municipality)"/>
<link wikidata="Q851838" start="39812" end="39817" title="Delta, British Columbia" label="Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000891" start="39819" end="39858" title="North Vancouver (district municipality)" label="North Vancouver (district municipality)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16740" start="39860" end="39871" title="Maple Ridge, British Columbia" label="Maple Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q876122" start="39873" end="39888" title="New Westminster" label="New Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q643326" start="39890" end="39904" title="Port Coquitlam" label="Port Coquitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001626" start="39906" end="39928" title="North Vancouver (city)" label="North Vancouver (city)"/>
<link wikidata="Q991329" start="39930" end="39944" title="West Vancouver" label="West Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q776261" start="39946" end="39956" title="Port Moody" label="Port Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q923243" start="39958" end="39972" title="Langley, British Columbia (city)" label="Langley (city)"/>
<link wikidata="Q629056" start="39974" end="39984" title="White Rock, British Columbia" label="White Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369892" start="39986" end="39998" title="Pitt Meadows" label="Pitt Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q895413" start="40000" end="40012" title="Bowen Island" label="Bowen Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q557967" start="40014" end="40020" title="Anmore" label="Anmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827312" start="40022" end="40031" title="Lions Bay, British Columbia" label="Lions Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q815312" start="40037" end="40045" title="Belcarra" label="Belcarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q644764" start="40097" end="40123" title="University Endowment Lands" label="University Endowment Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636234" start="40169" end="40183" title="List of regional district electoral areas in British Columbia" label="electoral area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544444" start="40193" end="40227" title="Greater Vancouver Electoral Area A, British Columbia" label="Greater Vancouver Electoral Area A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570939" start="40255" end="40280" title="List of First Nations governments in British Columbia" label="seventeen Indian reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132" start="40563" end="40571" title="Victoria, British Columbia" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q179553" start="40573" end="40580" title="Saanich, British Columbia" label="Saanich"/>
<link wikidata="Q14944797" start="40582" end="40591" title="Esquimalt, British Columbia" label="Esquimalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073424" start="40593" end="40600" title="Oak Bay, British Columbia" label="Oak Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484356" start="40602" end="40612" title="View Royal, British Columbia" label="View Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5759321" start="40614" end="40623" title="Highlands, British Columbia" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113057" start="40625" end="40632" title="Colwood, British Columbia" label="Colwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q115788" start="40634" end="40642" title="Langford, British Columbia" label="Langford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053984" start="40644" end="40659" title="Central Saanich, British Columbia" label="Central Saanich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395670" start="40660" end="40670" title="Saanichton, British Columbia" label="Saanichton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000769" start="40672" end="40685" title="North Saanich, British Columbia" label="North Saanich"/>
<link wikidata="Q390530" start="40687" end="40693" title="Sidney, British Columbia" label="Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823363" start="40695" end="40704" title="Metchosin, British Columbia" label="Metchosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q993727" start="40706" end="40711" title="Sooke, British Columbia" label="Sooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q550219" start="40735" end="40760" title="Capital Regional District" label="Capital Regional District"/>
<link wikidata="Q155239" start="40806" end="40820" title="Indian reserve" label="Indian reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048112" start="41098" end="41116" title="visible minority" label="visible minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q719642" start="41150" end="41160" title="Panethnicity" label="pan-ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935814" start="41188" end="41197" title="European Canadians" label="Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376878" start="41212" end="41223" title="East Asian Canadians" label="East Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566030" start="41238" end="41250" title="South Asian Canadians" label="South Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="41265" end="41275" title="Indigenous Canadians" label="Indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="41292" end="41306" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048112" start="41427" end="41445" title="visible minorities" label="visible minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q863284" start="41484" end="41494" title="Indigenous peoples in Canada" label="Indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="41506" end="41519" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="41524" end="41529" title="Métis in Canada" label="Métis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="41572" end="41583" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073649" start="41633" end="41643" title="Irreligion in Canada" label="Irreligion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193115" start="41674" end="41686" title="Christianity in Canada" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483773" start="41717" end="41724" title="Sikhism in Canada" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022915" start="41752" end="41757" title="Islam in Canada" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097993" start="41785" end="41793" title="Buddhism in Canada" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766557" start="41820" end="41828" title="Hinduism in Canada" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995" start="41855" end="41862" title="Judaism in Canada" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11937089" start="41889" end="41912" title="Mythologies of the indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="41997" end="42017" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Canadian Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="42615" end="42629" title="first language" label="first language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122598" start="42812" end="42832" title="Pacific Northwest languages" label="Indigenous languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="43240" end="43246" title="arable land" label="arable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554074" start="43305" end="43311" title="Fraser Valley" label="Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812222" start="43316" end="43324" title="Okanagan" label="Okanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q968907" start="43442" end="43460" title="outdoor recreation" label="outdoor recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="43465" end="43472" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="43517" end="43536" title="resource extraction" label="resource extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153780" start="44028" end="44045" title="Interior of British Columbia" label="Northern Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967371" start="44059" end="44076" title="subarctic climate" label="subarctic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145521" start="44968" end="44983" title="Hollywood North" label="Hollywood North"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="45084" end="45095" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="45100" end="45113" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q192311" start="45182" end="45214" title="Business cycle" label="dramatic upswings and downswings"/>
<link wikidata="Q192311" start="45225" end="45238" title="boom and bust" label="boom and bust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559695" start="45629" end="45646" title="debt-to-GDP ratio" label="debt-to-GDP ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="45679" end="45690" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544408" start="45960" end="45979" title="Lieutenant Governor of British Columbia" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131528190" start="45981" end="46002" title="Wendy Lisogar-Cocchia" label="Wendy Lisogar-Cocchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458227" start="46128" end="46143" title="Cabinet of Canada" label="federal Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969691" start="46231" end="46264" title="British Columbia Court of Appeal" label="chief justice of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85796467" start="46305" end="46322" title="regional district" label="regional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211577" start="46507" end="46530" title="plurality voting system" label="plurality voting system"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="46607" end="46631" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835118" start="46646" end="46652" title="BC-STV" label="BC-STV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419816" start="46755" end="46772" title="Executive Council of British Columbia" label="Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q919052" start="46847" end="46884" title="British Columbia New Democratic Party" label="British Columbia New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233252" start="46908" end="46917" title="David Eby" label="David Eby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366818" start="47010" end="47038" title="British Columbia Green Party" label="British Columbia Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q919043" start="47357" end="47387" title="British Columbia Liberal Party" label="British Columbia Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104026" start="47747" end="47783" title="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation" label="Co-operative Commonwealth Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="48600" end="48616" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="federal Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="48618" end="48639" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="federal Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396254" start="48732" end="48744" title="Kevin Falcon" label="Kevin Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q919043" start="48915" end="48924" title="BC United" label="BC United"/>
<link wikidata="Q354239" start="48965" end="48978" title="third party (politics)" label="third parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366818" start="49065" end="49079" title="Green Party of British Columbia" label="BC Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="49589" end="49595" title="trade union" label="unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801418" start="49884" end="49902" title="McGowan&amp;#x27;s War" label="McGowan&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342205" start="49969" end="49982" title="Robert Bonner (politician)" label="Robert Bonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434298" start="49998" end="50013" title="Fantasy Gardens" label="Fantasy Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835302" start="50503" end="50535" title="BC Legislature Raids" label="raid on the Parliament Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516340" start="50814" end="50834" title="Harmonized Sales Tax" label="Harmonized Sales Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q460064" start="50861" end="50874" title="Christy Clark" label="Christy Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="50975" end="50991" title="Senate of Canada" label="Senate of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661217" start="51983" end="51999" title="Symbols of British Columbia" label="official symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q637134" start="52010" end="52034" title="Flag of British Columbia" label="Flag of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767872" start="52051" end="52083" title="Coat of arms of British Columbia" label="Coat of arms of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220777" start="52101" end="52116" title="Pacific dogwood" label="Pacific dogwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q175089" start="52135" end="52139" title="Jade" label="Jade"/>
<link wikidata="Q147417" start="52155" end="52172" title="Western red cedar" label="Western red cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q838749" start="52188" end="52206" title="Steller&amp;#x27;s jay" label="Steller&amp;#x27;s jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q525781" start="52224" end="52258" title="Kermode bear" label="&amp;quot;Spirit&amp;quot; or Kermode bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q133325" start="52274" end="52288" title="Pacific salmon" label="Pacific salmon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52306" end="52329" title="Regional tartans of Canada#British Columbia" label="British Columbia Tartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4078" start="52904" end="52913" title="Cape Horn" label="Cape Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141812" start="53333" end="53355" title="Crowsnest Highway" label="Crowsnest Pass Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061576" start="53372" end="53392" title="Trans-Canada Highway" label="Trans-Canada Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q112136566" start="53519" end="53561" title="Plug-in electric vehicles in British Columbia" label="electric vehicles sold in British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="54021" end="54029" title="controlled-access highway" label="freeways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304276" start="54250" end="54267" title="arterial road" label="arterial highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344551" start="54595" end="54610" title="traffic barrier" label="traffic barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q918865" start="54613" end="54622" title="British Columbia Highway 1" label="Highway 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q170479" start="54626" end="54642" title="Vancouver Island" label="Vancouver Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812222" start="54670" end="54685" title="Okanagan Valley" label="Okanagan Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643599" start="54817" end="54832" title="grade-separated" label="grade-separated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="54852" end="54865" title="traffic light" label="traffic light"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376564" start="54887" end="54899" title="interchange (road)" label="interchanges"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969732" start="55344" end="55406" title="Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure (British Columbia)" label="British Columbia Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141812" start="55495" end="55507" title="British Columbia provincial highway 3" label="BC Highway 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q513223" start="55520" end="55534" title="Crowsnest Pass" label="Crowsnest Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921598" start="55540" end="55554" title="Vermilion Pass" label="Vermilion Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q766660" start="55575" end="55591" title="British Columbia Highway 93" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639216" start="55596" end="55603" title="Alberta Highway 93" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q392154" start="55610" end="55628" title="Kicking Horse Pass" label="Kicking Horse Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q41858" start="55705" end="55724" title="Banff National Park" label="Banff National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036444" start="55730" end="55748" title="Yellowhead Highway" label="Yellowhead Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q503429" start="55762" end="55782" title="Jasper National Park" label="Jasper National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q918910" start="55788" end="55797" title="British Columbia Highway 2" label="Highway 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012625" start="55806" end="55818" title="Dawson Creek" label="Dawson Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q917796" start="56019" end="56026" title="Osoyoos, British Columbia" label="Osoyoos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025947" start="56036" end="56054" title="Watson Lake, Yukon" label="Watson Lake, Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q628076" start="56110" end="56124" title="Alaska Highway" label="Alaska Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="56171" end="56185" title="public transport" label="public transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179186" start="56348" end="56358" title="BC Transit" label="BC Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142140" start="56481" end="56490" title="TransLink (British Columbia)" label="TransLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472026" start="56630" end="56645" title="Gabriola Island" label="Gabriola Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q919890" start="56661" end="56674" title="Pender Island" label="Pender Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353655" start="56958" end="56974" title="Greyhound Canada" label="Greyhound Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="57199" end="57210" title="trolley bus" label="trolley bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083590" start="57266" end="57272" title="hybrid electric vehicle" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q876780" start="57556" end="57564" title="SkyTrain (Vancouver)" label="SkyTrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="57579" end="57584" title="rapid transit" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q776261" start="57917" end="57927" title="Port Moody" label="Port Moody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417226" start="57933" end="57952" title="Evergreen Extension" label="Evergreen Extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534900" start="57960" end="57975" title="Millennium Line" label="Millennium Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122347" start="58186" end="58201" title="Arbutus station" label="Arbutus station"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="58209" end="58239" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q473209" start="58574" end="58582" title="Kamloops" label="Kamloops"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="58810" end="58834" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q178031" start="59041" end="59056" title="Yellowhead Pass" label="Yellowhead Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q519576" start="59106" end="59133" title="Grand Trunk Pacific Railway" label="Grand Trunk Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032234" start="59173" end="59198" title="Canadian Northern Railway" label="Canadian Northern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969701" start="59231" end="59264" title="British Columbia Electric Railway" label="British Columbia Electric Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q453211" start="59377" end="59398" title="BC Rail" label="Pacific Great Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852567" start="59666" end="59679" title="Tumbler Ridge, British Columbia" label="Tumbler Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001626" start="59685" end="59700" title="North Vancouver (city)" label="North Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368477" start="59740" end="59760" title="Island Rail Corridor" label="Island Rail Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378131" start="59920" end="59957" title="Englewood Railway" label="last logging railway in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q876720" start="60046" end="60054" title="Via Rail" label="Via Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142140" start="60159" end="60168" title="TransLink (British Columbia)" label="TransLink"/>
<link wikidata="Q206489" start="60222" end="60236" title="Lower Mainland" label="Lower Mainland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456804" start="60248" end="60270" title="Seton Lake Indian Band" label="Seton Lake Indian Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q355257" start="60280" end="60288" title="Lillooet" label="Lillooet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6366062" start="60298" end="60312" title="Kaoham Shuttle" label="Kaoham Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="60314" end="60320" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="60377" end="60384" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q420962" start="60420" end="60436" title="heritage railway" label="heritage railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q632324" start="60481" end="60507" title="White Pass and Yukon Route" label="White Pass and Yukon Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="60526" end="60532" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="60541" end="60546" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q795723" start="60583" end="60593" title="BC Ferries" label="BC Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624449" start="60911" end="60938" title="List of islands of British Columbia" label="islands of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500373" start="61035" end="61059" title="Washington State Ferries" label="Washington State Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q390530" start="61069" end="61075" title="Sidney, British Columbia" label="Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q483595" start="61080" end="61089" title="Anacortes, Washington" label="Anacortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719403" start="61095" end="61115" title="MV Coho" label="Black Ball Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q852584" start="61138" end="61162" title="Port Angeles, Washington" label="Port Angeles, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969732" start="61227" end="61272" title="British Columbia Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure" label="Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351980" start="61410" end="61422" title="Roberts Bank" label="Roberts Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849447" start="61429" end="61439" title="Tsawwassen, British Columbia" label="Tsawwassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="61544" end="61555" title="cruise ship" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q428072" start="61584" end="61598" title="Containerization" label="container port"/>
<link wikidata="Q321224" start="61767" end="61798" title="Vancouver International Airport" label="Vancouver International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q130193" start="61804" end="61834" title="Victoria International Airport" label="Victoria International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431708" start="61840" end="61869" title="Kelowna International Airport" label="Kelowna International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q969671" start="61879" end="61911" title="Abbotsford International Airport" label="Abbotsford International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663026" start="62026" end="62045" title="List of the busiest airports in Canada" label="2nd busiest airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q36649" start="62270" end="62280" title="visual art" label="visual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="62297" end="62314" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q337907" start="62504" end="62515" title="woodcarving" label="woodcarving"/>
<link wikidata="Q83809" start="62528" end="62539" title="totem poles" label="totem poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834089" start="62541" end="62560" title="transformation mask" label="transformation mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="62567" end="62573" title="canoes" label="canoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10988986" start="62586" end="62598" title="textile arts" label="textile arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098980" start="62604" end="62619" title="Chilkat weaving" label="Chilkat weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003092" start="62624" end="62639" title="button blankets" label="button blankets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470214" start="62727" end="62741" title="formline art" label="formline style"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243117" start="62959" end="62983" title="Western art" label="Western styles and forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q594781" start="63203" end="63221" title="Francis Rattenbury" label="Francis Rattenbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998053" start="63232" end="63247" title="James Blomfield" label="James Blomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q289624" start="63261" end="63271" title="Emily Carr" label="Emily Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493043" start="63291" end="63300" title="art scene" label="art scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147263" start="63318" end="63337" title="lyrical abstraction" label="lyrical abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="63342" end="63352" title="surrealist art" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833928" start="63420" end="63433" title="B. C. Binning" label="B. C. Binning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115081" start="63435" end="63448" title="Jack Shadbolt" label="Jack Shadbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584785" start="63450" end="63465" title="Gordon A. Smith" label="Gordon A. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514181" start="63467" end="63479" title="Takao Tanabe" label="Takao Tanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294601" start="63481" end="63491" title="Don Jarvis" label="Don Jarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821311" start="63497" end="63507" title="Toni Onley" label="Toni Onley"/>
<link wikidata="Q203209" start="63610" end="63624" title="conceptual art" label="conceptual art"/>
<link wikidata="Q333657" start="63626" end="63643" title="communication design" label="communication art"/>
<link wikidata="Q682010" start="63645" end="63654" title="video art" label="video art"/>
<link wikidata="Q213156" start="63660" end="63675" title="performance art" label="performance art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914248" start="63682" end="63698" title="Vancouver School" label="Vancouver School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158441" start="63702" end="63724" title="conceptual photography" label="conceptual photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q550428" start="63863" end="63872" title="Jeff Wall" label="Jeff Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983181" start="63874" end="63885" title="Ian Wallace (artist)" label="Ian Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583093" start="63887" end="63894" title="Ken Lum" label="Ken Lum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445738" start="63896" end="63905" title="Roy Arden" label="Roy Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q129554" start="63907" end="63919" title="Stan Douglas" label="Stan Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q320241" start="63925" end="63938" title="Rodney Graham" label="Rodney Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001280" start="64035" end="64054" title="A-maze-ing Laughter" label="A-maze-ing Laughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224775" start="64068" end="64080" title="Digital Orca" label="Digital Orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564477" start="64094" end="64111" title="Girl in a Wetsuit" label="Girl in a Wetsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q35852076" start="64125" end="64141" title="Angel of Victory" label="Angel of Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718089" start="64155" end="64164" title="The Birds (sculpture)" label="The Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490282" start="64180" end="64194" title="Brockton Point" label="Brockton Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q17121269" start="64264" end="64279" title="Vancouver Opera" label="Vancouver Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974570" start="64285" end="64308" title="City Opera of Vancouver" label="City Opera of Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190785" start="64310" end="64319" title="Ballet BC" label="Ballet BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q186035" start="64321" end="64339" title="contemporary dance" label="contemporary dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884949" start="64350" end="64366" title="Holy Body Tattoo" label="Holy Body Tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6404643" start="64368" end="64378" title="Kidd Pivot" label="Kidd Pivot"/>
<link wikidata="Q21229363" start="64380" end="64401" title="Jennifer Mascall" label="Mascall Dance Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018001" start="64407" end="64412" title="butoh" label="butoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426807" start="64426" end="64438" title="Kokoro Dance" label="Kokoro Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="64499" end="64516" title="theatre companies" label="theatre companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801440" start="64532" end="64557" title="Arts Club Theatre Company" label="Arts Club Theatre Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="64563" end="64576" title="Shakespearean" label="Shakespearean"/>
<link wikidata="Q807984" start="64577" end="64594" title="Bard on the Beach" label="Bard on the Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777457" start="64600" end="64623" title="Theatre Under the Stars (Vancouver)" label="Theatre Under the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270389" start="64660" end="64683" title="Queen Elizabeth Theatre" label="Queen Elizabeth Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103961" start="64689" end="64704" title="Orpheum (Vancouver)" label="Orpheum Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374917" start="64714" end="64727" title="Royal Theatre (Victoria, British Columbia)" label="Royal Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q602381" start="64943" end="64971" title="Vancouver Symphony Orchestra" label="Vancouver Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q85790402" start="64977" end="65004" title="Okanagan Symphony Orchestra" label="Okanagan Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914225" start="65010" end="65042" title="Vancouver Metropolitan Orchestra" label="Vancouver Metropolitan Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914273" start="65048" end="65082" title="Vancouver Youth Symphony Orchestra" label="Vancouver Youth Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254784" start="65088" end="65118" title="Richmond Delta Youth Orchestra" label="Richmond Delta Youth Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927075" start="65128" end="65145" title="Victoria Symphony" label="Victoria Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q373342" start="65162" end="65175" title="popular music" label="popular music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578043" start="65203" end="65221" title="Spirit of the West" label="Spirit of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q744242" start="65223" end="65242" title="Theory of a Deadman" label="Theory of a Deadman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13434222" start="65244" end="65251" title="Trooper (band)" label="Trooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533479" start="65253" end="65256" title="Gob (band)" label="Gob"/>
<link wikidata="Q61236" start="65262" end="65283" title="The New Pornographers" label="The New Pornographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q482907" start="65310" end="65321" title="Bryan Adams" label="Bryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q52583" start="65323" end="65339" title="Carly Rae Jepsen" label="Carly Rae Jepsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14517" start="65341" end="65352" title="Mac DeMarco" label="Mac DeMarco"/>
<link wikidata="Q153694" start="65354" end="65367" title="Michael Bublé" label="Michael Bublé"/>
<link wikidata="Q80424" start="65369" end="65382" title="Nelly Furtado" label="Nelly Furtado"/>
<link wikidata="Q155879" start="65388" end="65399" title="Diana Krall" label="Diana Krall"/>
<link wikidata="Q868557" start="65401" end="65416" title="Music festivals" label="Music festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458852" start="65441" end="65471" title="Squamish Valley Music Festival" label="Squamish Valley Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487455" start="65473" end="65497" title="Shambhala Music Festival" label="Shambhala Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111885" start="65503" end="65527" title="Pemberton Music Festival" label="Pemberton Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q601763" start="65614" end="65620" title="fusion cuisine" label="fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122597" start="65718" end="65756" title="Pacific Northwest cuisine" label="cuisine associated with the west coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q192935" start="65790" end="65797" title="seafood" label="seafood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884647" start="65812" end="65864" title="Rocky Mountain cuisine" label="cuisine associated with the interior of the province"/>
<link wikidata="Q223930" start="65887" end="65896" title="game meat" label="game meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435464" start="65898" end="65911" title="farm-to-table" label="farm-to-table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503716" start="65936" end="65942" title="Curing (food preservation)" label="curing"/>
<link wikidata="Q193713" start="65947" end="65954" title="Smoking (cooking)" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q46383" start="66302" end="66307" title="sushi" label="sushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833788" start="66309" end="66316" title="BC roll" label="BC roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319091" start="66318" end="66331" title="dynamite roll" label="dynamite roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139527" start="66333" end="66348" title="California roll" label="California roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936093" start="66351" end="66365" title="dungeness crab" label="dungeness crab"/>
<link wikidata="Q191655" start="66375" end="66380" title="tacos" label="tacos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932555" start="66383" end="66394" title="Pandalus platyceros" label="spot prawns"/>
<link wikidata="Q133325" start="66401" end="66415" title="pacific salmon" label="pacific salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q647175" start="66434" end="66442" title="teriyaki" label="teriyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076824" start="66444" end="66451" title="chowder" label="chowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q28803" start="66453" end="66461" title="sandwich" label="sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074737" start="66468" end="66475" title="halibut" label="halibut"/>
<link wikidata="Q720398" start="66477" end="66482" title="baked" label="baked"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312129" start="66510" end="66520" title="delicacy" label="delicacies"/>
<link wikidata="Q592876" start="66526" end="66540" title="white sturgeon" label="white sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q186385" start="66541" end="66547" title="caviar" label="caviar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068209" start="66552" end="66559" title="geoduck" label="geoduck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144579" start="66660" end="66670" title="Doukhobour" label="Doukhobour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551" start="66671" end="66678" title="borscht" label="borscht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215523" start="66680" end="66698" title="Salt Spring Island" label="Salt Spring Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="66699" end="66703" title="lamb (food)" label="lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156437" start="66705" end="66712" title="Japadog" label="Japadog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316209" start="66713" end="66724" title="street food" label="street food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322549" start="66730" end="66744" title="Butter chicken" label="Butter chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q177" start="66745" end="66750" title="pizza" label="pizza"/>
<link wikidata="Q254979" start="66797" end="66810" title="cinnamon buns" label="cinnamon buns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885517" start="66812" end="66824" title="Nanaimo bars" label="Nanaimo bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q65078382" start="66960" end="66970" title="London fog (beverage)" label="London Fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q841774" start="66975" end="66980" title="latte" label="latte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812222" start="67169" end="67177" title="Okanagan" label="Okanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741881" start="67245" end="67253" title="Ambrosia apple" label="Ambrosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577741" start="67258" end="67265" title="Spartan apple" label="Spartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49767393" start="67274" end="67280" title="Stella cherry" label="Stella"/>
<link wikidata="Q49767936" start="67285" end="67291" title="Skeena cherry" label="Skeena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172203" start="67306" end="67317" title="Coronation (grape)" label="Corontation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="67369" end="67376" title="peaches" label="peaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q434" start="67378" end="67383" title="pears" label="pears"/>
<link wikidata="Q12372598" start="67385" end="67390" title="plums" label="plums"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733836" start="67392" end="67400" title="apricots" label="apricots"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="67402" end="67414" title="strawberries" label="strawberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842373" start="67416" end="67428" title="blackberries" label="blackberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181" start="67430" end="67441" title="cranberries" label="cranberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505704" start="67447" end="67459" title="loganberries" label="loganberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517824" start="67577" end="67595" title="Similkameen Valley" label="Similkameen Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q633848" start="67619" end="67631" title="Gulf Islands" label="Gulf Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554074" start="67641" end="67654" title="Fraser Valley" label="Fraser Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154336" start="67924" end="67937" title="rock climbing" label="rock climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="67958" end="67965" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="67970" end="67977" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q115467" start="68056" end="68065" title="Sea kayak" label="Sea kayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="68129" end="68134" title="fjord" label="fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q207238" start="68137" end="68155" title="Whitewater rafting" label="Whitewater rafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q179246" start="68160" end="68165" title="kayak" label="kayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q192520" start="68204" end="68211" title="Sailing" label="Sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q191051" start="68216" end="68228" title="Windsurfing" label="sailboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="68261" end="68274" title="Cross-country skiing" label="cross-country"/>
<link wikidata="Q50620" start="68279" end="68294" title="telemark skiing" label="telemark skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q186222" start="68348" end="68356" title="Alpine skiing" label="downhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q130949" start="68357" end="68363" title="skiing" label="skiing"/>
<link wikidata="Q574528" start="68494" end="68512" title="Columbia Mountains" label="Columbia Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q178131" start="68514" end="68526" title="Snowboarding" label="Snowboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="68583" end="68603" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206060" start="68637" end="68655" title="Whistler Blackcomb" label="Whistler Blackcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q816261" start="68817" end="68824" title="jogging" label="joggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934967" start="68915" end="68924" title="Bicycle gearing" label="ten-speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q223705" start="68999" end="69012" title="mountain bike" label="mountain bike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434711" start="69323" end="69335" title="Longboarding" label="Longboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="69410" end="69426" title="Equestrianism" label="Horseback riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411690" start="69484" end="69496" title="trail riding" label="trail riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="69691" end="69695" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="69697" end="69703" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="69705" end="69711" title="Association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="69713" end="69719" title="ice hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q248534" start="69721" end="69738" title="Canadian football" label="Canadian football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="69740" end="69751" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185851" start="69753" end="69761" title="lacrosse" label="lacrosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="69763" end="69771" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="69773" end="69781" title="softball" label="softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="69783" end="69793" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q136851" start="69795" end="69802" title="curling" label="curling"/>
<link wikidata="Q876737" start="69804" end="69813" title="disc golf" label="disc golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181174" start="69815" end="69823" title="Ultimate Canada" label="Ultimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38108" start="69828" end="69842" title="figure skating" label="figure skating"/>
<link wikidata="Q204686" start="69927" end="69940" title="winter sports" label="winter sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880255" start="70085" end="70091" title="Resort hotel" label="lodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q136689" start="70093" end="70099" title="chalet" label="chalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q367914" start="70102" end="70119" title="bed and breakfast" label="bed and breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q187449" start="70311" end="70321" title="ecotourism" label="ecotourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193284" start="70451" end="70456" title="WWOOF" label="WWOOF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162804" start="70813" end="70868" title="Conseil scolaire francophone de la Colombie-Britannique" label="Conseil scolaire francophone de la Colombie-Britannique"/>
<link wikidata="Q986388" start="71743" end="71751" title="Twelfth grade" label="grade 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="73473" end="73503" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201603" start="73506" end="73529" title="Simon Fraser University" label="Simon Fraser University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458113" start="73532" end="73554" title="University of Victoria" label="University of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165458" start="73557" end="73596" title="University of Northern British Columbia" label="University of Northern British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914214" start="73599" end="73626" title="Vancouver Island University" label="Vancouver Island University"/>
<link wikidata="Q820796" start="73629" end="73669" title="British Columbia Institute of Technology" label="British Columbia Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335261" start="73672" end="73703" title="Kwantlen Polytechnic University" label="Kwantlen Polytechnic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551501" start="73706" end="73732" title="Thompson Rivers University" label="Thompson Rivers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337587" start="73735" end="73774" title="Emily Carr University of Art and Design" label="Emily Carr University of Art and Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813315" start="73777" end="73799" title="Royal Roads University" label="Royal Roads University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034602" start="73802" end="73821" title="Capilano University" label="Capilano University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495961" start="73824" end="73855" title="University of the Fraser Valley" label="University of the Fraser Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301348" start="73858" end="73873" title="Douglas College" label="Douglas College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029244" start="73876" end="73891" title="Camosun College" label="Camosun College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338161" start="73894" end="73909" title="Langara College" label="Langara College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448540" start="73912" end="73927" title="Selkirk College" label="Selkirk College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146783" start="73930" end="73954" title="College of New Caledonia" label="College of New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146895" start="73957" end="73979" title="College of the Rockies" label="College of the Rockies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081780" start="73982" end="73998" title="Okanagan College" label="Okanagan College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060002" start="74001" end="74023" title="Coast Mountain College" label="Coast Mountain College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988497" start="74026" end="74049" title="Justice Institute of BC" label="Justice Institute of BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939001" start="74087" end="74120" title="List of private universities in Canada" label="private colleges and universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271467" start="74168" end="74184" title="Quest University" label="Quest University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569551" start="74187" end="74213" title="Trinity Western University" label="Trinity Western University"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871897" start="74216" end="74233" title="Alexander College" label="Alexander College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894536" start="74236" end="74258" title="University Canada West" label="University Canada West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149655" start="74261" end="74277" title="Columbia College (British Columbia)" label="Columbia College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169343" start="74280" end="74297" title="Coquitlam College" label="Coquitlam College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74300" end="74329" title="Tamwood International College" label="Tamwood International College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806022" start="74332" end="74346" title="Ashton College" label="Ashton College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74349" end="74366" title="Blanche Macdonald" label="Blanche Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74369" end="74384" title="Vanwest College" label="Vanwest College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393301" start="74413" end="74443" title="Fairleigh Dickinson University" label="Fairleigh Dickinson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548" start="74448" end="74471" title="Northeastern University" label="Northeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="74511" end="74520" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150932" start="74539" end="74581" title="Index of British Columbia–related articles" label="Index of British Columbia–related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112208" start="74584" end="74611" title="Outline of British Columbia" label="Outline of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661217" start="74614" end="74641" title="Symbols of British Columbia" label="Symbols of British Columbia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3395" wikidata="Q9441" url="?curid=3395" title="The Buddha">
<text>Siddhartha Gautama, most commonly referred to as the Buddha (), was a wandering ascetic and religious teacher who lived in South Asia during the 6th or 5th century BCE and founded Buddhism. According to Buddhist legends, he was born in Lumbini, in what is now Nepal, to royal parents of the Shakya clan, but renounced his home life to live as a wandering ascetic. After leading a life of mendicancy, asceticism, and meditation, he attained nirvana at Bodh Gaya in what is now India. The Buddha then wandered through the lower Indo-Gangetic Plain, teaching and building a monastic order. Buddhist tradition holds he died in Kushinagar and reached &quot;parinirvana&quot; (&quot;final release from conditioned existence&quot;).

According to Buddhist tradition, the Buddha taught a Middle Way between sensual indulgence and severe asceticism, leading to freedom from ignorance, craving, rebirth, and suffering. His core teachings are summarized in the Four Noble Truths and the Noble Eightfold Path, a training of the mind that includes ethical training and kindness toward others, and meditative practices such as sense restraint, mindfulness, dhyana (meditation proper). Another key element of his teachings are the concepts of the five skandhas and dependent origination, describing how all &quot;dharmas&quot; (both mental states and concrete &#x27;things&#x27;) come into being, and cease to be, depending on other &quot;dharmas&quot;, lacking an existence on their own &quot;svabhava&quot;).

While in the Nikayas he frequently refers to himself as the Tathāgata, the earliest attestation of the title Buddha is from the 3rd century BCE, meaning &#x27;Awakened One&#x27; or &#x27;Enlightened One&#x27;. His teachings were compiled by the Buddhist community in the Vinaya, his codes for monastic practice, and the Sutta Piṭaka, a compilation of teachings based on his discourses. These were passed down in Middle Indo-Aryan dialects through an oral tradition. Later generations composed additional texts, such as systematic treatises known as &quot;Abhidharma&quot;, biographies of the Buddha, collections of stories about his past lives known as &quot;Jataka tales&quot;, and additional discourses, i.e., the Mahayana sutras.

Buddhism evolved into a variety of traditions and practices, represented by Theravada, Mahayana and Vajrayana, and spread beyond the Indian subcontinent. While Buddhism declined in India, and mostly disappeared after the 8th century CE due to a lack of popular and economic support, Buddhism is more prominent in Southeast and East Asia.

== Etymology, names and titles ==
===Siddhārtha Gautama and Buddha Shakyamuni===
According to Donald Lopez Jr., &quot;... he tended to be known as either Buddha or Sakyamuni in China, Korea, Japan, and Tibet, and as either Gotama Buddha or Samana Gotama (&#x27;the ascetic Gotama&#x27;) in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia.&quot;

&quot;Buddha&quot;, &quot;Awakened One&quot; or &quot;Enlightened One&quot;, is the masculine form of &quot;budh&quot; (बुध् ), &quot;to wake, be awake, observe, heed, attend, learn, become aware of, to know, be conscious again&quot;, &quot;to awaken&quot; to open up&#x27; (as does a flower)&quot;, &quot;one who has awakened from the deep sleep of ignorance and opened his consciousness to encompass all objects of knowledge&quot;. It is not a personal name, but a title for those who have attained bodhi (awakening, enlightenment). &quot;Buddhi&quot;, the power to &quot;form and retain concepts, reason, discern, judge, comprehend, understand&quot;, is the faculty which discerns truth (&quot;satya&quot;) from falsehood.

The name of his clan was Gautama (Pali: Gotama). His given name, &quot;Siddhārtha&quot; (the Sanskrit form; the Pali rendering is &quot;Siddhattha&quot;; in Tibetan it is &quot;Don grub&quot;; in Chinese &quot;Xidaduo&quot;; in Japanese &quot;Shiddatta/Shittatta&quot;; in Korean &quot;Siltalta&quot;) means &quot;He Who Achieves His Goal&quot;. The clan name of Gautama means &quot;descendant of Gotama&quot;, &quot;Gotama&quot; meaning &quot;one who has the most light&quot;, and comes from the fact that Kshatriya clans adopted the names of their house priests.

While the term &quot;Buddha&quot; is used in the Agamas and the Pali Canon, the oldest surviving written records of the term &quot;Buddha&quot; is from the middle of the 3rd century BCE, when several Edicts of Ashoka (reigned –232 BCE) mention the Buddha and Buddhism. Ashoka&#x27;s Lumbini pillar inscription commemorates the Emperor&#x27;s pilgrimage to Lumbini as the Buddha&#x27;s birthplace, calling him the &quot;Buddha Shakyamuni&quot; (Brahmi script: 𑀩𑀼𑀥 &quot;Bu-dha Sa-kya-mu-nī&quot;, &quot;Buddha, Sage of the Shakyas&quot;).

Śākyamuni, Sakyamuni, or Shakyamuni (, ) means &quot;Sage of the Shakyas&quot;.

===Tathāgata===
&quot;Tathāgata&quot; (Pali; ) is a term the Buddha commonly used when referring to himself or other Buddhas in the Pāli Canon. The exact meaning of the term is unknown, but it is often thought to mean either &quot;one who has thus gone&quot; (&quot;tathā-gata&quot;), &quot;one who has thus come&quot; (&quot;tathā-āgata&quot;), or sometimes &quot;one who has thus not gone&quot; (&quot;tathā-agata&quot;). This is interpreted as signifying that the Tathāgata is beyond all coming and going—beyond all transitory phenomena. A &quot;tathāgata&quot; is &quot;immeasurable&quot;, &quot;inscrutable&quot;, &quot;hard to fathom&quot;, and &quot;not apprehended&quot;.

===Other epithets===
A list of other epithets is commonly seen together in canonical texts and depicts some of his perfected qualities:
* &quot;Bhagavato (Bhagavan)&quot; – The Blessed one, one of the most used epithets, together with &quot;tathāgata&quot;
* &quot;Sammasambuddho&quot; – Perfectly self-awakened
* &quot;Vijja-carana-sampano&quot; – Endowed with higher knowledge and ideal conduct.
* &quot;Sugata&quot; – Well-gone or well-spoken.
* &quot;Lokavidu&quot; – Knower of the many worlds.
* &quot;Anuttaro Purisa-damma-sarathi&quot; – Unexcelled trainer of untrained people.
* &quot;Satthadeva-Manussanam&quot; – Teacher of gods and humans.
* &quot;Araham&quot; – Worthy of homage. An Arahant is &quot;one with taints destroyed, who has lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached the true goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and is completely liberated through final knowledge&quot;.
* &quot;Jina&quot; – Conqueror. Although the term is more commonly used to name an individual who has attained liberation in the religion Jainism, it is also an alternative title for the Buddha.

The Pali Canon also contains numerous other titles and epithets for the Buddha, including: All-seeing, All-transcending sage, Bull among men, The Caravan leader, Dispeller of darkness, The Eye, Foremost of charioteers, Foremost of those who can cross, King of the Dharma (&quot;Dharmaraja&quot;), Kinsman of the Sun, Helper of the World (&quot;Lokanatha&quot;), Lion (&quot;Siha&quot;), Lord of the Dhamma, Of excellent wisdom (&quot;Varapañña&quot;), Radiant One, Torchbearer of mankind, Unsurpassed doctor and surgeon, Victor in battle, and Wielder of power. Another epithet, used at inscriptions throughout South and Southeast Asia, is &quot;Maha sramana&quot;, &quot;great &quot;sramana&quot;&quot; (ascetic, renunciate).

==Sources==

=== Historical sources ===

====Pali suttas====
On the basis of philological evidence, Indologist and Pāli expert Oskar von Hinüber says that some of the Pāli suttas have retained very archaic place-names, syntax, and historical data from close to the Buddha&#x27;s lifetime, including the &quot;Mahāparinibbāṇa Sutta&quot; which contains a detailed account of the Buddha&#x27;s final days. Hinüber proposes a composition date of no later than 350–320 BCE for this text, which would allow for a &quot;true historical memory&quot; of the events approximately 60 years prior if the Short Chronology for the Buddha&#x27;s lifetime is accepted (but he also points out that such a text was originally intended more as hagiography than as an exact historical record of events).

John S. Strong sees certain biographical fragments in the canonical texts preserved in Pāli, as well as Chinese, Tibetan and Sanskrit as the earliest material. These include texts such as the &quot;Discourse on the Noble Quest&quot; (&quot;Ariyapariyesanā-sutta&quot;) and its parallels in other languages.

====Pillar and rock inscriptions====
No written records about Gautama were found from his lifetime or from the one or two centuries thereafter. But from the middle of the 3rd century BCE, several Edicts of Ashoka (reigned c. 268 to 232 BCE) mention the Buddha and Buddhism. Particularly, Ashoka&#x27;s Lumbini pillar inscription commemorates the Emperor&#x27;s pilgrimage to Lumbini as the Buddha&#x27;s birthplace, calling him the &quot;Buddha Shakyamuni&quot; (Brahmi script: 𑀩𑀼𑀥 &quot;Bu-dha Sa-kya-mu-nī&quot;, &quot;Buddha, Sage of the Shakyas&quot;). Another one of his edicts (Minor Rock Edict No. 3) mentions the titles of several &quot;Dhamma&quot; texts (in Buddhism, &quot;dhamma&quot; is another word for &quot;dharma&quot;), establishing the existence of a written Buddhist tradition at least by the time of the Maurya era. These texts may be the precursor of the Pāli Canon.

&quot;Sakamuni&quot; is also mentioned in a relief of Bharhut, dated to , in relation with his illumination and the Bodhi tree, with the inscription &quot;Bhagavato Sakamunino Bodho&quot; (&quot;The illumination of the Blessed Sakamuni&quot;).

====Oldest surviving manuscripts====
The oldest surviving Buddhist manuscripts are the Gandhāran Buddhist texts, found in Gandhara (corresponding to modern northwestern Pakistan and eastern Afghanistan) and written in Gāndhārī, they date from the first century BCE to the third century CE.

=== Biographical sources ===
Early canonical sources include the &quot;Ariyapariyesana Sutta&quot; (MN 26), the &quot;Mahāparinibbāṇa Sutta&quot; (DN 16), the &quot;Mahāsaccaka-sutta&quot; (MN 36), the &quot;Mahapadana Sutta&quot; (DN 14), and the &quot;Achariyabhuta Sutta&quot; (MN 123), which include selective accounts that may be older, but are not full biographies. The Jātaka tales retell previous lives of Gautama as a bodhisattva, and the first collection of these can be dated among the earliest Buddhist texts. The &quot;Mahāpadāna Sutta&quot; and &quot;Achariyabhuta Sutta&quot; both recount miraculous events surrounding Gautama&#x27;s birth, such as the bodhisattva&#x27;s descent from the Tuṣita Heaven into his mother&#x27;s womb.

The sources which present a complete picture of the life of Siddhārtha Gautama are a variety of different, and sometimes conflicting, traditional biographies from a later date. These include the &quot;Buddhacarita&quot;, &quot;Lalitavistara Sūtra&quot;, &quot;Mahāvastu&quot;, and the &quot;Nidānakathā&quot;. Of these, the &quot;Buddhacarita&quot; is the earliest full biography, an epic poem written by the poet Aśvaghoṣa in the first century CE. The &quot;Lalitavistara Sūtra&quot; is the next oldest biography, a Mahāyāna/Sarvāstivāda biography dating to the 3rd century CE.

The &quot;Mahāvastu&quot; from the Mahāsāṃghika Lokottaravāda tradition is another major biography, composed incrementally until perhaps the 4th century CE. The Dharmaguptaka biography of the Buddha is the most exhaustive, and is entitled the &quot;Abhiniṣkramaṇa Sūtra&quot;, and various Chinese translations of this date between the 3rd and 6th century CE. The &quot;Nidānakathā&quot; is from the Theravada tradition in Sri Lanka and was composed in the 5th century by Buddhaghoṣa.

== Historical person ==

===Understanding the historical person===
Scholars are hesitant to make claims about the historical facts of the Buddha&#x27;s life. Most of them accept that the Buddha lived, taught, and founded a monastic order during the Mahajanapada, and during the reign of Bimbisara (his friend, protector, and ruler of the Magadha empire); and died during the early years of the reign of Ajatashatru (who was the successor of Bimbisara), thus making him a younger contemporary of Mahavira, the Jain tirthankara.

There is less consensus on the veracity of many details contained in traditional biographies, as &quot;Buddhist scholars [...] have mostly given up trying to understand the historical person.&quot; The earliest versions of Buddhist biographical texts that we have already contain many supernatural, mythical, or legendary elements. In the 19th century, some scholars simply omitted these from their accounts of the life, so that &quot;the image projected was of a Buddha who was a rational, socratic teacher—a great person perhaps, but a more or less ordinary human being&quot;. More recent scholars tend to see such demythologisers as remythologisers, &quot;creating a Buddha that appealed to them, by eliding one that did not&quot;.

===Dating===
The dates of Gautama&#x27;s birth and death are uncertain. Within the Eastern Buddhist tradition of China, Vietnam, Korea and Japan, the traditional date for Buddha&#x27;s death was 949 BCE, but according to the Ka-tan system of the Kalachakra tradition, Buddha&#x27;s death was about 833 BCE.

Buddhist texts present two chronologies which have been used to date the lifetime of the Buddha. The &quot;long chronology&quot;, from Sri Lankese chronicles, states the Buddha was born 298 years before Asoka&#x27;s coronation and died 218 years before the coronation, thus a lifespan of about 80 years. According to these chronicles, Asoka was crowned in 326 BCE, which gives Buddha&#x27;s lifespan as 624–544 BCE, and are the accepted dates in Sri Lanka and South-East Asia. Alternatively, most scholars who also accept the long chronology but date Asoka&#x27;s coronation around 268 BCE (based on Greek evidence) put the Buddha&#x27;s lifespan later at 566–486 BCE.

However, the &quot;short chronology&quot;, from Indian sources and their Chinese and Tibetan translations, place the Buddha&#x27;s birth at 180 years before Asoka&#x27;s coronation and death 100 years before the coronation, still about 80 years. Following the Greek sources of Asoka&#x27;s coronation as 268 BCE, this dates the Buddha&#x27;s lifespan even later as 448–368 BCE.

Most historians in the early 20th century use the earlier dates of 563–483 BCE, differing from the long chronology based on Greek evidence by just three years. More recently, there are attempts to put his death midway between the long chronology&#x27;s 480s BCE and the short chronology&#x27;s 360s BCE, so circa 410 BCE. At a symposium on this question held in 1988, the majority of those who presented gave dates within 20 years either side of 400 BCE for the Buddha&#x27;s death. These alternative chronologies, however, have not been accepted by all historians.

The dating of Bimbisara and Ajatashatru also depends on the long or short chronology. In the long chrononology, Bimbisara reigned , and died 492 BCE, while Ajatashatru reigned . In the short chronology Bimbisara reigned , while Ajatashatru died between and 330 BCE. According to historian K. T. S. Sarao, a proponent of the Short Chronology wherein the Buddha&#x27;s lifespan was c.477–397 BCE, it can be estimated that Bimbisara was reigning c.457–405 BCE, and Ajatashatru was reigning c.405–373 BCE.

=== Historical context ===

====Shakyas====
According to the Buddhist tradition, Shakyamuni Buddha was a Shakya, a sub-Himalayan ethnicity and clan of north-eastern region of the Indian subcontinent. The Shakya community was on the periphery, both geographically and culturally, of the eastern Indian subcontinent in the 5th century BCE. The community, though describable as a small republic, was probably an oligarchy, with his father as the elected chieftain or oligarch. The Shakyas were widely considered to be non-Vedic (and, hence impure) in Brahminic texts; their origins remain speculative and debated. Bronkhorst terms this culture, which grew alongside Aryavarta without being affected by the flourish of Brahminism, as Greater Magadha.

The Buddha&#x27;s tribe of origin, the Shakyas, seems to have had non-Vedic religious practices which persist in Buddhism, such as the veneration of trees and sacred groves, and the worship of tree spirits (yakkhas) and serpent beings (nagas). They also seem to have built burial mounds called stupas. Tree veneration remains important in Buddhism today, particularly in the practice of venerating Bodhi trees. Likewise, yakkas and nagas have remained important figures in Buddhist religious practices and mythology.

====Shramanas====
The Buddha&#x27;s lifetime coincided with the flourishing of influential śramaṇa schools of thought like Ājīvika, Cārvāka, Jainism, and Ajñana. The &quot;Brahmajala Sutta&quot; records sixty-two such schools of thought. In this context, a śramaṇa refers to one who labours, toils or exerts themselves (for some higher or religious purpose). It was also the age of influential thinkers like Mahavira, Pūraṇa Kassapa, Makkhali Gosāla, Ajita Kesakambalī, Pakudha Kaccāyana, and Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta, as recorded in Samaññaphala Sutta, with whose viewpoints the Buddha must have been acquainted.

Śāriputra and Moggallāna, two of the foremost disciples of the Buddha, were formerly the foremost disciples of Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta, the sceptic. The Pāli canon frequently depicts Buddha engaging in debate with the adherents of rival schools of thought. There is philological evidence to suggest that the two masters, Alara Kalama and Uddaka Rāmaputta, were historical figures and they most probably taught Buddha two different forms of meditative techniques. Thus, Buddha was just one of the many śramaṇa philosophers of that time. In an era where holiness of person was judged by their level of asceticism, Buddha was a reformist within the śramaṇa movement, rather than a reactionary against Vedic Brahminism.

Coningham and Young note that both Jains and Buddhists used stupas, while tree shrines can be found in both Buddhism and Hinduism.

====Urban environment and egalitarianism====
The rise of Buddhism coincided with the Second Urbanisation, in which the Ganges Basin was settled and cities grew, in which egalitarianism prevailed. According to Thapar, the Buddha&#x27;s teachings were &quot;also a response to the historical changes of the time, among which were the emergence of the state and the growth of urban centres&quot;. While the Buddhist mendicants renounced society, they lived close to the villages and cities, depending for alms-givings on lay supporters.

According to Dyson, the Ganges basin was settled from the north-west and the south-east, as well as from within, &quot;[coming] together in what is now Bihar (the location of Pataliputra)&quot;. The Ganges basin was densely forested, and the population grew when new areas were deforestated and cultivated. The society of the middle Ganges basin lay on &quot;the outer fringe of Aryan cultural influence&quot;, and differed significantly from the Aryan society of the western Ganges basin. According to Stein and Burton, &quot;[t]he gods of the brahmanical sacrificial cult were not rejected so much as ignored by Buddhists and their contemporaries.&quot; Jainism and Buddhism opposed the social stratification of Brahmanism, and their egalitarism prevailed in the cities of the middle Ganges basin. This &quot;allowed Jains and Buddhists to engage in trade more easily than Brahmans, who were forced to follow strict caste prohibitions.&quot;

==Semi-legendary biography==

=== Nature of traditional depictions ===
In the earliest Buddhist texts, the nikāyas and āgamas, the Buddha is not depicted as possessing omniscience (&quot;sabbaññu&quot;) nor is he depicted as being an eternal transcendent (&quot;lokottara&quot;) being. According to Bhikkhu Analayo, ideas of the Buddha&#x27;s omniscience (along with an increasing tendency to deify him and his biography) are found only later, in the Mahayana sutras and later Pali commentaries or texts such as the &quot;Mahāvastu&quot;. In the &quot;Sandaka Sutta&quot;, the Buddha&#x27;s disciple Ananda outlines an argument against the claims of teachers who say they are all knowing while in the &quot;Tevijjavacchagotta Sutta&quot; the Buddha himself states that he has never made a claim to being omniscient, instead he claimed to have the &quot;higher knowledges&quot; (abhijñā). The earliest biographical material from the Pali Nikayas focuses on the Buddha&#x27;s life as a śramaṇa, his search for enlightenment under various teachers such as Alara Kalama and his forty-five-year career as a teacher.

Traditional biographies of Gautama often include numerous miracles, omens, and supernatural events. The character of the Buddha in these traditional biographies is often that of a fully transcendent (Skt. &quot;lokottara&quot;) and perfected being who is unencumbered by the mundane world. In the &quot;Mahāvastu&quot;, over the course of many lives, Gautama is said to have developed supramundane abilities including: a painless birth conceived without intercourse; no need for sleep, food, medicine, or bathing, although engaging in such &quot;in conformity with the world&quot;; omniscience, and the ability to &quot;suppress karma&quot;. As noted by Andrew Skilton, the Buddha was often described as being superhuman, including descriptions of him having the 32 major and 80 minor marks of a &quot;great man&quot;, and the idea that the Buddha could live for as long as an aeon if he wished (see DN 16).

The ancient Indians were generally unconcerned with chronologies, being more focused on philosophy. Buddhist texts reflect this tendency, providing a clearer picture of what Gautama may have taught than of the dates of the events in his life. These texts contain descriptions of the culture and daily life of ancient India which can be corroborated from the Jain scriptures, and make the Buddha&#x27;s time the earliest period in Indian history for which significant accounts exist. British author Karen Armstrong writes that although there is very little information that can be considered historically sound, we can be reasonably confident that Siddhārtha Gautama did exist as a historical figure. Michael Carrithers goes further, stating that the most general outline of &quot;birth, maturity, renunciation, search, awakening and liberation, teaching, death&quot; must be true.

=== Previous lives ===
Legendary biographies like the Pali &quot;Buddhavaṃsa&quot; and the Sanskrit &quot;Jātakamālā&quot; depict the Buddha&#x27;s (referred to as &quot;bodhisattva&quot; before his awakening) career as spanning hundreds of lifetimes before his last birth as Gautama. Many of these previous lives are narrated in the Jatakas, which consists of 547 stories. The format of a Jataka typically begins by telling a story in the present which is then explained by a story of someone&#x27;s previous life.

Besides imbuing the pre-Buddhist past with a deep karmic history, the Jatakas also serve to explain the bodhisattva&#x27;s (the Buddha-to-be) path to Buddhahood. In biographies like the &quot;Buddhavaṃsa&quot;, this path is described as long and arduous, taking &quot;four incalculable ages&quot; (&quot;asamkheyyas&quot;).

In these legendary biographies, the bodhisattva goes through many different births (animal and human), is inspired by his meeting of past Buddhas, and then makes a series of resolves or vows (&quot;pranidhana&quot;) to become a Buddha himself. Then he begins to receive predictions by past Buddhas. One of the most popular of these stories is his meeting with Dipankara Buddha, who gives the bodhisattva a prediction of future Buddhahood.

Another theme found in the Pali Jataka Commentary (&quot;Jātakaṭṭhakathā&quot;) and the Sanskrit &quot;Jātakamālā&quot; is how the Buddha-to-be had to practice several &quot;perfections&quot; (&quot;pāramitā&quot;) to reach Buddhahood. The Jatakas also sometimes depict negative actions done in previous lives by the bodhisattva, which explain difficulties he experienced in his final life as Gautama.

=== Birth and early life ===


According to the Buddhist tradition, Gautama was born in Lumbini, now in modern-day Nepal, and raised in Kapilavastu. The exact site of ancient Kapilavastu is unknown. It may have been either Piprahwa, Uttar Pradesh, in present-day India, or Tilaurakot, in present-day Nepal. Both places belonged to the Sakya territory, and are located only apart.

In the mid-3rd century BCE the Emperor Ashoka determined that Lumbini was Gautama&#x27;s birthplace and thus installed a pillar there with the inscription: &quot;...this is where the Buddha, sage of the Śākyas (&quot;Śākyamuni&quot;), was born.&quot;

According to later biographies such as the &quot;Mahavastu&quot; and the &quot;Lalitavistara&quot;, his mother, Maya (Māyādevī), Suddhodana&#x27;s wife, was a princess from Devdaha, the ancient capital of the Koliya Kingdom (what is now the Rupandehi District of Nepal). Legend has it that, on the night Siddhartha was conceived, Queen Maya dreamt that a white elephant with six white tusks entered her right side, and ten months later Siddhartha was born. As was the Shakya tradition, when his mother Queen Maya became pregnant, she left Kapilavastu for her father&#x27;s kingdom to give birth.

Her son is said to have been born on the way, at Lumbini, in a garden beneath a sal tree. The earliest Buddhist sources state that the Buddha was born to an aristocratic Kshatriya (Pali: &quot;khattiya&quot;) family called Gotama (Sanskrit: Gautama), who were part of the Shakyas, a tribe of rice-farmers living near the modern border of India and Nepal. His father Śuddhodana was &quot;an elected chief of the Shakya clan&quot;, whose capital was Kapilavastu, and who were later annexed by the growing Kingdom of Kosala during the Buddha&#x27;s lifetime.

The early Buddhist texts contain very little information about the birth and youth of Gotama Buddha. Later biographies developed a dramatic narrative about the life of the young Gotama as a prince and his existential troubles. They depict his father Śuddhodana as a hereditary monarch of the Suryavansha (Solar dynasty) of (Pāli: Okkāka). This is unlikely, as many scholars think that Śuddhodana was merely a Shakya aristocrat (&quot;khattiya&quot;), and that the Shakya republic was not a hereditary monarchy. The more egalitarian  form of government, as a political alternative to Indian monarchies, may have influenced the development of the śramanic Jain and Buddhist sanghas, where monarchies tended toward Vedic Brahmanism.

The day of the Buddha&#x27;s birth, enlightenment and death is widely celebrated in Theravada countries as Vesak and the day he got conceived as Poson. Buddha&#x27;s Birthday is called &quot;Buddha Purnima&quot; in Nepal, Bangladesh, and India as he is believed to have been born on a full moon day.

According to later biographical legends, during the birth celebrations, the hermit seer Asita journeyed from his mountain abode, analyzed the child for the &quot;32 marks of a great man&quot; and then announced that he would either become a great king (&quot;chakravartin&quot;) or a great religious leader. Suddhodana held a naming ceremony on the fifth day and invited eight Brahmin scholars to read the future. All gave similar predictions. Kondañña, the youngest, and later to be the first arhat other than the Buddha, was reputed to be the only one who unequivocally predicted that Siddhartha would become a Buddha.

Early texts suggest that Gautama was not familiar with the dominant religious teachings of his time until he left on his religious quest, which is said to have been motivated by existential concern for the human condition. According to the early Buddhist Texts of several schools, and numerous post-canonical accounts, Gotama had a wife, Yasodhara, and a son, named Rāhula. Besides this, the Buddha in the early texts reports that &quot;I lived a spoilt, a very spoilt life, monks (in my parents&#x27; home).&quot;

The legendary biographies like the &quot;Lalitavistara&quot; also tell stories of young Gotama&#x27;s great martial skill, which was put to the test in various contests against other Shakyan youths.

=== Renunciation ===

While the earliest sources merely depict Gotama seeking a higher spiritual goal and becoming an ascetic or &quot;śramaṇa&quot; after being disillusioned with lay life, the later legendary biographies tell a more elaborate dramatic story about how he became a mendicant.

The earliest accounts of the Buddha&#x27;s spiritual quest is found in texts such as the Pali &quot;Ariyapariyesanā-sutta&quot; (&quot;The discourse on the noble quest&quot;, MN 26) and its Chinese parallel at MĀ 204. These texts report that what led to Gautama&#x27;s renunciation was the thought that his life was subject to old age, disease and death and that there might be something better. The early texts also depict the Buddha&#x27;s explanation for becoming a sramana as follows: &quot;The household life, this place of impurity, is narrow—the &quot;samana&quot; life is the free open air. It is not easy for a householder to lead the perfected, utterly pure and perfect holy life.&quot; MN 26, MĀ 204, the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya and the Mahāvastu all agree that his mother and father opposed his decision and &quot;wept with tearful faces&quot; when he decided to leave.

Legendary biographies also tell the story of how Gautama left his palace to see the outside world for the first time and how he was shocked by his encounter with human suffering. These depict Gautama&#x27;s father as shielding him from religious teachings and from knowledge of human suffering, so that he would become a great king instead of a great religious leader. In the &quot;Nidanakatha&quot; (5th century CE), Gautama is said to have seen an old man. When his charioteer Chandaka explained to him that all people grew old, the prince went on further trips beyond the palace. On these he encountered a diseased man, a decaying corpse, and an ascetic that inspired him. This story of the &quot;four sights&quot; seems to be adapted from an earlier account in the &quot;Digha Nikaya&quot; (DN 14.2) which instead depicts the young life of a previous Buddha, Vipassi.

The legendary biographies depict Gautama&#x27;s departure from his palace as follows. Shortly after seeing the four sights, Gautama woke up at night and saw his female servants lying in unattractive, corpse-like poses, which shocked him. Therefore, he discovered what he would later understand more deeply during his enlightenment: &quot;dukkha&quot; (&quot;standing unstable&quot;, &quot;dissatisfaction&quot;) and the end of &quot;dukkha&quot;. Moved by all the things he had experienced, he decided to leave the palace in the middle of the night against the will of his father, to live the life of a wandering ascetic.

Accompanied by Chandaka and riding his horse Kanthaka, Gautama leaves the palace, leaving behind his son Rahula and Yaśodhara. He travelled to the river Anomiya, and cut off his hair. Leaving his servant and horse behind, he journeyed into the woods and changed into monk&#x27;s robes there, though in some other versions of the story, he received the robes from a &quot;Brahma&quot; deity at Anomiya.

According to the legendary biographies, when the ascetic Gautama first went to Rajagaha (present-day Rajgir) to beg for alms in the streets, King Bimbisara of Magadha learned of his quest, and offered him a share of his kingdom. Gautama rejected the offer but promised to visit his kingdom first, upon attaining enlightenment.

=== Ascetic life and awakening ===


Majjhima Nikaya 4 mentions that Gautama lived in &quot;remote jungle thickets&quot; during his years of spiritual striving and had to overcome the fear that he felt while living in the forests. The Nikaya-texts narrate that the ascetic Gautama practised under two teachers of yogic meditation. According to the &quot;Ariyapariyesanā-sutta&quot; (MN 26) and its Chinese parallel at MĀ 204, after having mastered the teaching of Ārāḍa Kālāma (), who taught a meditation attainment called &quot;the sphere of nothingness&quot;, he was asked by Ārāḍa to become an equal leader of their spiritual community.

Gautama felt unsatisfied by the practice because it &quot;does not lead to revulsion, to dispassion, to cessation, to calm, to knowledge, to awakening, to Nibbana&quot;, and moved on to become a student of Udraka Rāmaputra (). With him, he achieved high levels of meditative consciousness (called &quot;The Sphere of Neither Perception nor Non-Perception&quot;) and was again asked to join his teacher. But, once more, he was not satisfied for the same reasons as before, and moved on.

According to some sutras, after leaving his meditation teachers, Gotama then practiced ascetic techniques. The ascetic techniques described in the early texts include very minimal food intake, different forms of breath control, and forceful mind control. The texts report that he became so emaciated that his bones became visible through his skin. The &quot;Mahāsaccaka-sutta&quot; and most of its parallels agree that after taking asceticism to its extremes, Gautama realized that this had not helped him attain nirvana, and that he needed to regain strength to pursue his goal. One popular story tells of how he accepted milk and rice pudding from a village girl named Sujata.

According to the 身毛喜豎經, his break with asceticism led his five companions to abandon him, since they believed that he had abandoned his search and become undisciplined. At this point, Gautama remembered a previous experience of &quot;dhyana&quot; (&quot;meditation&quot;) he had as a child sitting under a tree while his father worked. This memory leads him to understand that &quot;dhyana&quot; is the path to liberation, and the texts then depict the Buddha achieving all four dhyanas, followed by the &quot;three higher knowledges&quot; (&quot;tevijja&quot;), culminating in complete insight into the Four Noble Truths, thereby attaining liberation from &quot;samsara&quot;, the endless cycle of rebirth.

According to the &quot;Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta&quot; (SN 56), the Tathagata, the term Gautama uses most often to refer to himself, realized &quot;the Middle Way&quot;—a path of moderation away from the extremes of self-indulgence and self-mortification, or the Noble Eightfold Path. In later centuries, Gautama became known as the &quot;Buddha&quot; or &quot;Awakened One&quot;. The title indicates that unlike most people who are &quot;asleep&quot;, a Buddha is understood as having &quot;woken up&quot; to the true nature of reality and sees the world &#x27;as it is&#x27; (&quot;yatha-bhutam&quot;). A Buddha has achieved liberation (&quot;vimutti&quot;), also called Nirvana, which is seen as the extinguishing of the &quot;fires&quot; of desire, hatred, and ignorance, that keep the cycle of suffering and rebirth going.

Following his decision to leave his meditation teachers, MĀ 204 and other parallel early texts report that Gautama sat down with the determination not to get up until full awakening (&quot;sammā-sambodhi&quot;) had been reached; the &quot;Ariyapariyesanā-sutta&quot; does not mention &quot;full awakening&quot;, but only that he attained nirvana. In Buddhist tradition, this event was said to have occurred under a pipal tree—known as &quot;the Bodhi tree&quot;—in Bodh Gaya, Bihar.

As reported by various texts from the Pali Canon, the Buddha sat for seven days under the bodhi tree &quot;feeling the bliss of deliverance&quot;. The Pali texts also report that he continued to meditate and contemplated various aspects of the Dharma while living by the River Nairañjanā, such as Dependent Origination, the Five Spiritual Faculties and suffering (&quot;dukkha&quot;).

The legendary biographies like the &quot;Mahavastu, Nidanakatha&quot; and the &quot;Lalitavistara&quot; depict an attempt by Mara, the ruler of the desire realm, to prevent the Buddha&#x27;s nirvana. He does so by sending his daughters to seduce the Buddha, by asserting his superiority and by assaulting him with armies of monsters. However the Buddha is unfazed and calls on the earth (or in some versions of the legend, the earth goddess) as witness to his superiority by touching the ground before entering meditation. Other miracles and magical events are also depicted.

=== First sermon and formation of the saṅgha ===

According to MN 26, immediately after his awakening, the Buddha hesitated on whether or not he should teach the &quot;Dharma&quot; to others. He was concerned that humans were overpowered by ignorance, greed, and hatred that it would be difficult for them to recognise the path, which is &quot;subtle, deep and hard to grasp&quot;. However, the god Brahmā Sahampati convinced him, arguing that at least some &quot;with little dust in their eyes&quot; will understand it. The Buddha relented and agreed to teach. According to Anālayo, the Chinese parallel to MN 26, MĀ 204, does not contain this story, but this event does appear in other parallel texts, such as in an &quot;Ekottarika-āgama&quot; discourse, in the &quot;Catusparisat-sūtra&quot;, and in the &quot;Lalitavistara&quot;.

According to MN 26 and MĀ 204, after deciding to teach, the Buddha initially intended to visit his former teachers, Alara Kalama and Udaka Ramaputta, to teach them his insights, but they had already died, so he decided to visit his five former companions. MN 26 and MĀ 204 both report that on his way to Vārānasī (Benares), he met another wanderer, an Ājīvika ascetic named Upaka in MN 26. The Buddha proclaimed that he had achieved full awakening, but Upaka was not convinced and &quot;took a different path&quot;.

MN 26 and MĀ 204 continue with the Buddha reaching the Deer Park (Sarnath) (&quot;Mrigadāva&quot;, also called &quot;Rishipatana&quot;, &quot;site where the ashes of the ascetics fell&quot;) near Vārānasī, where he met the group of five ascetics and was able to convince them that he had indeed reached full awakening. According to MĀ 204 (but not MN 26), as well as the Theravāda Vinaya, an &quot;Ekottarika-āgama&quot; text, the Dharmaguptaka Vinaya, the Mahīśāsaka Vinaya, and the &quot;Mahāvastu&quot;, the Buddha then taught them the &quot;first sermon&quot;, also known as the &quot;Benares sermon&quot;, i.e., the teaching of &quot;the noble eightfold path as the middle path aloof from the two extremes of sensual indulgence and self-mortification&quot;. The Pali text reports that after the first sermon, the ascetic Koṇḍañña (Kaundinya) became the first arahant (liberated being) and the first Buddhist bhikkhu or monastic. The Buddha then continued to teach the other ascetics and they formed the first , the company of Buddhist monks.

Various sources such as the &quot;Mahāvastu,&quot; the &quot;Mahākhandhaka&quot; of the Theravāda Vinaya and the &quot;Catusparisat-sūtra&quot; also mention that the Buddha taught them his second discourse, about the characteristic of &quot;not-self&quot; (&quot;Anātmalakṣaṇa Sūtra&quot;), at this time or five days later. After hearing this second sermon the four remaining ascetics also reached the status of &quot;arahant.&quot;

The Theravāda Vinaya and the &quot;Catusparisat-sūtra&quot; also speak of the conversion of Yasa, a local guild master, and his friends and family, who were some of the first laypersons to be converted and to enter the Buddhist community. The conversion of three brothers named Kassapa followed, who brought with them five hundred converts who had previously been &quot;matted hair ascetics&quot;, and whose spiritual practice was related to fire sacrifices. According to the Theravāda Vinaya, the Buddha then stopped at the Gayasisa hill near Gaya and delivered his third discourse, the &quot;Ādittapariyāya Sutta&quot; (The Discourse on Fire), in which he taught that everything in the world is inflamed by passions and only those who follow the Eightfold path can be liberated.

At the end of the rainy season, when the Buddha&#x27;s community had grown to around sixty awakened monks, he instructed them to wander on their own, teach and ordain people into the community, for the &quot;welfare and benefit&quot; of the world.

=== Travels and growth of the saṅgha ===

For the remaining 40 or 45 years of his life, the Buddha is said to have travelled in the Gangetic Plain, in what is now Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, and southern Nepal, teaching a diverse range of people: from nobles to servants, ascetics and householders, murderers such as Angulimala, and cannibals such as Alavaka. According to Schumann, the Buddha&#x27;s travels ranged from &quot;Kosambi on the Yamuna (25 km south-west of Allahabad )&quot;, to Campa (40 km east of Bhagalpur)&quot; and from &quot;Kapilavatthu (95 km north-west of Gorakhpur) to Uruvela (south of Gaya)&quot;. This covers an area of 600 by 300 km. His sangha enjoyed the patronage of the kings of Kosala and Magadha and he thus spent a lot of time in their respective capitals, Savatthi and Rajagaha.

Although the Buddha&#x27;s language remains unknown, it is likely that he taught in one or more of a variety of closely related Middle Indo-Aryan dialects, of which Pali may be a standardisation.

The sangha wandered throughout the year, except during the four months of the Vassa rainy season when ascetics of all religions rarely travelled. One reason was that it was more difficult to do so without causing harm to flora and animal life. The health of the ascetics might have been a concern as well. At this time of year, the sangha would retreat to monasteries, public parks or forests, where people would come to them.

The first vassana was spent at Varanasi when the sangha was formed. According to the Pali texts, shortly after the formation of the sangha, the Buddha travelled to Rajagaha, capital of Magadha, and met with King Bimbisara, who gifted a bamboo grove park to the sangha.

The Buddha&#x27;s sangha continued to grow during his initial travels in north India. The early texts tell the story of how the Buddha&#x27;s chief disciples, Sāriputta and Mahāmoggallāna, who were both students of the skeptic sramana Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta, were converted by Assaji. They also tell of how the Buddha&#x27;s son, Rahula, joined his father as a bhikkhu when the Buddha visited his old home, Kapilavastu. Over time, other Shakyans joined the order as bhikkhus, such as Buddha&#x27;s cousin Ananda, Anuruddha, Upali the barber, the Buddha&#x27;s half-brother Nanda and Devadatta. Meanwhile, the Buddha&#x27;s father Suddhodana heard his son&#x27;s teaching, converted to Buddhism and became a stream-enterer.

The early texts also mention an important lay disciple, the merchant Anāthapiṇḍika, who became a strong lay supporter of the Buddha early on. He is said to have gifted Jeta&#x27;s grove (&quot;Jetavana&quot;) to the sangha at great expense (the Theravada Vinaya speaks of thousands of gold coins).

=== Formation of the bhikkhunī order ===

The formation of a parallel order of female monastics (bhikkhunī) was another important part of the growth of the Buddha&#x27;s community. As noted by Anālayo&#x27;s comparative study of this topic, there are various versions of this event depicted in the different early Buddhist texts.

According to all the major versions surveyed by Anālayo, Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī, Buddha&#x27;s step-mother, is initially turned down by the Buddha after requesting ordination for her and some other women. Mahāprajāpatī and her followers then shave their hair, don robes and begin following the Buddha on his travels. The Buddha is eventually convinced by Ānanda to grant ordination to Mahāprajāpatī on her acceptance of eight conditions called gurudharmas which focus on the relationship between the new order of nuns and the monks.

According to Anālayo, the only argument common to all the versions that Ananda uses to convince the Buddha is that women have the same ability to reach all stages of awakening. Anālayo also notes that some modern scholars have questioned the authenticity of the eight gurudharmas in their present form due to various inconsistencies. He holds that the historicity of the current lists of eight is doubtful, but that they may have been based on earlier injunctions by the Buddha.

Anālayo notes that various passages indicate that the reason for the Buddha&#x27;s hesitation to ordain women was the danger that the life of a wandering sramana posed for women that were not under the protection of their male family members, such as dangers of sexual assault and abduction. Due to this, the gurudharma injunctions may have been a way to place &quot;the newly founded order of nuns in a relationship to its male counterparts that resembles as much as possible the protection a laywoman could expect from her male relatives&quot;.

=== Later years ===
According to J.S. Strong, after the first 20 years of his teaching career, the Buddha seems to have slowly settled in Sravasti, the capital of the Kingdom of Kosala, spending most of his later years in this city.

As the sangha grew in size, the need for a standardized set of monastic rules arose and the Buddha seems to have developed a set of regulations for the sangha. These are preserved in various texts called &quot;Pratimoksa&quot; which were recited by the community every fortnight. The Pratimoksa includes general ethical precepts, as well as rules regarding the essentials of monastic life, such as bowls and robes.

In his later years, the Buddha&#x27;s fame grew and he was invited to important royal events, such as the inauguration of the new council hall of the Shakyans (as seen in MN 53) and the inauguration of a new palace by Prince Bodhi (as depicted in MN 85). The early texts also speak of how during the Buddha&#x27;s old age, the kingdom of Magadha was usurped by a new king, Ajatashatru, who overthrew his father Bimbisara. According to the &quot;Samaññaphala Sutta,&quot; the new king spoke with different ascetic teachers and eventually took refuge in the Buddha. However, Jain sources also claim his allegiance, and it is likely he supported various religious groups, not just the Buddha&#x27;s sangha exclusively.

As the Buddha continued to travel and teach, he also came into contact with members of other śrāmana sects. There is evidence from the early texts that the Buddha encountered some of these figures and critiqued their doctrines. The &quot;Samaññaphala Sutta&quot; identifies six such sects.

The early texts also depict the elderly Buddha as suffering from back pain. Several texts depict him delegating teachings to his chief disciples since his body now needed more rest. However, the Buddha continued teaching well into his old age.

One of the most troubling events during the Buddha&#x27;s old age was Devadatta&#x27;s schism. Early sources speak of how the Buddha&#x27;s cousin, Devadatta, attempted to take over leadership of the order and then left the sangha with several Buddhist monks and formed a rival sect. This sect is said to have been supported by King Ajatashatru. The Pali texts depict Devadatta as plotting to kill the Buddha, but these plans all fail. They depict the Buddha as sending his two chief disciples (Sariputta and Moggallana) to this schismatic community in order to convince the monks who left with Devadatta to return.

All the major early Buddhist Vinaya texts depict Devadatta as a divisive figure who attempted to split the Buddhist community, but they disagree on what issues he disagreed with the Buddha on. The Sthavira texts generally focus on &quot;five points&quot; which are seen as excessive ascetic practices, while the Mahāsaṅghika Vinaya speaks of a more comprehensive disagreement, which has Devadatta alter the discourses as well as monastic discipline.

At around the same time of Devadatta&#x27;s schism, there was also war between Ajatashatru&#x27;s Kingdom of Magadha, and Kosala, led by an elderly king Pasenadi. Ajatashatru seems to have been victorious, a turn of events the Buddha is reported to have regretted.

=== Last days and &quot;parinirvana&quot; ===
The main narrative of the Buddha&#x27;s last days, death and the events following his death is contained in the &quot;Mahaparinibbana Sutta&quot; (DN 16) and its various parallels in Sanskrit, Chinese, and Tibetan. According to Anālayo, these include the Chinese Dirgha Agama 2, &quot;Sanskrit fragments of the &quot;Mahaparinirvanasutra&quot;&quot;, and &quot;three discourses preserved as individual translations in Chinese&quot;.

The &quot;Mahaparinibbana sutta&quot; depicts the Buddha&#x27;s last year as a time of war. It begins with Ajatashatru&#x27;s decision to make war on the Vajjika League, leading him to send a minister to ask the Buddha for advice. The Buddha responds by saying that the Vajjikas can be expected to prosper as long as they do seven things, and he then applies these seven principles to the Buddhist Sangha, showing that he is concerned about its future welfare.

The Buddha says that the Sangha will prosper as long as they &quot;hold regular and frequent assemblies, meet in harmony, do not change the rules of training, honour their superiors who were ordained before them, do not fall prey to worldly desires, remain devoted to forest hermitages, and preserve their personal mindfulness&quot;. He then gives further lists of important virtues to be upheld by the Sangha.

The early texts depict how the Buddha&#x27;s two chief disciples, Sariputta and Moggallana, died just before the Buddha&#x27;s death. The &quot;Mahaparinibbana&quot; depicts the Buddha as experiencing illness during the last months of his life but initially recovering. It depicts him as stating that he cannot promote anyone to be his successor. When Ānanda requested this, the &quot;Mahaparinibbana&quot; records his response as follows:

After travelling and teaching some more, the Buddha ate his last meal, which he had received as an offering from a blacksmith named Cunda. Falling violently ill, Buddha instructed his attendant Ānanda to convince Cunda that the meal eaten at his place had nothing to do with his death and that his meal would be a source of the greatest merit as it provided the last meal for a Buddha. Bhikkhu Mettanando and Oskar von Hinüber argue that the Buddha died of mesenteric infarction, a symptom of old age, rather than food poisoning.

The precise contents of the Buddha&#x27;s final meal are not clear, due to variant scriptural traditions and ambiguity over the translation of certain significant terms. The Theravada tradition generally believes that the Buddha was offered some kind of pork, while the Mahayana tradition believes that the Buddha consumed some sort of truffle or other mushroom. These may reflect the different traditional views on Buddhist vegetarianism and the precepts for monks and nuns. Modern scholars also disagree on this topic, arguing both for pig&#x27;s flesh or some kind of plant or mushroom that pigs like to eat. Whatever the case, none of the sources which mention the last meal attribute the Buddha&#x27;s sickness to the meal itself.

As per the &quot;Mahaparinibbana sutta,&quot; after the meal with Cunda, the Buddha and his companions continued travelling until he was too weak to continue and had to stop at Kushinagar, where Ānanda had a resting place prepared in a grove of Sala trees. After announcing to the sangha at large that he would soon be passing away to final Nirvana, the Buddha ordained one last novice into the order personally. His name was Subhadda. He then repeated his final instructions to the sangha, which was that the Dhamma and Vinaya was to be their teacher after his death. Then he asked if anyone had any doubts about the teaching, but nobody did. The Buddha&#x27;s final words are reported to have been: &quot;All &quot;saṅkhāras&quot; decay. Strive for the goal with diligence (&quot;appamāda&quot;)&quot; (Pali: &#x27;vayadhammā saṅkhārā appamādena sampādethā&#x27;).

He then entered his final meditation and died, reaching what is known as &quot;parinirvana&quot; (final nirvana; instead of a person being reborn, &quot;the five aggregates of physical and mental phenomena that constitute a being cease to occur&quot;). The &quot;Mahaparinibbana&quot; reports that in his final meditation he entered the four dhyanas consecutively, then the four immaterial attainments and finally the meditative dwelling known as &quot;nirodha-samāpatti,&quot; before returning to the fourth dhyana right at the moment of death.

=== Posthumous events ===

According to the &quot;Mahaparinibbana sutta,&quot; the Mallians of Kushinagar spent the days following the Buddha&#x27;s death honouring his body with flowers, music and scents. The sangha waited until the eminent elder Mahākassapa arrived to pay his respects before cremating the body.

The Buddha&#x27;s body was then cremated and the remains, including his bones, were kept as relics and they were distributed among various north Indian kingdoms like Magadha, Shakya and Koliya. These relics were placed in monuments or mounds called stupas, a common funerary practice at the time. Centuries later they would be exhumed and enshrined by Ashoka into many new stupas around the Mauryan realm. Many supernatural legends surround the history of alleged relics as they accompanied the spread of Buddhism and gave legitimacy to rulers.

According to various Buddhist sources, the First Buddhist Council was held shortly after the Buddha&#x27;s death to collect, recite and memorize the teachings. Mahākassapa was chosen by the sangha to be the chairman of the council. However, the historicity of the traditional accounts of the first council is disputed by modern scholars.

== Teachings and views==
=== Historicity ===
==== Scholarly views on the earliest teachings ====

One method to obtain information on the oldest core of Buddhism is to compare the oldest versions of the Pali Canon and other texts, such as the surviving portions of Sarvastivada, Mulasarvastivada, Mahisasaka, Dharmaguptaka, and the Chinese Agamas. The reliability of these sources, and the possibility of drawing out a core of oldest teachings, is a matter of dispute. According to Lambert Schmithausen, there are three positions held by modern scholars of Buddhism with regard to the authenticity of the teachings contained in the Nikayas:
# &quot;Stress on the fundamental homogeneity and substantial authenticity of at least a considerable part of the Nikayic materials&quot;.
# &quot;Scepticism with regard to the possibility of retrieving the doctrine of earliest Buddhism&quot;.
# &quot;Cautious optimism in this respect&quot;.

Scholars such as Richard Gombrich, Akira Hirakawa, Alexander Wynne and A.K. Warder hold that these Early Buddhist Texts contain material that could possibly be traced to the Buddha. Richard Gombrich argues that since the content of the earliest texts &quot;presents such originality, intelligence, grandeur and—most relevantly—coherence...it is hard to see it as a composite work.&quot; Thus he concludes they are &quot;the work of one genius&quot;. Peter Harvey also agrees that &quot;much&quot; of the Pali Canon &quot;must derive from his [the Buddha&#x27;s] teachings&quot;. Likewise, A. K. Warder has written that &quot;there is no evidence to suggest that it [the shared teaching of the early schools] was formulated by anyone other than the Buddha and his immediate followers.&quot; According to Alexander Wynne, &quot;the internal evidence of the early Buddhist literature proves its historical authenticity.&quot;

Other scholars of Buddhist studies have disagreed with the mostly positive view that the early Buddhist texts reflect the teachings of the historical Buddha, arguing that some teachings contained in the early texts are the authentic teachings of the Buddha, but not others. Ainslie Embree writes that many sermons credited to the Buddha are the works of later teachers, so there is considerable doubt about his original message. According to Tilmann Vetter, inconsistencies remain, and other methods must be applied to resolve those inconsistencies. According to Tilmann Vetter, the earliest core of the Buddhist teachings is the meditative practice of &quot;dhyāna&quot;, but &quot;liberating insight&quot; became an essential feature of the Buddhist tradition only at a later date.

He posits that the Fourth Noble Truths, the Eightfold path and Dependent Origination, which are commonly seen as essential to Buddhism, are later formulations which form part of the explanatory framework of this &quot;liberating insight&quot;. Lambert Schmithausen similarly argues that the mention of the four noble truths as constituting &quot;liberating insight&quot;, which is attained after mastering the four &quot;dhyānas&quot;, is a later addition. Johannes Bronkhorst also argues that the four truths may not have been formulated in earliest Buddhism, and did not serve in earliest Buddhism as a description of &quot;liberating insight&quot;.

Edward Conze argued that the attempts of European scholars to reconstruct the original teachings of the Buddha were &quot;all mere guesswork&quot;.

=== Core teachings ===

A number of teachings and practices are deemed essential to Buddhism, including: the samyojana (fetters, chains or bounds), that is, the sankharas (&quot;formations&quot;), the kleshas (unwholesome mental states), including the three poisons, and the āsavas (&quot;influx, canker&quot;), that perpetuate sasāra, the repeated cycle of becoming; the six sense bases and the five aggregates, which describe the process from sense contact to consciousness which lead to this bondage to sasāra; dependent origination, which describes this process, and its reversal, in detail; and the Middle Way, summarized by the later tradition in the Four Noble Truths and the Noble Eightfold Path, which prescribes how this bondage can be reversed.

According to N. Ross Reat, the Theravada Pali texts and the Mahasamghika school&#x27;s &quot;Śālistamba Sūtra&quot; share
these basic teachings and practices. Bhikkhu Analayo concludes that the Theravada &quot;Majjhima Nikaya&quot; and Sarvastivada &quot;Madhyama Agama&quot; contain mostly the same major doctrines. Likewise, Richard Salomon has written that the doctrines found in the Gandharan Manuscripts are &quot;consistent with non-Mahayana Buddhism, which survives today in the Theravada school of Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia, but which in ancient times was represented by eighteen separate schools&quot;.

==== Samsara ====
All beings have deeply entrenched samyojana (fetters, chains or bounds), that is, the sankharas (&quot;formations&quot;), kleshas (unwholesome mental states), including the three poisons, and āsavas (&quot;influx, canker&quot;), that perpetuate sasāra, the repeated cycle of becoming and rebirth. According to the Pali suttas, the Buddha stated that &quot;this saṃsāra is without discoverable beginning. A first point is not discerned of beings roaming and wandering on hindered by ignorance and fettered by craving.&quot; In the &quot;Dutiyalokadhammasutta sutta&quot; (AN 8:6) the Buddha explains how &quot;eight worldly winds&quot; &quot;keep the world turning around [...] Gain and loss, fame and disrepute, praise and blame, pleasure and pain&quot;. He then explains how the difference between a noble (&quot;arya&quot;) person and an uninstructed worldling is that a noble person reflects on and understands the impermanence of these conditions.

This cycle of becoming is characterized by &quot;dukkha&quot;, commonly referred to as &quot;suffering&quot;, &quot;dukkha&quot; is more aptly rendered as &quot;unsatisfactoriness&quot; or &quot;unease&quot;. It is the unsatisfactoriness and unease that comes with a life dictated by automatic responses and habituated selfishness, and the unsatifacories of expecting enduring happiness from things which are impermanent, unstable and thus unreliable. The ultimate noble goal should be liberation from this cycle.

&quot;Samsara&quot; is dictated by karma, which is an impersonal natural law, similar to how certain seeds produce certain plants and fruits. &quot;Karma&quot; is not the only cause for one&#x27;s conditions, as the Buddha listed various physical and environmental causes alongside karma. The Buddha&#x27;s teaching of karma differed to that of the Jains and Brahmins, in that on his view, karma is primarily mental intention (as opposed to mainly physical action or ritual acts). The Buddha is reported to have said &quot;By karma I mean intention.&quot; Richard Gombrich summarizes the Buddha&#x27;s view of karma as follows: &quot;all thoughts, words, and deeds derive their moral value, positive or negative, from the intention behind them&quot;.

==== The six sense bases and the five aggregates ====
The āyatana (six sense bases) and the five skandhas (aggregates) describe how sensory contact leads to attachment and &quot;dukkha&quot;. The six sense bases are eye and sight, ear and sound, nose and odour, tongue and taste, body and touch, and mind and thoughts. Together they create the input from which we create our world or reality, &quot;the all&quot;. This process takes place through the five skandhas, &quot;aggregates&quot;, &quot;groups&quot;, &quot;heaps&quot;, five groups of physical and mental processes, namely form (or material image, impression) (), sensations (or feelings, received from form) (), perceptions (), mental activity or formations (), consciousness (). They form part of other Buddhist teachings and lists, such as dependent origination, and explain how sensory input ultimately leads to bondage to samsara by the mental defilements.

==== Dependent Origination ====
In the early texts, the process of the arising of dukkha is explicated through the teaching of dependent origination, which says that everything that exists or occurs is dependent on conditioning factors. The most basic formulation of dependent origination is given in the early texts as: &#x27;It being thus, this comes about&#x27; (Pali: &quot;evam sati idam hoti&quot;). This can be taken to mean that certain phenomena only arise when there are other phenomena present, thus their arising is &quot;dependent&quot; on other phenomena.

The philosopher Mark Siderits has outlined the basic idea of the Buddha&#x27;s teaching of Dependent Origination of dukkha as follows:
In numerous early texts, this basic principle is expanded with a list of phenomena that are said to be conditionally dependent, as a result of later elaborations, including Vedic cosmogenies as the basis for the first four links. According to Boisvert, nidana 3-10 correlate with the five skandhas. According to Richard Gombrich, the twelve-fold list is a combination of two previous lists, the second list beginning with &quot;tanha&quot;, &quot;thirst&quot;, the cause of suffering as described in the second noble truth&quot;. According to Gombrich, the two lists were combined, resulting in contradictions in its reverse version.

===== Anatta =====
The Buddha saw his analysis of dependent origination as a &quot;Middle Way&quot; between &quot;eternalism&quot; (&quot;sassatavada&quot;, the idea that some essence exists eternally) and &quot;annihilationism&quot; (&quot;ucchedavada&quot;, the idea that we go completely out of existence at death). in this view, persons are just a causal series of impermanent psycho-physical elements, which are &quot;anatta&quot;, without an independent or permanent self. The Buddha instead held that all things in the world of our experience are transient and that there is no unchanging part to a person. According to Richard Gombrich, the Buddha&#x27;s position is simply that &quot;everything is process&quot;.

The Buddha&#x27;s arguments against an unchanging self rely on the scheme of the five skandhas, as can be seen in the Pali &quot;Anattalakkhaṇa Sutta&quot; (and its parallels in Gandhari and Chinese)&quot;.&quot; In the early texts the Buddha teaches that all five aggregates, including consciousness (&quot;viññana&quot;, which was held by Brahmins to be eternal), arise due to dependent origination. Since they are all impermanent, one cannot regard any of the psycho-physical processes as an unchanging self. Even mental processes such as consciousness and will (&quot;cetana&quot;) are seen as being dependently originated and impermanent and thus do not qualify as a self (&quot;atman&quot;).

The Buddha saw the belief in a self as arising from our grasping at and identifying with the various changing phenomena, as well as from ignorance about how things really are. Furthermore, the Buddha held that we experience suffering because we hold on to erroneous self views. As Rupert Gethin explains, for the Buddha, a person is
Due to this view (termed ), the Buddha&#x27;s teaching was opposed to all soul theories of his time, including the Jain theory of a &quot;jiva&quot; (&quot;life monad&quot;) and the Brahmanical theories of atman (Pali: &quot;atta&quot;) and purusha. All of these theories held that there was an eternal unchanging essence to a person, which was separate from all changing experiences, and which transmigrated from life to life. The Buddha&#x27;s anti-essentialist view still includes an understanding of continuity through rebirth, it is just the rebirth of a process (karma), not an essence like the atman.

==== The path to liberation ====


The Buddha taught a path (&quot;marga&quot;) of training to undo the samyojana, kleshas and āsavas and attain &quot;vimutti&quot; (liberation). This path taught by the Buddha is depicted in the early texts (most famously in the Pali &quot;Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta&quot; and its numerous parallel texts) as a &quot;Middle Way&quot; between sensual indulgence on one hand and mortification of the body on the other.

A common presentation of the core structure of Buddha&#x27;s teaching found in the early texts is that of the Four Noble Truths, which refers to the Noble Eightfold Path. According to Gethin, another common summary of the path to awakening wisely used in the early texts is &quot;abandoning the hindrances, practice of the four establishments of mindfulness and development of the awakening factors&quot;.

According to Rupert Gethin, in the Nikayas and Agamas, the Buddha&#x27;s path is mainly presented in a cumulative and gradual &quot;step by step&quot; process, such as that outlined in the &quot;Samaññaphala Sutta&quot;. Other early texts like the &quot;Upanisa sutta&quot; (SN 12.23), present the path as reversions of the process of Dependent Origination.

&quot;Bhāvanā&quot;, cultivation of wholesome states, is central to the Buddha&#x27;s path. Common practices to this goal, which are shared by most of these early presentations of the path, include &quot;sila&quot; (ethical training), restraint of the senses (&quot;indriyasamvara&quot;), &quot;sati&quot; (mindfulness) and &quot;sampajañña&quot; (clear awareness), and the practice of &quot;dhyana&quot;, the cumulative development of wholesome states leading to a &quot;state of perfect equanimity and awareness (&quot;upekkhā-sati-parisuddhi&quot;)&quot;. Dhyana is preceded and supported by various aspects of the path such as sense restraint and mindfulness, which is elaborated in the &quot;satipatthana&quot;-scheme, as taught in the Pali &quot;Satipatthana Sutta&quot; and the sixteen elements of &quot;Anapanasati&quot;, as taught in the &quot;Anapanasati Sutta&quot;.

==== Jain and Brahmanical influences ====
In various texts, the Buddha is depicted as having studied under two named teachers, Āḷāra Kālāma and Uddaka Rāmaputta. According to Alexander Wynne, these were yogis who taught doctrines and practices similar to those in the Upanishads. According to Johannes Bronkhorst, the &quot;meditation without breath and reduced intake of food&quot; which the Buddha practiced before his awakening are forms of asceticism which are similar to Jain practices.

According to Richard Gombrich, the Buddha&#x27;s teachings on Karma and Rebirth are a development of pre-Buddhist themes that can be found in Jain and Brahmanical sources, like the &quot;Brihadaranyaka Upanishad&quot;. Likewise, &quot;samsara&quot;, the idea that we are trapped in cycles of rebirth and that we should seek liberation from them through non-harming (&quot;ahimsa&quot;) and spiritual practices, pre-dates the Buddha and was likely taught in early Jainism. According to K.R. Norman, the Buddhist teaching of the &quot;three marks of existence&quot; may also reflect Upanishadic or other influences . The Buddhist practice called &quot;Brahma-vihara&quot; may have also originated from a Brahmanic term; but its usage may have been common in the sramana traditions.

=== Homeless life ===
The early Buddhist texts depict the Buddha as promoting the life of a homeless and celibate &quot;sramana&quot;, or mendicant, as the ideal way of life for the practice of the path. He taught that mendicants or &quot;beggars&quot; (&quot;bhikkhus&quot;) were supposed to give up all possessions and to own just a begging bowl and three robes. As part of the Buddha&#x27;s monastic discipline, they were also supposed to rely on the wider lay community for the basic necessities (mainly food, clothing, and lodging).

The Buddha&#x27;s teachings on monastic discipline were preserved in the various Vinaya collections of the different early schools.

Buddhist monastics, which included both monks and nuns, were supposed to beg for their food, were not allowed to store up food or eat after noon and they were not allowed to use gold, silver or any valuables.

===Society===

==== Critique of Brahmanism ====
According to Bronkhorst, &quot;the bearers of [the Brahmanical] tradition, the Brahmins, did not occupy a dominant position in the area in which the Buddha preached his message.&quot; Nevertheless, the Buddha was acquainted with Brahmanism, and in the early Buddhist Texts, the Buddha references Brahmanical devices. For example, in Samyutta Nikaya 111, Majjhima Nikaya 92 and Vinaya i 246 of the Pali Canon, the Buddha praises the Agnihotra as the foremost sacrifice and the Sāvitrī meter as the foremost meter. In general, the Buddha critiques the animal sacrifices and social system on certain key points.

The Brahmin caste held that the Vedas were eternal revealed (&quot;sruti&quot;) texts. The Buddha, on the other hand, did not accept that these texts had any divine authority or value.

The Buddha also did not see the Brahmanical rites and practices as useful for spiritual advancement. For example, in the Udāna, the Buddha points out that ritual bathing does not lead to purity: only &quot;truth and morality&quot; lead to purity. He especially critiqued animal sacrifice as taught in Vedas. The Buddha contrasted his teachings, which were taught openly to all people, with that of the Brahmins&#x27;, who kept their mantras secret.

The Buddha also critiqued the Brahmins&#x27; claims of superior birth and the idea that different castes and bloodlines were inherently pure or impure, noble or ignoble.

In the &quot;Vasettha sutta &quot;the Buddha argues that the main difference among humans is not birth but their actions and occupations. According to the Buddha, one is a &quot;Brahmin&quot; (i.e., divine, like Brahma) only to the extent that one has cultivated virtue. Because of this the early texts report that he proclaimed: &quot;Not by birth one is a Brahman, not by birth one is a non-Brahman; – by moral action one is a Brahman&quot;

The &quot;Aggañña Sutta&quot; explains all classes or varnas can be good or bad and gives a sociological explanation for how they arose, against the Brahmanical idea that they are divinely ordained. According to Kancha Ilaiah, the Buddha posed the first contract theory of society. The Buddha&#x27;s teaching then is a single universal moral law, one Dharma valid for everybody, which is opposed to the Brahmanic ethic founded on &quot;one&#x27;s own duty&quot; (&quot;svadharma&quot;) which depends on caste. Because of this, all castes including untouchables were welcome in the Buddhist order and when someone joined, they renounced all caste affiliation.

==== Socio-political teachings ====
The early texts depict the Buddha as giving a deflationary account of the importance of politics to human life. Politics is inevitable and is probably even necessary and helpful, but it is also a tremendous waste of time and effort, as well as being a prime temptation to allow ego to run rampant. Buddhist political theory denies that people have a moral duty to engage in politics except to a very minimal degree (pay the taxes, obey the laws, maybe vote in the elections), and it actively portrays engagement in politics and the pursuit of enlightenment as being conflicting paths in life.

In the &quot;Aggañña Sutta&quot;, the Buddha teaches a history of how monarchy arose which according to Matthew J. Moore is &quot;closely analogous to a social contract&quot;. The &quot;Aggañña Sutta&quot; also provides a social explanation of how different classes arose, in contrast to the Vedic views on social caste.

Other early texts like the &quot;Cakkavatti-Sīhanāda Sutta&quot; and the &quot;Mahāsudassana Sutta&quot; focus on the figure of the righteous wheel turning leader (&quot;Cakkavatti&quot;). This ideal leader is one who promotes Dharma through his governance. He can only achieve his status through moral purity and must promote morality and Dharma to maintain his position. According to the &quot;Cakkavatti-Sīhanāda Sutta&quot;, the key duties of a Cakkavatti are: &quot;establish guard, ward, and protection according to Dhamma for your own household, your troops, your nobles, and vassals, for Brahmins and householders, town and country folk, ascetics and Brahmins, for beasts and birds. let no crime prevail in your kingdom, and to those who are in need, give property.&quot; The sutta explains the injunction to give to the needy by telling how a line of wheel-turning monarchs falls because they fail to give to the needy, and thus the kingdom falls into infighting as poverty increases, which then leads to stealing and violence.

In the &quot;Mahāparinibbāna Sutta,&quot; the Buddha outlines several principles that he promoted among the Vajjika tribal federation, which had a quasi-republican form of government. He taught them to &quot;hold regular and frequent assemblies&quot;, live in harmony and maintain their traditions. The Buddha then goes on to promote a similar kind of republican style of government among the Buddhist Sangha, where all monks had equal rights to attend open meetings and there would be no single leader, since The Buddha also chose not to appoint one. Some scholars have argued that this fact signals that the Buddha preferred a republican form of government, while others disagree with this position.

==== Worldly happiness ====
As noted by Bhikkhu Bodhi, the Buddha as depicted in the Pali suttas does not exclusively teach a world-transcending goal, but also teaches laypersons how to achieve worldly happiness (&quot;sukha&quot;).

According to Bodhi, the &quot;most comprehensive&quot; of the suttas that focus on how to live as a layperson is the &quot;Sigālovāda Sutta&quot; (DN 31). This sutta outlines how a layperson behaves towards six basic social relationships: &quot;parents and children, teacher and pupils, husband and wife, friend and friend, employer and workers, lay follower and religious guides&quot;. This Pali text also has parallels in Chinese and in Sanskrit fragments.

In another sutta (&quot;Dīghajāṇu Sutta&quot;, AN 8.54) the Buddha teaches two types of happiness. First, there is the happiness visible in this very life. The Buddha states that four things lead to this happiness: &quot;The accomplishment of persistent effort, the accomplishment of protection, good friendship, and balanced living.&quot; Similarly, in several other suttas, the Buddha teaches on how to improve family relationships, particularly on the importance of filial love and gratitude as well as marital well-being.

Regarding the happiness of the next life, the Buddha (in the &quot;Dīghajāṇu Sutta&quot;) states that the virtues which lead to a good rebirth are: faith (in the Buddha and the teachings), moral discipline, especially keeping the five precepts, generosity, and wisdom (knowledge of the arising and passing of things).

According to the Buddha of the suttas then, achieving a good rebirth is based on cultivating wholesome or skillful (&quot;kusala&quot;) karma, which leads to a good result, and avoiding unwholesome (&quot;akusala&quot;) karma. A common list of good karmas taught by the Buddha is the list of ten courses of action (&quot;kammapatha&quot;) as outlined in MN 41 &quot;Saleyyaka Sutta&quot; (and its Chinese parallel in SĀ 1042).

Good karma is also termed merit (&quot;puñña&quot;), and the Buddha outlines three bases of meritorious actions: giving, moral discipline and meditation (as seen in AN 8:36).

== Physical characteristics ==


Early sources depict the Buddha&#x27;s appearance as similar to other Buddhist monks. Various discourses describe how he &quot;cut off his hair and beard&quot; when renouncing the world. Likewise, Digha Nikaya 3 has a Brahmin describe the Buddha as a shaved or bald (&quot;mundaka&quot;) man. Digha Nikaya 2 also describes how king Ajatashatru is unable to tell which of the monks is the Buddha when approaching the sangha and must ask his minister to point him out. Likewise, in MN 140, a mendicant who sees himself as a follower of the Buddha meets the Buddha in person but is unable to recognize him.

The Buddha is also described as being handsome and with a clear complexion (Digha I:115; Anguttara I:181), at least in his youth. In old age, however, he is described as having a stooped body, with slack and wrinkled limbs.

Various Buddhist texts attribute to the Buddha a series of extraordinary physical characteristics, known as &quot;the 32 Signs of the Great Man&quot; (Skt. &quot;mahāpuruṣa lakṣaṇa&quot;).

According to Anālayo, when they first appear in the Buddhist texts, these physical marks were initially held to be imperceptible to the ordinary person, and required special training to detect. Later though, they are depicted as being visible by regular people and as inspiring faith in the Buddha.

These characteristics are described in the Digha Nikaya&#x27;s &quot;&quot; (D, I:142).

== In other religions ==
=== Hinduism ===

After the lifetime of the Buddha the Hindu synthesis emerged, between 500–200 BCE and , under the pressure of the success of Buddhism and Jainism. In response to the success of Buddhism, Gautama was incorporated into Vaishnavism as the 9th avatar of Vishnu. The adoption of the Buddha as an incarnation began at approximately the same time as Hinduism began to predominate and Buddhism to decline in India, and the inclusion is ambiguous, as the co-option into a list of avatars may be seen as an aspect of Hindu efforts to decisively weaken Buddhist power and appeal in India. While his inclusion has been rejected by some traditionalists, many modern Hindus include the Buddha in their conception of Hinduism.

Buddha&#x27;s teachings deny the authority of the Vedas and the concepts of Brahman-Atman. Consequently, Buddhism is generally classified as a &quot;nāstika&quot; school (heterodox, literally &quot;It is not so&quot;) in contrast to the six orthodox schools of Hinduism.

=== Islam ===
Buddhist ideas in Muslim culture can be traced to the presence of Buddhism in Transoxiana and K̲h̲urāsān. Buddhism lasted from the 2nd century B.C. to the 8th century, there, until it dwindled in the face of Zoroastrianism, the Sassanide state religion. Remnants of Buddhism remains until the 9th century and the lasting impact of Buddhist influence is reflected in Muslim arts and poetry of Islamic Persia. However, in the 9th century, the intellectual distance between Buddhism and Islam increased drastically. Only centuries later, during Turco-Mongol governance, the attention of Muslim scholars shifted towards Buddhism again.

In Islamic sources, Buddha is called &quot;Budd&quot; (Persian: &quot;but&quot;) or Shakyamuni. The former term is used in the writings of al-Jahiz, al-Mas&#x27;udi, al-Biruni, and al-Shahrastani. The term further denotes a temple or an idol, as many authors believed that Buddhists were idolaters. They are described further as believing in the eternity of the world, the retributation of actions after life, and the appearance of Buddha in various forms. Buddhists were referred to as &quot;sumaniyya&quot;.

Although Muslims had only rudimentary knowledge about Buddhism, they attempted to integrate the Buddha into their own religious history. Ibn Hazm defines the Buddha as a person who is not born, does not eat or drink, and does not die. The Buddha is compared to various Islamic figures by Muslim heresiologists. In his &quot;Fihrist&quot;, ibn al-Nadim reiterates three opinions from among the scholars, that the Buddha is either an angel, an &quot;ʿifrīt&quot; (demon), or a Prophet. Al-Shahrastani identified Buddha with the legendary al-Khizr.

Rashid al-Din Hamadani&#x27;s (1247–1318) &quot;Jāmiʿ al-Tawārīkh&quot; dedicates an entire chapter on describing Buddhist beliefs to the Ilkhanate from a Muslim viewpoint. He identifies Buddha (Shakyamuni) as a monotheistic prophet. He integrates the cyclical reappearance of the Buddha into the lineage of Islamic prophets, who likewise raise whenever a community yielded into decay and violance. In line with Islamic prophetology, Rashid al-Din emphazizes the finality of Muhammad. In order to establish Buddha&#x27;s monotheism, the author retells a story from the &quot;Lalitavistara Sūtra&quot; within an Islamic framework: Accordingly, the Indian deities, Vishnu, Brahma, Shiva, and Indra are prophets or angels who claim divinity for themselves and thus identified with the &quot;people of Iblis&quot; (&quot;ahl-i iblīs&quot;). When Buddha is brought to the idols and ordered to worship them, the idols bow down before Buddha instead, an idea linked to the Quranic story of angels prostrating before Adam, and the superiority of prophets over angels in Islamic theology (&quot;Kalām&quot;).

Muhammad Hamidullah (1908 – December 2002) identifies Buddha as a prophet based on the Quran Surah 95:1. The verse takes an oath by a fig-tree, followed by Mount Sinai. Since Moses reveived his revelation on Mount Sinai, the fig-tree features as the location of revelation for another prophet, identified with Buddha, since Buddha reached enlightenment under a fig-tree. He is further identified with the prophet Dhu al-Kifl, supposedly related to his birthplace in Kapila-Vastu. He furthermore compares Buddha&#x27;s teachings with that of Muhammad: The teaching of the omnipresence of dukkha, as formulated in the Four Noble Truths, is compared to 90:04, stating that &quot;humans are created in &quot;pain toil and trial&quot;. Similarly, by receiving his revelation, Muhammad would have entered into a state of peace (salam) and, as per hadith, his devilish nature surrendered to islam (&quot;aslama shayṭānī&quot;).

=== Christianity ===
The Christian saint Josaphat is based on the Buddha. The name comes from the Sanskrit &quot;Bodhisattva&quot; via Arabic &quot;Būdhasaf&quot; and Georgian &quot;Iodasaph&quot;. The only story in which St. Josaphat appears, &quot;Barlaam and Josaphat&quot;, is based on the life of the Buddha. Josaphat was included in earlier editions of the Roman Martyrology (feast-day 27 November)—though not in the Roman Missal—and in the Eastern Orthodox Church liturgical calendar (26 August).

=== Other religions ===
In the Baháʼí Faith, Buddha is regarded as one of the Manifestations of God.

Some early Chinese Taoist-Buddhists thought the Buddha to be a reincarnation of Laozi.

In the ancient Gnostic sect of Manichaeism, the Buddha is listed among the prophets who preached the word of God before Mani.

In Sikhism, Buddha is mentioned as the 23rd avatar of Vishnu in the Chaubis Avtar, a composition in Dasam Granth traditionally and historically attributed to Guru Gobind Singh.

== Artistic depictions ==

The earliest artistic depictions of the Buddha found at Bharhut and Sanchi are aniconic and symbolic. During this early aniconic period, the Buddha is depicted by other objects or symbols, such as an empty throne, a riderless horse, footprints, a Dharma wheel or a Bodhi tree. Since aniconism precludes single devotional figures, most representations are of narrative scenes from his life. These continued to be very important after the Buddha&#x27;s person could be shown, alongside larger statues. The art at Sanchi also depicts Jataka tales, narratives of the Buddha in his past lives.

Other styles of Indian Buddhist art depict the Buddha in human form, either standing, sitting crossed legged (often in the Lotus Pose) or lying down on one side. Iconic representations of the Buddha became particularly popular and widespread after the first century CE. Some of these depictions, particularly those of Gandharan Buddhism and Central Asian Buddhism, were influenced by Hellenistic art, a style known as Greco-Buddhist art. The subsequently influenced the art of East Asian Buddhist images, as well as those of Southeast Asian Theravada Buddhism.

=== Gallery showing different Buddha styles ===
=== In other media ===
==== Films ====

* &quot;Buddha Dev&quot; (&quot;Life of Lord Buddha&quot;), a 1923 Indian silent film by Dhundiraj Govind Phalke, first depiction of the Buddha on film with Bhaurao Datar in the title role.
* &quot;Prem Sanyas&quot; (&quot;The Light of Asia&quot;), a 1925 silent film, directed by Franz Osten and Himansu Rai based on Arnold&#x27;s epic poem with Rai also portraying the Buddha.
* , a 1952 Japanese feature film representing the life of Buddha.
* &quot;Gotoma the Buddha&quot;, a 1957 Indian documentary film directed by Rajbans Khanna and produced by Bimal Roy.
* &quot;Siddhartha&quot;, a 1972 drama film by Conrad Rooks, an adaptation Hesse&#x27;s novel. It stars Shashi Kapoor as Siddhartha, a contemporary of the Buddha.
* &quot;Little Buddha&quot;, a 1994 film by Bernardo Bertolucci, the film stars Keanu Reeves as Prince Siddhartha.
* &quot;The Legend of Buddha&quot;, a 2004 Indian animated film by Shamboo Falke.
* Buddha&#x27;s life, 2011 This animation movie is about the life of Buddha based on Pali Canon (Theravada Buddhism) and other commentaries. It was produced by members of the Buddhist community in cooperation with the Department of Religious Affairs and the National Office of Buddhism, Thailand. It is considered one of the most accurate story of the Buddha. It is almost 5 hours long and very detailed. The production took 8 years to complete (from 2003-2011).
* &quot;The Life of Buddha&quot;, or Prawat Phra Phuttajao, a 2007 Thai animated feature film about the life of Gautama Buddha, based on the Tipitaka.
* &quot;Tathagatha Buddha&quot;, a 2008 Indian film by Allani Sridhar. Based on Sadguru Sivananda Murthy&#x27;s book &quot;Gautama Buddha&quot;, it stars Sunil Sharma as the Buddha.
* &quot;Sri Siddhartha Gautama&quot;, a 2013 Sinhalese epic biographical film based on the life of Lord Buddha.
* &quot;A Journey of Samyak Buddha&quot;, a 2013 Indian film by Praveen Damle, based on B. R. Ambedkar&#x27;s 1957 Navayana book &quot;The Buddha and His Dhamma&quot; with Abhishek Urade in the title role.

==== Television ====
* &quot;Buddha&quot;, a 1996 Indian series which aired on Sony TV. It stars Arun Govil as the Buddha.
* &quot;The Buddha&quot; 2010 PBS documentary by filmmaker David Grubin and narrated by Richard Gere.
* &quot;Buddha&quot;, a 2013 Indian drama series on Zee TV starring Himanshu Soni in the title role.

==== Literature ====
* &quot;The Light of Asia&quot;, an 1879 epic poem by Edwin Arnold
* &quot;The Buddha and His Dhamma&quot;, a treatise on Buddha&#x27;s life and philosophy, by B. R. Ambedkar
* &quot;Before He Was Buddha: The Life of Siddhartha&quot;, by Hammalawa Saddhatissa
* &quot;Buddha&quot;, a manga series that ran from 1972 to 1983 by Osamu Tezuka
* &quot;Siddhartha&quot; novel by Hermann Hesse, written in German in 1922
* &quot;Lord of Light&quot;, a novel by Roger Zelazny depicts a man in a far future Earth Colony who takes on the name and teachings of the Buddha
* &quot;Creation&quot;, a 1981 novel by Gore Vidal, includes the Buddha as one of the religious figures that the main character encounters

==== Music ====
* &quot;The Light of Asia&quot;, an 1886 oratorio by Dudley Buck based on Arnold&#x27;s poem
* &quot;Karuna Nadee&quot;, a 2010 oratorio by Dinesh Subasinghe

== See also ==
* Buddhist pilgrimage sites
* Family of Gautama Buddha
* List of Indian philosophers
* List of places where Gautama Buddha stayed
* Miracles of Gautama Buddha

==Notes==
==References==

===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* , 1120 pp.
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 


* 
* 

* 
* .
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 


* 
* 
* 
* 
* in 
* in 
* 
* 
* 



== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

The Buddha
* 
* 

Early Buddhism
* 

Buddhism general
* 

== External links ==

* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="0" end="18" title="The Buddha" label="Siddhartha Gautama"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="49" end="59" title="The Buddha" label="the Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q211390" start="70" end="87" title="śramaṇa" label="wandering ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="123" end="133" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="180" end="188" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213" start="236" end="243" title="Lumbini" label="Lumbini"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="260" end="265" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062748" start="291" end="297" title="Shakya" label="Shakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q73413583" start="308" end="317" title="Great Renunciation" label="renounced"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428021" start="322" end="331" title="Householder (Buddhism)" label="home life"/>
<link wikidata="Q987168" start="388" end="398" title="mendicancy" label="mendicancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="400" end="410" title="asceticism" label="asceticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16256466" start="440" end="447" title="Nirvana (Buddhism)" label="nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q176767" start="451" end="460" title="Bodh Gaya" label="Bodh Gaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="476" end="481" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="526" end="545" title="Indo-Gangetic Plain" label="Indo-Gangetic Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="571" end="585" title="Sangha" label="monastic order"/>
<link wikidata="Q825673" start="623" end="633" title="Kushinagar" label="Kushinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q375237" start="652" end="663" title="parinirvana" label="parinirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q833475" start="780" end="790" title="Middle Way" label="Middle Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137019" start="852" end="859" title="Vimutti" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053923" start="865" end="874" title="Avidyā (Buddhism)" label="ignorance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727644" start="876" end="883" title="Upādāna" label="craving"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993736" start="885" end="907" title="Saṃsāra (Buddhism)" label="rebirth, and suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q169010" start="950" end="967" title="Four Noble Truths" label="Four Noble Truths"/>
<link wikidata="Q185514" start="976" end="996" title="Noble Eightfold Path" label="Noble Eightfold Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495987" start="1000" end="1020" title="Bhavana" label="training of the mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q550068" start="1035" end="1051" title="Buddhist ethics" label="ethical training"/>
<link wikidata="Q897336" start="1056" end="1078" title="Brahmavihara" label="kindness toward others"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207203" start="1084" end="1104" title="Buddhist meditation" label="meditative practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q185514" start="1113" end="1128" title="right effort" label="sense restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011276" start="1130" end="1141" title="Sati (Buddhism)" label="mindfulness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577829" start="1143" end="1149" title="Dhyana in Buddhism" label="dhyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q747858" start="1232" end="1245" title="Skandha" label="five skandhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q522046" start="1250" end="1271" title="dependent origination" label="dependent origination"/>
<link wikidata="Q622629" start="1479" end="1487" title="svabhava" label="svabhava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061285" start="1557" end="1566" title="Tathāgata" label="Tathāgata"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="1606" end="1612" title="Buddha (title)" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q848764" start="1768" end="1774" title="Vinaya" label="Vinaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q757370" start="1817" end="1829" title="Sutta Piṭaka" label="Sutta Piṭaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236316" start="1909" end="1926" title="Middle Indo-Aryan languages" label="Middle Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="1947" end="1961" title="oral tradition" label="oral tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q612405" start="2052" end="2062" title="Abhidharma" label="Abhidharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q668439" start="2156" end="2168" title="Jataka tales" label="Jataka tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191035" start="2213" end="2228" title="Mahayana sutras" label="Mahayana sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="2307" end="2316" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="2318" end="2326" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q172175" start="2331" end="2340" title="Vajrayana" label="Vajrayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q397641" start="3005" end="3009" title="Buddhi" label="budh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137019" start="3398" end="3403" title="Enlightenment in Buddhism" label="bodhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317397" start="3594" end="3599" title="satya" label="satya"/>
<link wikidata="Q242360" start="4131" end="4140" title="Kshatriya" label="Kshatriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q779933" start="4390" end="4406" title="Edicts of Ashoka" label="Edicts of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="4459" end="4465" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q85782651" start="4473" end="4499" title="Lumbini pillar inscription" label="Lumbini pillar inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="4634" end="4647" title="Brahmi script" label="Brahmi script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062748" start="4794" end="4800" title="Shakya" label="Shakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="4849" end="4853" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="4942" end="4952" title="Pāli Canon" label="Pāli Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q220797" start="5329" end="5349" title="impermanence" label="transitory phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="5528" end="5535" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q560179" start="5646" end="5654" title="Bhagavan" label="Bhagavan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5779" end="5802" title="Buddhahood#Samyaksambuddha" label="Perfectly self-awakened"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090056" start="5897" end="5903" title="Sugata" label="Sugata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308653" start="5977" end="5988" title="Buddhist cosmology" label="many worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089509" start="6125" end="6129" title="Deva (Buddhism)" label="gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q225932" start="6186" end="6193" title="Arahant" label="Arahant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790595" start="6429" end="6433" title="Jina (Jainism)" label="Jina"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="6532" end="6542" title="moksha" label="liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="6559" end="6566" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="6621" end="6631" title="Pali Canon" label="Pali Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="7421" end="7433" title="philology" label="philological"/>
<link wikidata="Q20172356" start="7471" end="7488" title="Oskar von Hinüber" label="Oskar von Hinüber"/>
<link wikidata="Q374326" start="7653" end="7674" title="Mahāparinibbāṇa Sutta" label="Mahāparinibbāṇa Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="8070" end="8081" title="hagiography" label="hagiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q779933" start="8634" end="8650" title="Edicts of Ashoka" label="Edicts of Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="8726" end="8732" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q85782651" start="8740" end="8766" title="Lumbini pillar inscription" label="Lumbini pillar inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q185083" start="8901" end="8914" title="Brahmi script" label="Brahmi script"/>
<link wikidata="Q55402482" start="9022" end="9044" title="Minor Rock Edict" label="Minor Rock Edict No. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="9083" end="9089" title="Dharma" label="Dhamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="9263" end="9273" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya era"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="9315" end="9325" title="Pāli Canon" label="Pāli Canon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9367" end="9378" title=":File:Bhagavato Sakamunino Bodho inscription in Bharhut.jpg" label="in a relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310870" start="9382" end="9389" title="Bharhut" label="Bharhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q321437" start="9444" end="9454" title="Bodhi tree" label="Bodhi tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695999" start="9660" end="9684" title="Gandhāran Buddhist texts" label="Gandhāran Buddhist texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q213651" start="9695" end="9703" title="Gandhara" label="Gandhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124623" start="9791" end="9799" title="Gāndhārī language" label="Gāndhārī"/>
<link wikidata="Q609445" start="9964" end="9966" title="Majjhima Nikāya" label="MN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224655" start="10011" end="10013" title="Dīgha Nikāya" label="DN"/>
<link wikidata="Q668439" start="10240" end="10252" title="Jataka tales" label="Jātaka tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="10291" end="10302" title="bodhisattva" label="bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q660582" start="10568" end="10581" title="Tushita" label="Tuṣita Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280431" start="10813" end="10825" title="Buddhacarita" label="Buddhacarita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381826" start="10839" end="10858" title="Lalitavistara Sūtra" label="Lalitavistara Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4285610" start="10872" end="10881" title="Mahāvastu" label="Mahāvastu"/>
<link wikidata="Q312552" start="11026" end="11035" title="Aśvaghoṣa" label="Aśvaghoṣa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="11129" end="11137" title="Mahayana" label="Mahāyāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q633994" start="11138" end="11150" title="Sarvastivada" label="Sarvāstivāda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150429" start="11227" end="11239" title="Mahāsāṃghika" label="Mahāsāṃghika"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670635" start="11240" end="11253" title="Lokottaravāda" label="Lokottaravāda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445824" start="11353" end="11366" title="Dharmaguptaka" label="Dharmaguptaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="11591" end="11600" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q335247" start="11663" end="11674" title="Buddhaghosa" label="Buddhaghoṣa"/>
<link wikidata="Q846025" start="11926" end="11938" title="Mahajanapada" label="Mahajanapada"/>
<link wikidata="Q317765" start="11964" end="11973" title="Bimbisara" label="Bimbisara"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="12015" end="12022" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q379242" start="12080" end="12091" title="Ajatashatru" label="Ajatashatru"/>
<link wikidata="Q9422" start="12172" end="12180" title="Mahavira" label="Mahavira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077817" start="12191" end="12202" title="tirthankara" label="tirthankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q831837" start="13187" end="13197" title="Kalachakra" label="Kalachakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="13452" end="13457" title="Asoka" label="Asoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q104518472" start="15154" end="15168" title="K. T. S. Sarao" label="K. T. S. Sarao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062748" start="15473" end="15479" title="Shakya" label="Shakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="15777" end="15786" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="15887" end="15892" title="Vedas" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q194497" start="15916" end="15925" title="Historical Vedic religion" label="Brahminic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428240" start="16031" end="16040" title="Āryāvarta" label="Aryavarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082423" start="16098" end="16113" title="Greater Magadha" label="Greater Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q211390" start="16725" end="16732" title="śramaṇa" label="śramaṇa"/>
<link wikidata="Q412873" start="16757" end="16764" title="Ājīvika" label="Ājīvika"/>
<link wikidata="Q477243" start="16766" end="16773" title="Charvaka" label="Cārvāka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="16775" end="16782" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906267" start="16788" end="16794" title="Ajñana" label="Ajñana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923579" start="16806" end="16822" title="Brahmajala Sutta" label="Brahmajala Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9422" start="17042" end="17050" title="Mahavira" label="Mahavira"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142462" start="17052" end="17066" title="Purana Kassapa" label="Pūraṇa Kassapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701335" start="17068" end="17083" title="Makkhali Gosala" label="Makkhali Gosāla"/>
<link wikidata="Q153187" start="17085" end="17102" title="Ajita Kesakambali" label="Ajita Kesakambalī"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135087" start="17104" end="17121" title="Pakudha Kaccayana" label="Pakudha Kaccāyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229185" start="17127" end="17148" title="Sanjaya Belatthaputta" label="Sañjaya Belaṭṭhaputta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483786" start="17165" end="17183" title="Samaññaphala Sutta" label="Samaññaphala Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q320142" start="17246" end="17255" title="Śāriputra" label="Śāriputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q379814" start="17260" end="17270" title="Maudgalyayana" label="Moggallāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500007" start="17565" end="17577" title="Alara Kalama" label="Alara Kalama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876891" start="17582" end="17598" title="Uddaka Rāmaputta" label="Uddaka Rāmaputta"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="18178" end="18197" title="Second Urbanisation" label="Second Urbanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="18263" end="18277" title="egalitarianism" label="egalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="18780" end="18785" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q389755" start="18803" end="18814" title="Pataliputra" label="Pataliputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428240" start="19075" end="19088" title="Aryavarta" label="Aryan society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700962" start="19680" end="19686" title="nikāya" label="nikāya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153367" start="19692" end="19698" title="Āgama (Buddhism)" label="āgamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424662" start="19741" end="19752" title="omniscience" label="omniscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901708" start="19872" end="19887" title="Bhikkhu Analayo" label="Bhikkhu Analayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191035" start="20024" end="20039" title="Mahayana sutras" label="Mahayana sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="20050" end="20054" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q28988" start="20173" end="20179" title="Ananda" label="Ananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520293" start="20451" end="20458" title="abhijñā" label="abhijñā"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500007" start="20626" end="20638" title="Alara Kalama" label="Alara Kalama"/>
<link wikidata="Q221284" start="21234" end="21244" title="conformity" label="conformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006151" start="21952" end="21967" title="Jain Agamas (Śvētāmbara)" label="Jain scriptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="22024" end="22038" title="History of India" label="Indian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q256548" start="22092" end="22107" title="Karen Armstrong" label="Karen Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q55314939" start="22294" end="22312" title="Michael Carrithers" label="Michael Carrithers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4098012" start="22541" end="22552" title="Buddhavaṃsa" label="Buddhavaṃsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="22646" end="22657" title="bodhisattva" label="bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q668439" start="22810" end="22817" title="Jataka tales" label="Jatakas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196442" start="23297" end="23308" title="Asaṃkhyeya" label="asamkheyyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="23451" end="23463" title="List of the named Buddhas" label="past Buddhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8194413" start="23516" end="23526" title="Bodhisattva vow" label="pranidhana"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089907" start="23661" end="23694" title="Sumedha" label="his meeting with Dipankara Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q828201" start="23957" end="23965" title="pāramitā" label="pāramitā"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213" start="24249" end="24256" title="Lumbini" label="Lumbini"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610827" start="24297" end="24308" title="Kapilavastu (ancient city)" label="Kapilavastu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389059" start="24384" end="24392" title="Piprahwa" label="Piprahwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417973" start="24434" end="24444" title="Tilaurakot" label="Tilaurakot"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="24581" end="24587" title="Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4285610" start="24843" end="24852" title="Mahāvastu" label="Mahavastu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381826" start="24873" end="24886" title="Lalitavistara Sūtra" label="Lalitavistara"/>
<link wikidata="Q877831" start="24906" end="24910" title="Maya (mother of the Buddha)" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428848" start="24967" end="24974" title="Devdaha" label="Devdaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427280" start="25003" end="25009" title="Koliya" label="Koliya"/>
<link wikidata="Q28438" start="25035" end="25053" title="Rupandehi District" label="Rupandehi District"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="25057" end="25062" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629117" start="25149" end="25163" title="white elephant (animal)" label="white elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q591259" start="25217" end="25223" title="lunar month" label="months"/>
<link wikidata="Q909828" start="25471" end="25479" title="Shorea robusta" label="sal tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q242360" start="25561" end="25570" title="Kshatriya" label="Kshatriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062748" start="25663" end="25669" title="Shakya" label="Shakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q226488" start="25757" end="25767" title="Śuddhodana" label="Śuddhodana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062748" start="25802" end="25813" title="Shakya" label="Shakya clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q756854" start="25905" end="25911" title="Kosala" label="Kosala"/>
<link wikidata="Q849242" start="26214" end="26232" title="hereditary monarchy" label="hereditary monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765113" start="26240" end="26251" title="Suryavansha" label="Suryavansha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11296108" start="26480" end="26480" title="gaṇasaṅgha" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1784985" start="26602" end="26606" title="Jain monasticism" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="26620" end="26627" title="Sangha (Buddhism)" label="sanghas"/>
<link wikidata="Q194497" start="26660" end="26676" title="Historical Vedic religion" label="Vedic Brahmanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="26763" end="26772" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q215700" start="26786" end="26791" title="Vesak" label="Vesak"/>
<link wikidata="Q48733901" start="26824" end="26829" title="Poson" label="Poson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348941" start="26831" end="26853" title="Buddha&amp;#x27;s Birthday" label="Buddha&amp;#x27;s Birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635662" start="26877" end="26884" title="Purnima" label="Purnima"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807039" start="27068" end="27073" title="Asita" label="Asita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218809" start="27136" end="27171" title="Physical characteristics of the Buddha" label="&amp;quot;32 marks of a great man&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059400" start="27239" end="27251" title="chakravartin" label="chakravartin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="27357" end="27364" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708070" start="27424" end="27432" title="Kaundinya" label="Kondañña"/>
<link wikidata="Q225932" start="27474" end="27479" title="arhat" label="arhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="27593" end="27599" title="Buddhahood" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q48727619" start="27842" end="27862" title="early Buddhist Texts" label="early Buddhist Texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378713" start="27896" end="27919" title="post-canonical Buddhist texts" label="post-canonical accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q466572" start="27940" end="27949" title="Yaśodharā" label="Yasodhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q218969" start="27968" end="27974" title="Rāhula" label="Rāhula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381826" start="28159" end="28172" title="Lalitavistara Sūtra" label="Lalitavistara"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876822" start="28821" end="28823" title="Madhyama Agama" label="MĀ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445824" start="29327" end="29340" title="Dharmaguptaka" label="Dharmaguptaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4285610" start="29356" end="29365" title="Mahāvastu" label="Mahāvastu"/>
<link wikidata="Q726297" start="29775" end="29784" title="dukkha" label="suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q668439" start="29873" end="29884" title="Nidanakatha" label="Nidanakatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270387" start="29970" end="29978" title="Channa (Buddhist)" label="Chandaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q211390" start="30140" end="30147" title="shramana" label="ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862374" start="30191" end="30202" title="four sights" label="four sights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451813" start="30354" end="30361" title="Vipassī Buddha" label="Vipassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137019" start="30681" end="30694" title="enlightenment in Buddhism" label="enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q726297" start="30702" end="30708" title="dukkha" label="dukkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138769" start="31032" end="31040" title="Kanthaka" label="Kanthaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q218969" start="31092" end="31098" title="Rahula" label="Rahula"/>
<link wikidata="Q466572" start="31103" end="31112" title="Yashodhara" label="Yaśodhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769915" start="31140" end="31147" title="Anoma River" label="Anomiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q504779" start="31254" end="31271" title="Kasaya (clothing)" label="monk&amp;#x27;s robes"/>
<link wikidata="Q289162" start="31352" end="31370" title="Brahma (Buddhism)" label="&amp;quot;Brahma&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q863683" start="31491" end="31497" title="Rajgir" label="Rajgir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31510" end="31514" title="alms#Buddhism" label="alms"/>
<link wikidata="Q317765" start="31536" end="31545" title="Bimbisara" label="Bimbisara"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="31549" end="31556" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="32031" end="32036" title="yogic" label="yogic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500007" start="32182" end="32194" title="Alara Kalama" label="Ārāḍa Kālāma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876891" start="32565" end="32581" title="Udaka Ramaputta" label="Udraka Rāmaputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q839496" start="33058" end="33072" title="Pranayama" label="breath control"/>
<link wikidata="Q19029" start="33478" end="33490" title="rice pudding" label="rice pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q11311667" start="33517" end="33523" title="Sujata (milkmaid)" label="Sujata"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577829" start="33760" end="33766" title="Dhyana in Buddhism" label="dhyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q183379" start="33937" end="33947" title="moksha" label="liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520293" start="34073" end="34080" title="tevijja" label="tevijja"/>
<link wikidata="Q169010" start="34130" end="34147" title="Four Noble Truths" label="Four Noble Truths"/>
<link wikidata="Q173324" start="34189" end="34196" title="samsara" label="samsara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380663" start="34258" end="34285" title="Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta" label="Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061285" start="34305" end="34314" title="Tathagata" label="Tathagata"/>
<link wikidata="Q833475" start="34389" end="34399" title="Middle Way" label="Middle Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064" start="34453" end="34468" title="hedonism" label="self-indulgence"/>
<link wikidata="Q185514" start="34500" end="34520" title="Noble Eightfold Path" label="Noble Eightfold Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071706" start="35481" end="35486" title="Sacred fig" label="pipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q321437" start="35511" end="35521" title="Bodhi tree" label="Bodhi tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q176767" start="35531" end="35540" title="Bodh Gaya" label="Bodh Gaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547540" start="35821" end="35837" title="Lilajan River" label="River Nairañjanā"/>
<link wikidata="Q522046" start="35847" end="35868" title="Pratītyasamutpāda" label="Dependent Origination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190665" start="35874" end="35898" title="Indriya" label="Five Spiritual Faculties"/>
<link wikidata="Q4285610" start="35977" end="35986" title="Mahāvastu" label="Mahavastu"/>
<link wikidata="Q668439" start="35988" end="35999" title="Nidanakatha" label="Nidanakatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381826" start="36020" end="36033" title="Lalitavistara Sūtra" label="Lalitavistara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352021" start="36061" end="36065" title="Mara (demon)" label="Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341130" start="36363" end="36376" title="Prithvi" label="earth goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q13016913" start="36411" end="36430" title="Maravijaya attitude" label="touching the ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="36681" end="36687" title="Dharma (Buddhism)" label="Dharma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36912" end="36928" title="Brahma (Buddhism)#Brahmā Sahampati" label="Brahmā Sahampati"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350552" start="37237" end="37253" title="Ekottara Agama" label="Ekottarika-āgama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500007" start="37465" end="37477" title="Alara Kalama" label="Alara Kalama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876891" start="37482" end="37497" title="Udaka Ramaputta" label="Udaka Ramaputta"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="37653" end="37661" title="Varanasi" label="Vārānasī"/>
<link wikidata="Q412873" start="37701" end="37708" title="Ājīvika" label="Ājīvika"/>
<link wikidata="Q324394" start="37921" end="37940" title="Sarnath" label="Deer Park (Sarnath)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350552" start="38258" end="38286" title="Ekottara Agama" label="&amp;quot;Ekottarika-āgama&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660502" start="38323" end="38333" title="Mahīśāsaka" label="Mahīśāsaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708070" start="38692" end="38700" title="Kaundinya" label="Koṇḍañña"/>
<link wikidata="Q225932" start="38730" end="38737" title="Arhat" label="arahant"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="38779" end="38786" title="bhikkhu" label="bhikkhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="38880" end="38880" title="Sangha (Buddhism)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q488506" start="39149" end="39169" title="Anatta" label="&amp;quot;not-self&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752383" start="39177" end="39196" title="Anattalakkhaṇa Sutta" label="Anātmalakṣaṇa Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000808" start="39440" end="39444" title="Yasa" label="Yasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q251329" start="39892" end="39896" title="Gaya, India" label="Gaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919944" start="39942" end="39962" title="Ādittapariyāya Sutta" label="Ādittapariyāya Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="40511" end="40525" title="Gangetic Plain" label="Gangetic Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="40542" end="40555" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q263512" start="40690" end="40700" title="Angulimala" label="Angulimala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194868" start="40800" end="40807" title="Kosambi" label="Kosambi"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="40815" end="40821" title="Yamuna" label="Yamuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q162442" start="40843" end="40852" title="Allahabad" label="Allahabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q760714" start="40886" end="40895" title="Bhagalpur" label="Bhagalpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584396" start="40952" end="40961" title="Gorakhpur" label="Gorakhpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q756854" start="41084" end="41090" title="Kosala" label="Kosala"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="41095" end="41102" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594448" start="41165" end="41173" title="Shravasti" label="Savatthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q863683" start="41178" end="41186" title="Rajgir" label="Rajagaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236316" start="41317" end="41334" title="Middle Indo-Aryan languages" label="Middle Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="41354" end="41358" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151493" start="41464" end="41469" title="Vassa" label="Vassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="41845" end="41853" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q863683" start="41978" end="41986" title="Rajgir" label="Rajagaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q234009" start="41999" end="42006" title="Magadha (Mahajanapada)" label="Magadha"/>
<link wikidata="Q317765" start="42026" end="42035" title="Bimbisara" label="Bimbisara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42226" end="42241" title="Śrāvaka#Foremost disciples" label="chief disciples"/>
<link wikidata="Q320142" start="42243" end="42252" title="Śāriputra" label="Sāriputta"/>
<link wikidata="Q379814" start="42257" end="42271" title="Maudgalyayana" label="Mahāmoggallāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229185" start="42319" end="42340" title="Sanjaya Belatthiputta" label="Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363264" start="42360" end="42366" title="Assaji" label="Assaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q218969" start="42413" end="42419" title="Rāhula" label="Rahula"/>
<link wikidata="Q28988" start="42588" end="42594" title="Ānanda" label="Ananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306373" start="42596" end="42605" title="Anuruddha" label="Anuruddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q984630" start="42607" end="42612" title="Upali" label="Upali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610453" start="42656" end="42661" title="Nanda (Buddhism)" label="Nanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q451043" start="42666" end="42675" title="Devadatta" label="Devadatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068696" start="42790" end="42804" title="sotapanna" label="stream-enterer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264464" start="42876" end="42889" title="Anathapindika" label="Anāthapiṇḍika"/>
<link wikidata="Q305242" start="42975" end="42992" title="Jetavana" label="Jeta&amp;#x27;s grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q854979" start="43203" end="43212" title="bhikkhunī" label="bhikkhunī"/>
<link wikidata="Q613944" start="43494" end="43515" title="Mahapajapati Gotami" label="Mahāprajāpatī Gautamī"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923429" start="43856" end="43891" title="Eight Garudhammas" label="eight conditions called gurudharmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001032" start="45442" end="45452" title="Pratimokṣa" label="Pratimoksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q379242" start="46021" end="46032" title="Ajatashatru" label="Ajatashatru"/>
<link wikidata="Q317765" start="46059" end="46068" title="Bimbisara" label="Bimbisara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46441" end="46472" title="Śramaṇa#Pre-Buddhist śrāmana schools in Buddhist texts" label="members of other śrāmana sects."/>
<link wikidata="Q451043" start="46971" end="46980" title="Devadatta" label="Devadatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401216" start="47715" end="47723" title="Sthavira nikāya" label="Sthavira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150429" start="47830" end="47842" title="Mahāsāṃghika" label="Mahāsaṅghika"/>
<link wikidata="Q374326" start="48399" end="48420" title="Mahaparinibbana Sutta" label="Mahaparinibbana Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q605199" start="48869" end="48883" title="Vajjika League" label="Vajjika League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194211" start="50162" end="50167" title="Cunda (Buddhism)" label="Cunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q20172356" start="50439" end="50456" title="Oskar von Hinüber" label="Oskar von Hinüber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642206" start="50487" end="50497" title="Superior mesenteric artery syndrome" label="mesenteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q207550" start="50498" end="50508" title="infarction" label="infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="50735" end="50744" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="50831" end="50839" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509923" start="50977" end="50999" title="Buddhist vegetarianism" label="Buddhist vegetarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q825673" start="51475" end="51485" title="Kushinagar" label="Kushinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196497" start="52009" end="52030" title="Saṅkhāra" label="&amp;quot;saṅkhāras&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19882047" start="52080" end="52088" title="appamāda" label="appamāda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577829" start="52545" end="52567" title="Dhyāna in Buddhism" label="immaterial attainments"/>
<link wikidata="Q335304" start="52961" end="52972" title="Mahākāśyapa" label="Mahākassapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="53121" end="53126" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427280" start="53215" end="53221" title="Koliya" label="Koliya"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="53278" end="53283" title="stupa" label="stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8589" start="53381" end="53387" title="King Ashoka" label="Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="53420" end="53433" title="Maurya Empire" label="Mauryan realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q752404" start="53618" end="53640" title="First Buddhist Council" label="First Buddhist Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="54117" end="54127" title="Pali Canon" label="Pali Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q633994" start="54179" end="54191" title="Sarvastivada" label="Sarvastivada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027531" start="54193" end="54209" title="Mulasarvastivada" label="Mulasarvastivada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660502" start="54211" end="54221" title="Mahisasaka" label="Mahisasaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445824" start="54223" end="54236" title="Dharmaguptaka" label="Dharmaguptaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153367" start="54254" end="54260" title="Āgama (Buddhism)" label="Agamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481293" start="54396" end="54416" title="Lambert Schmithausen" label="Lambert Schmithausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149600" start="54866" end="54882" title="Richard Gombrich" label="Richard Gombrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4125044" start="54920" end="54931" title="A.K. Warder" label="A.K. Warder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149600" start="55031" end="55047" title="Richard Gombrich" label="Richard Gombrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q55629611" start="55299" end="55311" title="Peter Harvey (academic)" label="Peter Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55438" end="55450" title="A. K. Warder" label="A. K. Warder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481293" start="56802" end="56822" title="Lambert Schmithausen" label="Lambert Schmithausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987761" start="57015" end="57034" title="Johannes Bronkhorst" label="Johannes Bronkhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q72390" start="57211" end="57223" title="Edward Conze" label="Edward Conze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914995" start="57469" end="57478" title="samyojana" label="samyojana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196497" start="57521" end="57530" title="Saṅkhāra" label="sankharas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19969527" start="57561" end="57568" title="Kleshas (Buddhism)" label="kleshas"/>
<link wikidata="Q683151" start="57612" end="57625" title="three poisons" label="three poisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374787" start="57635" end="57640" title="āsava" label="āsava"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993736" start="57688" end="57694" title="Samsara (Buddhism)" label="sasāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q341127" start="57732" end="57747" title="six sense bases" label="six sense bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q747858" start="57756" end="57771" title="Skandha" label="five aggregates"/>
<link wikidata="Q522046" start="57874" end="57895" title="Pratītyasamutpāda" label="dependent origination"/>
<link wikidata="Q833475" start="57964" end="57974" title="Middle Way" label="Middle Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q169010" start="58017" end="58034" title="Four Noble Truths" label="Four Noble Truths"/>
<link wikidata="Q185514" start="58043" end="58063" title="Noble Eightfold Path" label="Noble Eightfold Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150429" start="58177" end="58189" title="Mahāsāṃghika" label="Mahasamghika"/>
<link wikidata="Q47116555" start="58204" end="58232" title="Salistamba Sutra" label="&amp;quot;Śālistamba Sūtra&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901708" start="58276" end="58291" title="Bhikkhu Analayo" label="Bhikkhu Analayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q609445" start="58327" end="58342" title="Majjhima Nikāya" label="Majjhima Nikaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q633994" start="58353" end="58365" title="Sarvastivada" label="Sarvastivada"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876822" start="58372" end="58386" title="Madhyama Agama" label="Madhyama Agama"/>
<link wikidata="Q28229611" start="58444" end="58459" title="Richard Salomon (South Asian Studies)" label="Richard Salomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695999" start="58504" end="58525" title="Gandhāran Buddhist texts" label="Gandharan Manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914995" start="58785" end="58794" title="samyojana" label="samyojana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196497" start="58837" end="58846" title="Saṅkhāra" label="sankharas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19969527" start="58873" end="58880" title="Kleshas (Buddhism)" label="kleshas"/>
<link wikidata="Q683151" start="58924" end="58937" title="three poisons" label="three poisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374787" start="58943" end="58948" title="āsava" label="āsava"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993736" start="58996" end="59002" title="Samsara (Buddhism)" label="sasāra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480392" start="59039" end="59046" title="Rebirth (Buddhism)" label="rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q726297" start="59753" end="59759" title="dukkha" label="dukkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673416" start="60254" end="60259" title="Karma in Buddhism" label="karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q341127" start="61029" end="61036" title="six sense bases" label="āyatana"/>
<link wikidata="Q747858" start="61063" end="61076" title="Skandha" label="five skandhas"/>
<link wikidata="Q522046" start="62020" end="62041" title="Dependent Origination" label="dependent origination"/>
<link wikidata="Q488506" start="63657" end="63663" title="anatta" label="anatta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63961" end="64011" title="Buddhist philosophy#Anatta" label="Buddha&amp;#x27;s arguments against an unchanging self"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752383" start="64086" end="64106" title="Anattalakkhaṇa Sutta" label="Anattalakkhaṇa Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q628565" start="64265" end="64272" title="Vijñāna" label="viññana"/>
<link wikidata="Q628565" start="64499" end="64512" title="Vijñāna" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5065627" start="64529" end="64535" title="cetana" label="cetana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380288" start="64937" end="64950" title="Rupert Gethin" label="Rupert Gethin"/>
<link wikidata="Q282492" start="65127" end="65131" title="jiva" label="jiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052811" start="65195" end="65200" title="Ātman (Hinduism)" label="atman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052353" start="65230" end="65237" title="purusha" label="purusha"/>
<link wikidata="Q190995" start="65303" end="65310" title="essence" label="essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q391156" start="65435" end="65452" title="Anti-essentialism" label="anti-essentialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914995" start="65702" end="65711" title="samyojana" label="samyojana"/>
<link wikidata="Q19969527" start="65713" end="65720" title="Kleshas (Buddhism)" label="kleshas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374787" start="65725" end="65730" title="āsava" label="āsava"/>
<link wikidata="Q833475" start="65950" end="65960" title="Middle Way" label="Middle Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q169010" start="66161" end="66178" title="Four Noble Truths" label="Four Noble Truths"/>
<link wikidata="Q185514" start="66200" end="66220" title="Noble Eightfold Path" label="Noble Eightfold Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393073" start="66346" end="66356" title="Five hindrances" label="hindrances"/>
<link wikidata="Q891184" start="66428" end="66449" title="Bojjhangas" label="the awakening factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483786" start="66653" end="66671" title="Samaññaphala Sutta" label="Samaññaphala Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495987" start="66823" end="66830" title="Bhavana" label="Bhāvanā"/>
<link wikidata="Q550068" start="67021" end="67025" title="Buddhist ethics" label="sila"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011276" start="67112" end="67116" title="Sati (Buddhism)" label="sati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410081" start="67147" end="67157" title="sampajañña" label="sampajañña"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577829" start="67209" end="67215" title="Dhyana in Buddhism" label="dhyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165710" start="67306" end="67316" title="Upekkha" label="equanimity"/>
<link wikidata="Q341045" start="67468" end="67479" title="mindfulness" label="mindfulness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585596" start="67514" end="67526" title="satipatthana" label="satipatthana"/>
<link wikidata="Q19861368" start="67569" end="67587" title="Satipatthana Sutta" label="Satipatthana Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123673" start="67628" end="67639" title="Anapanasati" label="Anapanasati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581598" start="67670" end="67687" title="Anapanasati Sutta" label="Anapanasati Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500007" start="67823" end="67835" title="Alara Kalama" label="Āḷāra Kālāma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876891" start="67840" end="67856" title="Uddaka Ramaputta" label="Uddaka Rāmaputta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113985" start="67964" end="67974" title="Upanishads" label="Upanishads"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987761" start="67989" end="68008" title="Johannes Bronkhorst" label="Johannes Bronkhorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="68251" end="68256" title="Karma" label="Karma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480392" start="68261" end="68268" title="Rebirth (Buddhism)" label="Rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="68331" end="68335" title="Jainism" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q194497" start="68340" end="68351" title="Brahminism" label="Brahmanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q545112" start="68376" end="68400" title="Brihadaranyaka Upanishad" label="Brihadaranyaka Upanishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q173324" start="68424" end="68431" title="Saṃsāra" label="samsara"/>
<link wikidata="Q178498" start="68561" end="68567" title="Ahiṃsā" label="ahimsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327424" start="68674" end="68685" title="K.R. Norman" label="K.R. Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054156" start="68722" end="68746" title="three marks of existence" label="three marks of existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q897336" start="68833" end="68858" title="Brahmavihara" label="&amp;quot;Brahma-vihara&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="69224" end="69244" title="Bhikkhu" label="&amp;quot;bhikkhus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q848764" start="69590" end="69596" title="Vinaya" label="Vinaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475652" start="70233" end="70248" title="Samyutta Nikaya" label="Samyutta Nikaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q609445" start="70254" end="70269" title="Majjhima Nikaya" label="Majjhima Nikaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="70297" end="70307" title="Pali Canon" label="Pali Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588538" start="70332" end="70341" title="Agnihotra" label="Agnihotra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587216" start="70376" end="70389" title="Sāvitrī meter" label="Sāvitrī meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="70514" end="70521" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="70542" end="70547" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q47148" start="70577" end="70582" title="Śruti" label="sruti"/>
<link wikidata="Q948253" start="70817" end="70822" title="Udāna" label="Udāna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060201" start="70851" end="70865" title="Ritual purification" label="ritual bathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142916" start="70967" end="70983" title="animal sacrifice" label="animal sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q131510" start="71129" end="71135" title="mantra" label="mantra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11389" start="71529" end="71535" title="Brahma" label="Brahma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692184" start="71771" end="71784" title="Aggañña Sutta" label="Aggañña Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303998" start="71815" end="71821" title="Varna (Hinduism)" label="varnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521353" start="71973" end="71986" title="Kancha Ilaiah" label="Kancha Ilaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918846" start="72015" end="72030" title="contract theory" label="contract theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="72112" end="72118" title="Dharma" label="Dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692184" start="73064" end="73077" title="Aggañña Sutta" label="Aggañña Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059400" start="73537" end="73559" title="Chakravarti (Sanskrit term)" label="&amp;quot;Cakkavatti&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="75040" end="75050" title="Republicanism" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q854944" start="75154" end="75167" title="Bhikkhu Bodhi" label="Bhikkhu Bodhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4256046" start="75471" end="75487" title="Sigālovāda Sutta" label="Sigālovāda Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275681" start="75832" end="75847" title="Dīghajāṇu Sutta" label="Dīghajāṇu Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q544764" start="75855" end="75857" title="Aṅguttara Nikāya" label="AN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275681" start="76402" end="76417" title="Dīghajāṇu Sutta" label="Dīghajāṇu Sutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068303" start="76483" end="76488" title="Faith in Buddhism" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074929" start="76565" end="76578" title="five precepts" label="five precepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851225" start="76975" end="76985" title="kammapatha" label="kammapatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406348" start="77108" end="77133" title="Merit (Buddhism)" label="merit (&amp;quot;puñña&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78239" end="78264" title="Physical characteristics of the Buddha#The 32 Signs of a Great Man" label="32 Signs of the Great Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224655" start="78654" end="78666" title="Digha Nikaya" label="Digha Nikaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192933" start="78780" end="78795" title="Hindu synthesis" label="Hindu synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83090" start="78983" end="78989" title="avatar" label="avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="78993" end="78999" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79350" end="79382" title="Gautama_Buddha_in_Hinduism#Rejection" label="rejected by some traditionalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4317194" start="79389" end="79402" title="Neo-Vedanta" label="modern Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="79506" end="79511" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q746990" start="79532" end="79539" title="Brahman" label="Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052811" start="79540" end="79545" title="Ātman (Hinduism)" label="Atman"/>
<link wikidata="Q618680" start="79605" end="79612" title="Nastika" label="nāstika"/>
<link wikidata="Q183324" start="79820" end="79831" title="Transoxiana" label="Transoxiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352322" start="79836" end="79846" title="Greater Khorasan" label="K̲h̲urāsān"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="79950" end="79964" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="79970" end="79994" title="Sassanid Empire" label="Sassanide state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243071" start="80134" end="80148" title="Islam in Iran" label="Islamic Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q768212" start="80284" end="80296" title="Turco-Mongol tradition" label="Turco-Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q293497" start="80514" end="80522" title="al-Jahiz" label="al-Jahiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q168705" start="80524" end="80539" title="al-Mas&amp;#x27;udi" label="al-Mas&amp;#x27;udi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="80541" end="80550" title="al-Biruni" label="al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050887" start="80556" end="80570" title="al-Shahrastani" label="al-Shahrastani"/>
<link wikidata="Q317787" start="81023" end="81031" title="Ibn Hazm" label="Ibn Hazm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384613" start="81225" end="81237" title="Ibn al-Nadim" label="ibn al-Nadim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266031" start="81318" end="81323" title="Angels in Islam" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q936678" start="81328" end="81346" title="Ifrit" label="&amp;quot;ʿifrīt&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="81361" end="81368" title="Prophets and messengers in Islam" label="Prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q311577" start="81422" end="81430" title="Khidr" label="al-Khizr"/>
<link wikidata="Q328782" start="81433" end="81455" title="Rashid al-Din Hamadani" label="Rashid al-Din Hamadani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262004" start="81481" end="81498" title="Jāmiʿ al-Tawārīkh" label="Jāmiʿ al-Tawārīkh"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="81571" end="81580" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932888" start="81908" end="81916" title="Muhammad in Islam" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381826" start="82008" end="82027" title="Lalitavistara Sūtra" label="Lalitavistara Sūtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="82096" end="82102" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11389" start="82104" end="82110" title="Brahma" label="Brahma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="82112" end="82117" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q128335" start="82123" end="82128" title="Indra" label="Indra"/>
<link wikidata="Q273101" start="82231" end="82236" title="Iblis" label="Iblis"/>
<link wikidata="Q280817" start="82519" end="82524" title="Kalām" label="Kalām"/>
<link wikidata="Q981811" start="82534" end="82553" title="Muhammad Hamidullah" label="Muhammad Hamidullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="82621" end="82626" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q234262" start="82627" end="82632" title="Surah" label="Surah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990155" start="82709" end="82714" title="Moses in Islam" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q377485" start="82742" end="82753" title="Mount Sinai" label="Mount Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q332574" start="82947" end="82958" title="Dhu al-Kifl" label="Dhu al-Kifl"/>
<link wikidata="Q726297" start="83121" end="83127" title="dukkha" label="dukkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q169010" start="83150" end="83167" title="Four Noble Truths" label="Four Noble Truths"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="83375" end="83381" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395423" start="83387" end="83402" title="Qareen" label="devilish nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q790563" start="83497" end="83505" title="Barlaam and Josaphat" label="Josaphat"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="83569" end="83580" title="Bodhisattva" label="Bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="83992" end="84004" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699644" start="84039" end="84060" title="Manifestation of God (Baháʼí Faith)" label="Manifestations of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="84082" end="84088" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9333" start="84143" end="84148" title="Laozi" label="Laozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="84166" end="84173" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="84182" end="84193" title="Manichaeism" label="Manichaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q203922" start="84271" end="84275" title="Mani (prophet)" label="Mani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="84281" end="84288" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007242" start="84346" end="84359" title="Chaubis Avtar" label="Chaubis Avtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q312967" start="84436" end="84453" title="Guru Gobind Singh" label="Guru Gobind Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310870" start="84539" end="84546" title="Bharhut" label="Bharhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q181123" start="84551" end="84557" title="Sanchi" label="Sanchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q665056" start="84730" end="84742" title="Dharmachakra" label="Dharma wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q321437" start="84748" end="84758" title="Bodhi Tree" label="Bodhi tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q114003234" start="84841" end="84871" title="Life of Buddha in art" label="narrative scenes from his life"/>
<link wikidata="Q668439" start="85014" end="85026" title="Jataka tales" label="Jataka tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q474197" start="85196" end="85206" title="Lotus position" label="Lotus Pose"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612288" start="85391" end="85409" title="Gandharan Buddhism" label="Gandharan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000891" start="85414" end="85436" title="Buddhism in Central Asia" label="Central Asian Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q221375" start="85457" end="85472" title="Hellenistic art" label="Hellenistic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008014" start="85491" end="85509" title="Greco-Buddhist art" label="Greco-Buddhist art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905453" start="85550" end="85569" title="East Asian Buddhism" label="East Asian Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q512431" start="85812" end="85835" title="Dadasaheb Phalke" label="Dhundiraj Govind Phalke"/>
<link wikidata="Q46996216" start="85880" end="85893" title="Bhaurao Datar" label="Bhaurao Datar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214408" start="85921" end="85932" title="Prem Sanyas" label="Prem Sanyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q91245" start="86004" end="86015" title="Franz Osten" label="Franz Osten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619016" start="86020" end="86031" title="Himansu Rai" label="Himansu Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587937" start="86176" end="86193" title="Gotoma the Buddha" label="Gotoma the Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q55405" start="86275" end="86284" title="Bimal Roy" label="Bimal Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q505260" start="86294" end="86304" title="Siddhartha (1972 film)" label="Siddhartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162592" start="86333" end="86345" title="Conrad Rooks" label="Conrad Rooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q379171" start="86390" end="86403" title="Shashi Kapoor" label="Shashi Kapoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141873" start="86457" end="86470" title="Little Buddha" label="Little Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q53009" start="86493" end="86512" title="Bernardo Bertolucci" label="Bernardo Bertolucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q43416" start="86529" end="86541" title="Keanu Reeves" label="Keanu Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250732" start="86572" end="86592" title="The Legend of Buddha" label="The Legend of Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="86648" end="86666" title="Buddha&amp;#x27;s life" label="Buddha&amp;#x27;s life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579899" start="87117" end="87135" title="The Life of Buddha" label="The Life of Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321432" start="87250" end="87258" title="Tipitaka" label="Tipitaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527896" start="87268" end="87285" title="Gautama Buddha (film)" label="Tathagatha Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q19898464" start="87315" end="87329" title="Allani Sridhar" label="Allani Sridhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25209680" start="87450" end="87472" title="Sri Siddhartha Gautama (film)" label="Sri Siddhartha Gautama"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059369" start="87562" end="87588" title="A Journey of Samyak Buddha" label="A Journey of Samyak Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q231690" start="87642" end="87656" title="B. R. Ambedkar" label="B. R. Ambedkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982199" start="87669" end="87677" title="Navayana" label="Navayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720491" start="87689" end="87714" title="The Buddha and His Dhamma" label="The Buddha and His Dhamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631750" start="87840" end="87847" title="Sony Entertainment Television" label="Sony TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802093" start="87858" end="87868" title="Arun Govil" label="Arun Govil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234447" start="87943" end="87955" title="David Grubin" label="David Grubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48410" start="87972" end="87984" title="Richard Gere" label="Richard Gere"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954312" start="87994" end="88000" title="Buddha (TV series)" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044826" start="88038" end="88044" title="Zee TV" label="Zee TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q107649730" start="88054" end="88067" title="Himanshu Soni" label="Himanshu Soni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4410249" start="88117" end="88134" title="The Light of Asia" label="The Light of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115371" start="88163" end="88175" title="Edwin Arnold" label="Edwin Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720491" start="88184" end="88209" title="The Buddha and His Dhamma" label="The Buddha and His Dhamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q231690" start="88269" end="88283" title="B. R. Ambedkar" label="B. R. Ambedkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645542" start="88347" end="88368" title="Hammalawa Saddhatissa" label="Hammalawa Saddhatissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q945140" start="88377" end="88383" title="Buddha (manga)" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="88393" end="88398" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q193300" start="88436" end="88448" title="Osamu Tezuka" label="Osamu Tezuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q457289" start="88457" end="88467" title="Siddhartha (novel)" label="Siddhartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q25973" start="88483" end="88496" title="Hermann Hesse" label="Hermann Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q734976" start="88532" end="88545" title="Lord of Light" label="Lord of Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q295406" start="88564" end="88577" title="Roger Zelazny" label="Roger Zelazny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696825" start="88679" end="88687" title="Creation (novel)" label="Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q167821" start="88711" end="88721" title="Gore Vidal" label="Gore Vidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086535" start="88835" end="88852" title="The Light of Asia (oratorio)" label="The Light of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311819" start="88880" end="88891" title="Dudley Buck" label="Dudley Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278103" start="88928" end="88940" title="Karuna Nadee" label="Karuna Nadee"/>
<link wikidata="Q85477" start="88955" end="88963" title="oratorio" label="oratorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278103" start="88967" end="88984" title="Dinesh Subasinghe" label="Dinesh Subasinghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q851387" start="89003" end="89028" title="Buddhist pilgrimage sites" label="Buddhist pilgrimage sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433361" start="89031" end="89055" title="Family of Gautama Buddha" label="Family of Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q106839708" start="89058" end="89085" title="List of Indian philosophers" label="List of Indian philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633989" start="89088" end="89130" title="List of places where Gautama Buddha stayed" label="List of places where Gautama Buddha stayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4203245" start="89133" end="89159" title="Miracles of Gautama Buddha" label="Miracles of Gautama Buddha"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3397" wikidata="Q12280" url="?curid=3397" title="Bridge">
<text>A bridge is a structure built to span a physical obstacle (such as a body of water, valley, road, or railway) without blocking the path underneath. It is constructed for the purpose of providing passage over the obstacle, which is usually something that is otherwise difficult or impossible to cross. There are many different designs of bridges, each serving a particular purpose and applicable to different situations. Designs of bridges vary depending on factors such as the function of the bridge, the nature of the terrain where the bridge is constructed and anchored, the material used to make it, and the funds available to build it.

The earliest bridges were likely made with fallen trees and stepping stones. The Neolithic people built boardwalk bridges across marshland. The Arkadiko Bridge, dating from the 13th century BC, in the Peloponnese is one of the oldest arch bridges in existence and use.

==Etymology==
The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; traces the origin of the word &quot;bridge&quot; to an Old English word &quot;brycg&quot;, of the same meaning.

The Oxford English Dictionary also notes that there is some suggestion that the word can be traced directly back to Proto-Indo-European &quot;*bʰrēw-.&quot; However, they also note that &quot;this poses semantic problems.&quot;

The origin of the word for the card game of the same name is unknown, but may be from folk etymology.

==History==


The simplest and earliest types of bridges were stepping stones.

Neolithic people also built a form of boardwalk across marshes; examples of such bridges include the Sweet Track and the Post Track in England, approximately 6000 years old. Ancient people would also have used log bridges consisting of logs that fell naturally or were intentionally felled or placed across streams. Some of the first human-made bridges with significant span were probably intentionally felled trees. Among the oldest timber bridges is the Holzbrücke Rapperswil-Hurden bridge that crossed upper Lake Zürich in Switzerland; prehistoric timber pilings discovered to the west of the Seedamm causeway date back to 1523 BC. The first wooden footbridge there led across Lake Zürich; it was reconstructed several times through the late 2nd century AD, when the Roman Empire built a wooden bridge to carry transport across the lake. Between 1358 and 1360, Rudolf IV, Duke of Austria, built a &#x27;new&#x27; wooden bridge across the lake that was used until 1878; it was approximately long and wide. On 6 April 2001, a reconstruction of the original wooden footbridge was opened; it is also the longest wooden bridge in Switzerland.

The Arkadiko Bridge is one of four Mycenaean corbel arch bridges part of a former network of roads, designed to accommodate chariots, between the fort of Tiryns and town of Epidauros in the Peloponnese, in southern Greece. Dating to the Greek Bronze Age (13th century BC), it is one of the oldest arch bridges still in existence and use. Several intact, arched stone bridges from the Hellenistic era can be found in the Peloponnese.

The greatest bridge builders of antiquity were the ancient Romans. The Romans built arch bridges and aqueducts that could stand in conditions that would damage or destroy earlier designs, some of which still stand today. An example is the Alcántara Bridge, built over the river Tagus, in Spain. The Romans also used cement, which reduced the variation of strength found in natural stone. One type of cement, called pozzolana, consisted of water, lime, sand, and volcanic rock. Brick and mortar bridges were built after the Roman era, as the technology for cement was lost (then later rediscovered).

In India, the &quot;Arthashastra&quot; treatise by Kautilya mentions the construction of dams and bridges. A Mauryan bridge near Girnar was surveyed by James Princep. The bridge was swept away during a flood, and later repaired by Puspagupta, the chief architect of emperor Chandragupta I. The use of stronger bridges using plaited bamboo and iron chain was visible in India by about the 4th century. A number of bridges, both for military and commercial purposes, were constructed by the Mughal administration in India.

Although large bridges of wooden construction existed in China at the time of the Warring States period, the oldest surviving stone bridge in China is the Zhaozhou Bridge, built from 595 to 605 AD during the Sui dynasty. This bridge is also historically significant as it is the world&#x27;s oldest open-spandrel stone segmental arch bridge. European segmental arch bridges date back to at least the Alconétar Bridge (approximately 2nd century AD), while the enormous Roman era Trajan&#x27;s Bridge (105 AD) featured open-spandrel segmental arches in wooden construction.

Rope bridges, a simple type of suspension bridge, were used by the Inca civilization in the Andes mountains of South America, just prior to European colonization in the 16th century.

The Ashanti built bridges over streams and rivers. They were constructed by pounding four large forked tree trunks into the stream bed, placing beams along these forked pillars, then positioning cross-beams that were finally covered with four to six inches of dirt.

During the 18th century, there were many innovations in the design of timber bridges by Hans Ulrich Grubenmann, Johannes Grubenmann, as well as others. The first book on bridge engineering was written by Hubert Gautier in 1716.

A major breakthrough in bridge technology came with the erection of the Iron Bridge in Shropshire, England in 1779. It used cast iron for the first time as arches to cross the river Severn. With the Industrial Revolution in the 19th century, truss systems of wrought iron were developed for larger bridges, but iron does not have the tensile strength to support large loads. With the advent of steel, which has a high tensile strength, much larger bridges were built, many using the ideas of Gustave Eiffel.

In Canada and the United States, numerous timber covered bridges were built in the late 1700s to the late 1800s, reminiscent of earlier designs in Germany and Switzerland. Some covered bridges were also built in Asia. In later years, some were partly made of stone or metal but the trusses were usually still made of wood; in the United States, there were three styles of trusses, the Queen Post, the Burr Arch and the Town Lattice. Hundreds of these structures still stand in North America. They were brought to the attention of the general public in the 1990s by the novel, movie and play &quot;The Bridges of Madison County&quot;.

In 1927, welding pioneer Stefan Bryła designed the first welded road bridge in the world, the Maurzyce Bridge which was later built across the river Słudwia at Maurzyce near Łowicz, Poland in 1929. In 1995, the American Welding Society presented the Historic Welded Structure Award for the bridge to Poland.

==Types of bridges==
Bridges can be categorized in several different ways. Common categories include the type of structural elements used, by what they carry, whether they are fixed or movable, and by the materials used.

===Structure types===
Bridges may be classified by how the actions of tension, compression, bending, torsion and shear are distributed through their structure. Most bridges will employ all of these to some degree, but only a few will predominate. The separation of forces and moments may be quite clear. In a suspension or cable-stayed bridge, the elements in tension are distinct in shape and placement. In other cases the forces may be distributed among a large number of members, as in a truss.

Some Engineers sub-divide &#x27;beam&#x27; bridges into slab, beam-and-slab and box girder on the basis of their cross-section. A slab can be solid or voided (though this is no longer favored for inspectability reasons) while beam-and-slab consists of concrete or steel girders connected by a concrete slab. A box-girder cross-section consists of a single-cell or multi-cellular box. In recent years, integral bridge construction has also become popular.

===Fixed or movable bridges===
Most bridges are fixed bridges, meaning they have no moving parts and stay in one place until they fail or are demolished. Temporary bridges, such as Bailey bridges, are designed to be assembled, taken apart, transported to a different site, and re-used. They are important in military engineering and are also used to carry traffic while an old bridge is being rebuilt. Movable bridges are designed to move out of the way of boats or other kinds of traffic, which would otherwise be too tall to fit. These are generally electrically powered.

The Tank bridge transporter (TBT) has the same cross-country performance as a tank even when fully loaded. It can deploy, drop off and load bridges independently, but it cannot recover them.

===Double-decked bridges===

Double-decked (or double-decker) bridges have two levels, such as the George Washington Bridge, connecting New York City to Bergen County, New Jersey, US, as the world&#x27;s busiest bridge, carrying 102 million vehicles annually; truss work between the roadway levels provided stiffness to the roadways and reduced movement of the upper level when the lower level was installed three decades after the upper level. The Tsing Ma Bridge and Kap Shui Mun Bridge in Hong Kong have six lanes on their upper decks, and on their lower decks there are two lanes and a pair of tracks for MTR metro trains. Some double-decked bridges only use one level for street traffic; the Washington Avenue Bridge in Minneapolis reserves its lower level for automobile and light rail traffic and its upper level for pedestrian and bicycle traffic (predominantly students at the University of Minnesota). Likewise, in Toronto, the Prince Edward Viaduct has five lanes of motor traffic, bicycle lanes, and sidewalks on its upper deck; and a pair of tracks for the Bloor–Danforth subway line on its lower deck. The western span of the San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge also has two levels.

Robert Stephenson&#x27;s High Level Bridge across the River Tyne in Newcastle upon Tyne, completed in 1849, is an early example of a double-decked bridge. The upper level carries a railway, and the lower level is used for road traffic. Other examples include Britannia Bridge over the Menai Strait and Craigavon Bridge in Derry, Northern Ireland. The Oresund Bridge between Copenhagen and Malmö consists of a four-lane highway on the upper level and a pair of railway tracks at the lower level. Tower Bridge in London is different example of a double-decked bridge, with the central section consisting of a low-level bascule span and a high-level footbridge.

===Viaducts===

A viaduct is made up of multiple bridges connected into one longer structure. The longest and some of the highest bridges are viaducts, such as the Lake Pontchartrain Causeway and Millau Viaduct.

===Multi-way bridge===
A multi-way bridge has three or more separate spans which meet near the center of the bridge. Multi-way bridges with only three spans appear as a &quot;T&quot; or &quot;Y&quot; when viewed from above. Multi-way bridges are extremely rare. The Tridge, Margaret Bridge, and Zanesville Y-Bridge are examples.

===Bridge types by use===
A bridge can be categorized by what it is designed to carry, such as trains, pedestrian or road traffic (road bridge), a pipeline (Pipe bridge) or waterway for water transport or barge traffic. An aqueduct is a bridge that carries water, resembling a viaduct, which is a bridge that connects points of equal height. A road-rail bridge carries both road and rail traffic. Overway is a term for a bridge that separates incompatible intersecting traffic, especially road and rail.

Some bridges accommodate other purposes, such as the tower of Nový Most Bridge in Bratislava, which features a restaurant, or a bridge-restaurant which is a bridge built to serve as a restaurant. Other suspension bridge towers carry transmission antennas.

Conservationists use wildlife overpasses to reduce habitat fragmentation and animal-vehicle collisions. The first animal bridges sprung up in France in the 1950s, and these types of bridges are now used worldwide to protect both large and small wildlife.

Bridges are subject to unplanned uses as well. The areas underneath some bridges have become makeshift shelters and homes to homeless people, and the undertimbers of bridges all around the world are spots of prevalent graffiti. Some bridges attract people attempting suicide, and become known as suicide bridges.

===Bridge types by material===

The materials used to build the structure are also used to categorize bridges. Until the end of the 18th century, bridges were made out of timber, stone and masonry. Modern bridges are currently built in concrete, steel, fiber reinforced polymers (FRP), stainless steel or combinations of those materials. Living bridges have been constructed of live plants such as &quot;Ficus elastica&quot; tree roots in India and wisteria vines in Japan.

== Analysis and design ==

Unlike buildings whose design is led by architects, bridges are usually designed by engineers. This follows from the importance of the engineering requirements; namely spanning the obstacle and having the durability to survive, with minimal maintenance, in an aggressive outdoor environment. Bridges are first analysed; the bending moment and shear force distributions are calculated due to the applied loads. For this, the finite element method is the most popular. The analysis can be one-, two-, or three-dimensional. For the majority of bridges, a two-dimensional plate model (often with stiffening beams) is sufficient or an upstand finite element model. On completion of the analysis, the bridge is designed to resist the applied bending moments and shear forces, section sizes are selected with sufficient capacity to resist the stresses. Many bridges are made of prestressed concrete which has good durability properties, either by pre-tensioning of beams prior to installation or post-tensioning on site.

In most countries, bridges, like other structures, are designed according to Load and Resistance Factor Design (LRFD) principles. In simple terms, this means that the load is factored up by a factor greater than unity, while the resistance or capacity of the structure is factored down, by a factor less than unity. The effect of the factored load (stress, bending moment) should be less than the factored resistance to that effect. Both of these factors allow for uncertainty and are greater when the uncertainty is greater.

==Aesthetics==

Most bridges are utilitarian in appearance, but in some cases, the appearance of the bridge can have great importance. Often, this is the case with a large bridge that serves as an entrance to a city, or crosses over a main harbor entrance. These are sometimes known as signature bridges. Designers of bridges in parks and along parkways often place more importance on aesthetics, as well. Examples include the stone-faced bridges along the Taconic State Parkway in New York.

Bridges are typically more aesthetically pleasing if they are simple in shape, the deck is thinner in proportion to its span, the lines of the structure are continuous, and the shapes of the structural elements reflect the forces acting on them. To create a beautiful image, some bridges are built much taller than necessary. This type, often found in east-Asian style gardens, is called a Moon bridge, evoking a rising full moon. Other garden bridges may cross only a dry bed of stream-washed pebbles, intended only to convey an impression of a stream. Often in palaces, a bridge will be built over an artificial waterway as symbolic of a passage to an important place or state of mind. A set of five bridges cross a sinuous waterway in an important courtyard of the Forbidden City in Beijing, China. The central bridge was reserved exclusively for the use of the Emperor and Empress, with their attendants.

==Bridge maintenance==

The estimated life of bridges varies between 25 and 80 years depending on location and material.

Bridges may age hundred years with proper maintenance and rehabilitation. Bridge maintenance consisting of a combination of structural health monitoring and testing. This is regulated in country-specific engineer standards and includes an ongoing monitoring every three to six months, a simple test or inspection every two to three years and a major inspection every six to ten years. In Europe, the cost of maintenance is considerable and is higher in some countries than spending on new bridges. The lifetime of welded steel bridges can be significantly extended by aftertreatment of the weld transitions. This results in a potential high benefit, using existing bridges far beyond the planned lifetime.

== Bridge traffic loading ==
While the response of a bridge to the applied loading is well understood, the applied traffic loading itself is still the subject of research. This is a statistical problem as loading is highly variable, particularly for road bridges. Load Effects in bridges (stresses, bending moments) are designed for using the principles of Load and Resistance Factor Design. Before factoring to allow for uncertainty, the load effect is generally considered to be the maximum characteristic value in a specified return period. Notably, in Europe, it is the maximum value expected in 1000 years.

Bridge standards generally include a load model, deemed to represent the characteristic maximum load to be expected in the return period. In the past, these load models were agreed by standard drafting committees of experts but today, this situation is changing. It is now possible to measure the components of bridge traffic load, to weigh trucks, using weigh-in-motion (WIM) technologies. With extensive WIM databases, it is possible to calculate the maximum expected load effect in the specified return period. This is an active area of research, addressing issues of opposing direction lanes, side-by-side (same direction) lanes, traffic growth, permit/non-permit vehicles and long-span bridges (see below). Rather than repeat this complex process every time a bridge is to be designed, standards authorities specify simplified notional load models, notably HL-93, intended to give the same load effects as the characteristic maximum values. The Eurocode is an example of a standard for bridge traffic loading that was developed in this way.

=== Traffic loading on long span bridges ===

Most bridge standards are only applicable for short and medium spans - for example, the Eurocode is only applicable for loaded lengths up to 200 m. Longer spans are dealt with on a case-by-case basis. It is generally accepted that the intensity of load reduces as span increases because the probability of many trucks being closely spaced and extremely heavy reduces as the number of trucks involved increases. It is also generally assumed that short spans are governed by a small number of trucks traveling at high speed, with an allowance for dynamics. Longer spans on the other hand, are governed by congested traffic and no allowance for dynamics is needed.

Calculating the loading due to congested traffic remains a challenge as there is a paucity of data on inter-vehicle gaps, both within-lane and inter-lane, in congested conditions. Weigh-in-Motion (WIM) systems provide data on inter-vehicle gaps but only operate well in free flowing traffic conditions. Some authors have used cameras to measure gaps and vehicle lengths in jammed situations and have inferred weights from lengths using WIM data. Others have used microsimulation to generate typical clusters of vehicles on the bridge.

== Bridge vibration ==
Bridges vibrate under load and this contributes, to a greater or lesser extent, to the stresses. Vibration and dynamics are generally more significant for slender structures such as pedestrian bridges and long-span road or rail bridges. One of the most famous examples is the Tacoma Narrows Bridge that collapsed shortly after being constructed due to excessive vibration. More recently, the Millennium Bridge in London vibrated excessively under pedestrian loading and was closed and retrofitted with a system of dampers. For smaller bridges, dynamics is not catastrophic but can contribute an added amplification to the stresses due to static effects. For example, the Eurocode for bridge loading specifies amplifications of between 10% and 70%, depending on the span, the number of traffic lanes and the type of stress (bending moment or shear force).

=== Vehicle-bridge dynamic interaction ===
There have been many studies of the dynamic interaction between vehicles and bridges during vehicle crossing events. Fryba did pioneering work on the interaction of a moving load and an Euler-Bernoulli beam. With increased computing power, vehicle-bridge interaction (VBI) models have become ever more sophisticated. The concern is that one of the many natural frequencies associated with the vehicle will resonate with the bridge&#x27;s first natural frequency. The vehicle-related frequencies include body bounce and axle hop but there are also pseudo-frequencies associated with the vehicle&#x27;s speed of crossing and there are many frequencies associated with the surface profile. Given the wide variety of heavy vehicles on road bridges, a statistical approach has been suggested, with VBI analyses carried out for many statically extreme loading events.

==Bridge failures==

The failure of bridges is of special concern for structural engineers in trying to learn lessons vital to bridge design, construction and maintenance.

The failure of bridges first assumed national interest in Britain during the Victorian era when many new designs were being built, often using new materials, with some of them failing catastrophically.

In the United States, the National Bridge Inventory tracks the structural evaluations of all bridges, including designations such as &quot;structurally deficient&quot; and &quot;functionally obsolete&quot;.

==Bridge health monitoring==
There are several methods used to monitor the condition of large structures, like bridges. Many long-span bridges are now routinely monitored with a range of sensors, including strain transducers, accelerometers, tiltmeters, and GPS. Accelerometers have the advantage that they are inertial, i.e., they do not require a reference point to measure from. This is often a problem for distance or deflection measurement, especially if the bridge is over water. Crowdsourcing bridge conditions by accessing data passively captured by cell phones, which routinely include accelerometers and GPS sensors, has been suggested as an alternative to including sensors during bridge construction and an augment for professional examinations.

An option for structural-integrity monitoring is &quot;non-contact monitoring&quot;, which uses the Doppler effect (Doppler shift). A laser beam from a Laser Doppler Vibrometer is directed at the point of interest, and the vibration amplitude and frequency are extracted from the Doppler shift of the laser beam frequency due to the motion of the surface. The advantage of this method is that the setup time for the equipment is faster and, unlike an accelerometer, this makes measurements possible on multiple structures in as short a time as possible. Additionally, this method can measure specific points on a bridge that might be difficult to access. However, vibrometers are relatively expensive and have the disadvantage that a reference point is needed to measure from.

Snapshots in time of the external condition of a bridge can be recorded using Lidar to aid bridge inspection. This can provide measurement of the bridge geometry (to facilitate the building of a computer model) but the accuracy is generally insufficient to measure bridge deflections under load.

While larger modern bridges are routinely monitored electronically, smaller bridges are generally inspected visually by trained inspectors. There is considerable research interest in the challenge of smaller bridges as they are often remote and do not have electrical power on site. Possible solutions are the installation of sensors on a specialist inspection vehicle and the use of its measurements as it drives over the bridge to infer information about the bridge condition. These vehicles can be equipped with accelerometers, gyrometers, Laser Doppler Vibrometers and some even have the capability to apply a resonant force to the road surface to dynamically excite the bridge at its resonant frequency.

==Visual index==
==See also==
* Air draft
* Architectural engineering
* Bridge chapel
* Bridge tower
* Bridge to nowhere
* Bridges Act
* BS 5400
* Causeway
* Coal trestle
* Covered bridges
* Cross-sea traffic ways
* Culvert
* Deck
* Devil&#x27;s Bridge
* Footbridge
* Jet bridge
* Landscape architecture
* Megaproject
* Military bridges
* Orphan bridge
* Outline of bridges
* Overpass
* Pier (bridge structure)
* Pontoon bridge
* Rigid-frame bridge
* Structure gauge
* Transporter bridge
* Tensegrity
* Trestle bridge
* Tunnel

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* Whitney, Charles S. &quot;Bridges of the World: Their Design and Construction&quot;. Mineola, NY: Dover Publications, 2003. (Unabridged republication of &quot;Bridges : a study in their art, science, and evolution&quot;. 1929.)

==External links==

* Digital Bridge: Bridges of the Nineteenth Century , a collection of digitized books at Lehigh University
* Structurae – International Database and Gallery of Engineerings Structures with over 10000 Bridges.
* U.S. Federal Highway Administration Bridge Technology
* The Museum of Japanese Timber Bridges Fukuoka University
* &quot;bridge-info.org&quot;: site for bridges</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="2" end="8" title="Bridge" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960395" start="33" end="37" title="Span (engineering)" label="span"/>
<link wikidata="Q15324" start="69" end="82" title="body of water" label="body of water"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="84" end="90" title="valley" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415899" start="701" end="716" title="stepping stones" label="stepping stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="722" end="731" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11111030" start="745" end="754" title="boardwalk" label="boardwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q254087" start="785" end="800" title="Arkadiko Bridge" label="Arkadiko Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="842" end="853" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q158438" start="875" end="886" title="arch bridge" label="arch bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="935" end="960" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1022" end="1033" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q188966" start="1340" end="1366" title="Contract bridge" label="card game of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415899" start="1474" end="1489" title="stepping stones" label="stepping stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1492" end="1501" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11111030" start="1530" end="1539" title="boardwalk" label="boardwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="1547" end="1554" title="marshes" label="marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736549" start="1593" end="1604" title="Sweet Track" label="Sweet Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233725" start="1613" end="1623" title="Post Track" label="Post Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827951" start="1702" end="1712" title="log bridge" label="log bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623823" start="1826" end="1836" title="human-made" label="human-made"/>
<link wikidata="Q428759" start="1926" end="1939" title="timber bridge" label="timber bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625439" start="1948" end="1976" title="Holzbrücke Rapperswil-Hurden" label="Holzbrücke Rapperswil-Hurden"/>
<link wikidata="Q14407" start="2003" end="2014" title="Lake Zürich" label="Lake Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q690742" start="2088" end="2095" title="Seedamm" label="Seedamm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2262" end="2274" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q156404" start="2356" end="2382" title="Rudolf IV, Duke of Austria" label="Rudolf IV, Duke of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q254087" start="2638" end="2653" title="Arkadiko Bridge" label="Arkadiko Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12550" start="2679" end="2690" title="corbel arch" label="corbel arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="2758" end="2765" title="chariot" label="chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="2824" end="2835" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="2849" end="2855" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="2877" end="2887" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q158438" start="2931" end="2942" title="arch bridge" label="arch bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="3018" end="3033" title="Hellenistic age" label="Hellenistic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413460" start="3119" end="3133" title="Roman Engineering" label="ancient Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q18870689" start="3169" end="3178" title="aqueduct (bridge)" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q996197" start="3307" end="3323" title="Alcántara Bridge" label="Alcántara Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q14294" start="3346" end="3351" title="Tagus" label="Tagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17075870" start="3483" end="3492" title="pozzolana" label="pozzolana"/>
<link wikidata="Q250423" start="3514" end="3518" title="lime (material)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="3530" end="3543" title="volcanic rock" label="volcanic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q189566" start="3555" end="3561" title="Mortar (masonry)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="3591" end="3600" title="Roman era" label="Roman era"/>
<link wikidata="Q323133" start="3688" end="3700" title="Arthashastra" label="Arthashastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q323133" start="3719" end="3727" title="Kautilya" label="Kautilya"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="3777" end="3784" title="Mauryan" label="Mauryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747217" start="3797" end="3803" title="Girnar" label="Girnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q740234" start="3820" end="3833" title="James Prinsep" label="James Princep"/>
<link wikidata="Q849802" start="3942" end="3956" title="Chandragupta I" label="Chandragupta I"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="4157" end="4163" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="4272" end="4293" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q551446" start="4345" end="4360" title="Zhaozhou Bridge" label="Zhaozhou Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="4398" end="4409" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q244556" start="4489" end="4502" title="Spandrel" label="open-spandrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q967119" start="4590" end="4606" title="Alconétar Bridge" label="Alconétar Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q849786" start="4668" end="4688" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Bridge" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566155" start="4763" end="4775" title="Inca rope bridge" label="Rope bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q12570" start="4794" end="4811" title="suspension bridge" label="suspension bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="4830" end="4834" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="4855" end="4860" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q722071" start="4951" end="4958" title="Ashanti Empire" label="Ashanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="4978" end="4985" title="streams" label="streams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="4990" end="4996" title="rivers" label="rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q120995" start="5302" end="5324" title="Hans Ulrich Grubenmann" label="Hans Ulrich Grubenmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q121462" start="5326" end="5345" title="Johannes Grubenmann" label="Johannes Grubenmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q466202" start="5418" end="5432" title="Hubert Gautier" label="Hubert Gautier"/>
<link wikidata="Q99200" start="5511" end="5526" title="the Iron Bridge" label="the Iron Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="5567" end="5576" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="5619" end="5631" title="river Severn" label="river Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="5642" end="5663" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328068" start="5685" end="5690" title="truss" label="truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="5702" end="5714" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="5777" end="5793" title="tensile strength" label="tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q20882" start="5935" end="5949" title="Gustave Eiffel" label="Gustave Eiffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825472" start="6001" end="6016" title="covered bridges" label="covered bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q284395" start="6549" end="6578" title="The Bridges of Madison County" label="The Bridges of Madison County"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="6596" end="6603" title="welding" label="welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q248935" start="6612" end="6624" title="Stefan Bryła" label="Stefan Bryła"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280" start="6651" end="6662" title="road bridge" label="road bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11785930" start="6681" end="6696" title="Maurzyce Bridge" label="Maurzyce Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353519" start="6736" end="6743" title="Słudwia River" label="Słudwia"/>
<link wikidata="Q109992" start="6761" end="6767" title="Łowicz" label="Łowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157891" start="6798" end="6822" title="American Welding Society" label="American Welding Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="7188" end="7195" title="Tension (mechanics)" label="tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712821" start="7197" end="7208" title="compression (physical)" label="compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072476" start="7210" end="7217" title="bending" label="bending"/>
<link wikidata="Q826575" start="7219" end="7226" title="torsion (mechanics)" label="torsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q657936" start="7231" end="7236" title="Shear stress" label="shear"/>
<link wikidata="Q12570" start="7427" end="7437" title="Suspension bridge" label="suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q158555" start="7441" end="7460" title="cable-stayed bridge" label="cable-stayed bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624019" start="7768" end="7774" title="hollow-core slab" label="voided"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735471" start="7927" end="7937" title="Box girder bridge" label="box-girder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718983" start="8018" end="8033" title="integral bridge" label="integral bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q803818" start="8254" end="8267" title="Bailey bridge" label="Bailey bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q787417" start="8475" end="8489" title="Movable bridge" label="Movable bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q125821" start="8939" end="8963" title="George Washington Bridge" label="George Washington Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q112915" start="8993" end="9006" title="Bergen County" label="Bergen County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="9008" end="9018" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328068" start="9100" end="9105" title="truss" label="truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q16396" start="9289" end="9304" title="Tsing Ma Bridge" label="Tsing Ma Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236838" start="9309" end="9328" title="Kap Shui Mun Bridge" label="Kap Shui Mun Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q14751" start="9449" end="9452" title="MTR" label="MTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550402" start="9537" end="9561" title="Washington Avenue Bridge (Minneapolis)" label="Washington Avenue Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="9565" end="9576" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="9726" end="9749" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="9765" end="9772" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110325" start="9778" end="9799" title="Prince Edward Viaduct" label="Prince Edward Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q54371" start="9910" end="9924" title="Bloor–Danforth line" label="Bloor–Danforth"/>
<link wikidata="Q20379" start="9925" end="9936" title="Toronto subway and RT" label="subway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q771404" start="9980" end="10012" title="San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge" label="San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q328728" start="10035" end="10052" title="Robert Stephenson" label="Robert Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617778" start="10060" end="10077" title="High Level Bridge, River Tyne" label="High Level Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="10089" end="10099" title="River Tyne" label="River Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="10103" end="10122" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle upon Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q918066" start="10294" end="10310" title="Britannia Bridge" label="Britannia Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q922298" start="10320" end="10332" title="Menai Strait" label="Menai Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107799" start="10337" end="10353" title="Craigavon Bridge" label="Craigavon Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q297871" start="10386" end="10400" title="Øresund Bridge" label="Oresund Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="10409" end="10419" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211" start="10424" end="10429" title="Malmö" label="Malmö"/>
<link wikidata="Q83125" start="10530" end="10542" title="Tower Bridge" label="Tower Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q911663" start="10652" end="10664" title="Bascule bridge" label="bascule span"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068842" start="10682" end="10692" title="footbridge" label="footbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132510" start="10859" end="10886" title="Lake Pontchartrain Causeway" label="Lake Pontchartrain Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q99236" start="10891" end="10905" title="Millau Viaduct" label="Millau Viaduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770213" start="11170" end="11180" title="The Tridge (Midland, Michigan)" label="The Tridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q916120" start="11182" end="11197" title="Margaret Bridge" label="Margaret Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045693" start="11203" end="11222" title="Y-Bridge (Zanesville, Ohio)" label="Zanesville Y-Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18870689" start="11461" end="11469" title="aqueduct (bridge)" label="aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q837291" start="11805" end="11814" title="Nový Most" label="Nový Most"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="11825" end="11835" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q996547" start="11871" end="11888" title="bridge-restaurant" label="bridge-restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077135" start="12021" end="12040" title="Wildlife crossing" label="wildlife overpasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q913302" start="12051" end="12072" title="habitat fragmentation" label="habitat fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077135" start="12114" end="12128" title="Wildlife crossing" label="animal bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635361" start="12552" end="12566" title="suicide bridge" label="suicide bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18349989" start="12908" end="12922" title="Living root bridges" label="Living bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q160576" start="12974" end="12988" title="Ficus elastica" label="Ficus elastica"/>
<link wikidata="Q261903" start="13019" end="13027" title="wisteria" label="wisteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q220184" start="13496" end="13517" title="finite element method" label="finite element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q465444" start="13943" end="13963" title="prestressed concrete" label="prestressed concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564634" start="14164" end="14197" title="Limit state design" label="Load and Resistance Factor Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488301" start="15071" end="15092" title="Taconic State Parkway" label="Taconic State Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q158448" start="15497" end="15508" title="Moon bridge" label="Moon bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="15875" end="15889" title="Forbidden City" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617762" start="16707" end="16745" title="High Frequency Impact Treatment" label="aftertreatment of the weld transitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564634" start="17203" end="17236" title="Limit state design" label="Load and Resistance Factor Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627230" start="17375" end="17388" title="return period" label="return period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979849" start="17814" end="17829" title="Weigh in motion" label="weigh-in-motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434513" start="18409" end="18417" title="Eurocode" label="Eurocode"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979849" start="19395" end="19410" title="Weigh in motion" label="Weigh-in-Motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934035" start="19678" end="19693" title="microsimulation" label="microsimulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q226035" start="20050" end="20071" title="Tacoma Narrows Bridge" label="Tacoma Narrows Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44057" start="20166" end="20183" title="Millennium Bridge, London" label="Millennium Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305987" start="21606" end="21626" title="structural engineers" label="structural engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="21786" end="21799" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971123" start="21938" end="21963" title="National Bridge Inventory" label="National Bridge Inventory"/>
<link wikidata="Q192940" start="22346" end="22359" title="accelerometer" label="accelerometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q275969" start="22606" end="22619" title="Crowdsourcing" label="Crowdsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="22979" end="22993" title="Doppler effect" label="Doppler effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="23013" end="23018" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724132" start="23031" end="23055" title="Laser Doppler Vibrometer" label="Laser Doppler Vibrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q504027" start="23735" end="23740" title="Lidar" label="Lidar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446632" start="24696" end="24705" title="Air draft" label="Air draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q150737" start="24708" end="24733" title="Architectural engineering" label="Architectural engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q996370" start="24736" end="24749" title="Bridge chapel" label="Bridge chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q996564" start="24752" end="24764" title="Bridge tower" label="Bridge tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297251" start="24767" end="24784" title="Bridge to nowhere" label="Bridge to nowhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966648" start="24787" end="24798" title="Bridges Act" label="Bridges Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836639" start="24801" end="24808" title="BS 5400" label="BS 5400"/>
<link wikidata="Q892168" start="24811" end="24819" title="Causeway" label="Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q653401" start="24822" end="24834" title="Coal trestle" label="Coal trestle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825472" start="24837" end="24852" title="Covered bridges" label="Covered bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188195" start="24855" end="24877" title="Cross-sea traffic ways" label="Cross-sea traffic ways"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168092" start="24880" end="24887" title="Culvert" label="Culvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042353" start="24890" end="24894" title="Deck (bridge)" label="Deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q445800" start="24897" end="24916" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Bridge" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068842" start="24919" end="24929" title="Footbridge" label="Footbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061299" start="24932" end="24942" title="Jet bridge" label="Jet bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q47844" start="24945" end="24967" title="Landscape architecture" label="Landscape architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475641" start="24970" end="24981" title="Megaproject" label="Megaproject"/>
<link wikidata="Q25556320" start="24984" end="24999" title="Military bridge" label="Military bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103930" start="25003" end="25016" title="Orphan bridge" label="Orphan bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641355" start="25019" end="25037" title="Outline of bridges" label="Outline of bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425560" start="25040" end="25048" title="Overpass" label="Overpass"/>
<link wikidata="Q21155149" start="25051" end="25074" title="Pier (bridge structure)" label="Pier (bridge structure)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104072" start="25077" end="25091" title="Pontoon bridge" label="Pontoon bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11236495" start="25094" end="25112" title="Rigid-frame bridge" label="Rigid-frame bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q904003" start="25115" end="25130" title="Structure gauge" label="Structure gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q506412" start="25133" end="25151" title="Transporter bridge" label="Transporter bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930978" start="25154" end="25164" title="Tensegrity" label="Tensegrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q653401" start="25167" end="25181" title="Trestle bridge" label="Trestle bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="25184" end="25190" title="Tunnel" label="Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q581046" start="25786" end="25804" title="Fukuoka University" label="Fukuoka University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3398" wikidata="Q2915129" url="?curid=3398" title="Beadwork">
<text>Beadwork is the art or craft of attaching beads to one another by stringing them onto a thread or thin wire with a sewing or beading needle or sewing them to cloth. Beads are produced in a diverse range of materials, shapes, and sizes, and vary by the kind of art produced. Most often, beadwork is a form of personal adornment (e.g. jewelry), but it also commonly makes up other artworks.

Beadwork techniques are broadly divided into several categories, including loom and off-loom weaving, stringing, bead embroidery, bead crochet, bead knitting, and bead tatting.

== Ancient beading ==

The art of creating and utilizing beads is ancient, and ostrich shell beads discovered in Africa can be carbon-dated to 10,000 BC. Faience beads, a type of ceramic created by mixing powdered clays, lime, soda, and silica sand with water until a paste forms, then molding it around a stick or straw and firing until hard, were notably used in ancient Egyptian jewelry from the First Dynasty (beginning in the early Bronze Age) onward. Faience and other ceramic beads with vitrified quartz coatings predate pure glass beads.

Beads and work created with them were found near-ubiquitously across the ancient world, often made of locally available materials. For example, the Athabaskan peoples of Alaska used tusk shells (scaphopod mollusks), which are naturally hollow, as beads and incorporated them into elaborate jewelry.

Beadwork has historically been used for religious purposes, as good luck talismans, for barter and trade, and for ritual exchange.

== Modern beading ==

Today, beadwork is commonly practiced by jewelers, hobbyists, and contemporary artists; artists known for using beadwork as a medium include Liza Lou, Ran Hwang, Hew Locke, Jeffery Gibson, and Joyce J. Scott.

Some ancient stitches have become especially popular among contemporary artists. The off-loom peyote stitch, for example, is used in Native American Church members&#x27; beadwork.

Jewelry made of beads was widespread and fashionable in Western Ukraine, which was connected with the familiarity of Ukrainian artists with the artistic achievements of the countries of Western Europe, where from the 18th century. There was a fashion for artistic products made of beads. Modern Ukrainian beadwork includes: beaded clothing, collars, bracelets, necklaces, necklaces-gerdanes, clothing accessories, and household items such as pysanka.

== Europe ==
Beadwork in Europe, much like in Egypt and the Americas, can be traced to the use of bone and shell as adornments amongst early modern humans. As glassmaking increased in popularity through the Middle Ages, glass beads began to appear extensively in bead embroidery, beaded necklaces, and similar wares.

In Northern Russia, the Kokoshnik headdress typically includes river pearl netting around the forehead in addition to traditional bead embroidery.

By 1291, artists in Murano, Italy had begun production of intricate glass Murano beads inspired by Venetian glassware. With the advent of lampwork glass, Europeans started producing seed beads for embroidery, crochet, and other, mostly off-loom techniques. Czech seed beads are among the most popular contemporary bead styles.

One technique of European beadwork is beaded &quot;immortal&quot; flowers. The technique&#x27;s origins, though indistinct, are generally agreed to range at least several centuries back, as far back as at least the 16th if not 14th century. Two mayor styles were developed: French beading, in which the wire only goes through each bead once and the wires are arranged vertically, and Victorian (also called English or Russian) beading, in which the wires go through each bead twice and are arranged horizontally. In the late 19th and early 20th century, the beaded flowers were used to create long lasting funeral wreaths, called (French for &quot;immortals&quot;). In the mid-20th century, the art was introduced to United States with sales of flower beading kits. In 1960s to 1970s, books by emerging beaded flower designers emerged. In the 1990s and 2000s, there was another revival of interest in the craft, exemplified for example by the funeral wreaths made to commemorate victims of the September 11 attacks.

Ukrainian masters develop exclusively national motifs in their bead collections. Beaded artworks include clothing ensembles, clothing accessories, priestly clothing decorations, and household items. At the beginning of the 20th century embroidery workshops were created on the territory of Galicia and Bukovyna, where, along with weaving and embroidery, jewelry from beads was made. Contemporary beadwork includes: beaded clothing, collars, bracelets, necklaces, clothing accessories like handbags and purses.

== North America ==
Native American beadwork, already established via the use of materials like shells, dendrite, claws, and bone, evolved to incorporate glass beads as Europeans brought them to the Americas beginning in the early 17th century.

Native beadwork today heavily utilizes small glass beads, but artists also continue to use traditionally important materials. Wampum shells, for instance, are ceremonially and politically important to a range of Eastern Woodlands tribes, and are used to depict important events.

Several Native American artists from a wide range of nations are considered to be at the forefront of modern American bead working. These artists include Teri Greeves (Kiowa, known for beaded commentaries on Native voting rights), Marcus Amerman (Choctaw, known for realistic beaded portraits of historical figures and celebrities), and Jamie Okuma (Luiseño-Shoshone-Bannock, known for beaded dolls).

=== Great Lakes tribes ===
Ursuline nuns in the Great Lakes introduced floral patterns to young Indigenous women, who quickly applied them to beadwork. Ojibwe women in the area created ornately decorated shoulder bags known as &quot;gashkibidaagan&quot; (bandolier bags).

=== Eastern Woodlands tribes ===
Innu, Mi&#x27;kmaq, Penobscot, and Haudenosaunee peoples developed, and are known for, beading symmetrical scroll motifs, most often in white beads. Tribes of the Iroqouis Confederacy practice raised beading, where threads are pulled taut to force beads into a bas-relief, which creates a three-dimensional effect.

=== Southeastern tribes ===
Southeastern tribes pioneered a beadwork style that features images with white outlines, a visual reference to the shells and pearls coastal Southeasterners used pre-contact. This style was nearly lost during the Trail of Tears, as many beadworkers died during their forced removal to Indian Territory west of the Mississippi River. Roger Amerman (Choctaw, brother of Marcus Amerman) and Martha Berry (Cherokee) have effectively revived the style, however.

=== Sierra Madre tribes ===
Huichol communities in the Mexican states of Jalisco and Nayarit uniquely attach their beads to objects and surfaces via the use of a resin-beeswax mixture (in lieu of wire or waxed thread). Huichol beadwork is commonly characterized by bright colors and geometric shapes, and motifs of animals and spirits illustrate their spiritual beliefs.

=== Métis Nation ===
Métis were known as the Flower Beadwork People by the Cree and Dene because of their culture of colourful floral beadwork and embroidery. During the early 19th century, European and Euro-North American observers and travelers frequently noted the intricate beadwork adorning Métis clothing. This beadwork, particularly floral patterns, has evolved into one of the most recognizable symbols of Métis culture. Métis artisans employed First Nations beadwork techniques along with floral designs influenced by French-Canadian nuns in Roman Catholic missions. By the 1830s, vibrant and lifelike floral motifs dominated Métis creations from the Red River region. Beadwork adorned nearly every traditional Métis garment, from moccasins to coats, belts to bags. The practice of beadwork became a vital economic activity for Métis women and families, spanning generations and providing both personal and commercial expression. Métis organizations like the Louis Riel Institute and the Gabriel Dumont Institute actively promote and preserve traditional beading through workshops and resources, ensuring its continuation within the community.

== Africa ==

Several African nations outside of Egypt have beadwork traditions. Aggry (also spelled aggri or aggrey) beads, a type of decorated glass bead, are used by Ghanaians and other West Africans to make necklaces and bracelets that may be traded for other goods. These beads are often believed to have magical medicinal of fertility powers. In Mauritania, powder-glass Kiffa beads represent a beading tradition that may date as far back as 1200 CE; a group of women have been revitalizing the craft after the last traditional Kiffa artisans died in the 1970s. Cameroonian women are known for crafting wooden sculptures covered in beadwork.

== See also ==
*Glass beadmaking
*Beadweaving

== References ==
*
* Dubin, Lois Sherr (1999). &quot;North American Indian Jewelry and Adornment: From Prehistory to the Present.&quot; New York: Harry N. Abrams. 
* Dubin, Lois Sherr (2009). &quot;The History of Beads: From 100,000 B.C. to the Present&quot;. New York: Harry N. Abrams. .
* Beads and beadwork. (1996). &quot;In Encyclopedia of north american indians, Houghton Mifflin.&quot; Retrieved 27 January 2014, from 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2915129" start="0" end="8" title="Beadwork" label="Beadwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053956" start="42" end="46" title="bead" label="bead"/>
<link wikidata="Q142690" start="115" end="121" title="Sewing needle" label="sewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="333" end="340" title="Jewellery" label="jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q173056" start="465" end="469" title="loom" label="loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17138728" start="474" end="490" title="Off loom bead weaving" label="off-loom weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876058" start="492" end="501" title="Bead stringing" label="stringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876057" start="503" end="518" title="bead embroidery" label="bead embroidery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876053" start="520" end="532" title="bead crochet" label="bead crochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876055" start="534" end="547" title="bead knitting" label="bead knitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q498133" start="558" end="565" title="tatting" label="tatting"/>
<link wikidata="Q253664" start="722" end="729" title="Egyptian faience" label="Faience"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="933" end="946" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q203859" start="967" end="980" title="First Dynasty of Egypt" label="First Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="999" end="1015" title="Bronze Age" label="early Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072553" start="1062" end="1071" title="Vitrification" label="vitrified"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="1072" end="1078" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105755" start="1263" end="1273" title="Alaskan Athabaskans" label="Athabaskan"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="1285" end="1291" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q238314" start="1297" end="1307" title="tusk shell" label="tusk shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q238314" start="1310" end="1328" title="Tusk shell" label="scaphopod mollusks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129913" start="1455" end="1473" title="Prayer beads" label="religious purposes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44506" start="1488" end="1496" title="talisman" label="talisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886928" start="1610" end="1618" title="Bench jeweler" label="jewelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660410" start="1710" end="1718" title="Liza Lou" label="Liza Lou"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668358" start="1720" end="1729" title="Ran Hwang" label="Ran Hwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q15433825" start="1731" end="1740" title="Hew Locke" label="Hew Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176002" start="1742" end="1756" title="Jeffrey Gibson" label="Jeffery Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192925" start="1762" end="1776" title="Joyce J. Scott" label="Joyce J. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179596" start="1873" end="1886" title="peyote stitch" label="peyote stitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q920084" start="1912" end="1934" title="Native American Church" label="Native American Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="1960" end="1967" title="Jewellery" label="Jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12684" start="2203" end="2210" title="fashion" label="fashion"/>
<link wikidata="Q201664" start="2310" end="2318" title="bracelet" label="bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q189299" start="2321" end="2329" title="necklace" label="necklace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233785" start="2402" end="2409" title="pysanka" label="pysanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q115690473" start="2547" end="2565" title="early modern human" label="early modern human"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2619" end="2630" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q588279" start="2733" end="2748" title="Northern Russia" label="Northern Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633521" start="2754" end="2763" title="Kokoshnik" label="Kokoshnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q52437" start="2898" end="2911" title="Murano" label="Murano, Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q371383" start="2952" end="2964" title="Murano beads" label="Murano beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116707" start="2977" end="2991" title="Venetian glass" label="Venetian glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666550" start="3016" end="3030" title="Lampworking" label="lampwork glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445626" start="3060" end="3069" title="seed bead" label="seed bead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083647" start="3812" end="3827" title="Funerary art" label="funeral wreaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="4200" end="4220" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="4754" end="4769" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q190136" start="4838" end="4846" title="Dendrite (crystal)" label="dendrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055643" start="4959" end="4977" title="Colonial history of the United States" label="early 17th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q943899" start="5106" end="5112" title="Wampum" label="Wampum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847401" start="5192" end="5216" title="Indigenous peoples of the Eastern Woodlands" label="Eastern Woodlands tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702380" start="5414" end="5426" title="Teri Greeves" label="Teri Greeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q117100" start="5428" end="5433" title="Kiowa" label="Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254248" start="5468" end="5488" title="Native American civil rights" label="Native voting rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757990" start="5491" end="5505" title="Marcus Amerman" label="Marcus Amerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103726" start="5507" end="5514" title="Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q28481184" start="5597" end="5608" title="Jamie Okuma" label="Jamie Okuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q14682998" start="5610" end="5617" title="La Jolla Band of Luiseno Indians" label="Luiseño"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438552" start="5618" end="5634" title="Fort Hall Indian Reservation" label="Shoshone-Bannock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250880" start="5689" end="5697" title="Ursulines" label="Ursuline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="5710" end="5721" title="Great Lakes region" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="5814" end="5820" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q29572285" start="5889" end="5932" title="Bandolier bag" label="&amp;quot;gashkibidaagan&amp;quot; (bandolier bags)"/>
<link wikidata="Q497568" start="5968" end="5972" title="Innu" label="Innu"/>
<link wikidata="Q495751" start="5974" end="5986" title="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq people" label="Mi&amp;#x27;kmaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q774932" start="5988" end="5997" title="Penobscot people" label="Penobscot"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="6003" end="6016" title="Haudenosaunee" label="Haudenosaunee"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="6131" end="6151" title="Iroquois" label="Iroqouis Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="6229" end="6239" title="Relief" label="bas-relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q905014" start="6312" end="6331" title="Indigenous peoples of the Southeastern Woodlands" label="Southeastern tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="6525" end="6539" title="Trail of Tears" label="Trail of Tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="6597" end="6613" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="6626" end="6643" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103726" start="6660" end="6667" title="Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757990" start="6680" end="6694" title="Marcus Amerman" label="Marcus Amerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774343" start="6700" end="6712" title="Martha Berry (artist)" label="Martha Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="6714" end="6722" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162132" start="6798" end="6805" title="Huichol" label="Huichol"/>
<link wikidata="Q13160" start="6843" end="6850" title="Jalisco" label="Jalisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q79920" start="6855" end="6862" title="Nayarit" label="Nayarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="7163" end="7168" title="Métis" label="Métis"/>
<link wikidata="Q117191" start="7217" end="7221" title="Cree" label="Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770873" start="7226" end="7230" title="Dene" label="Dene"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="7669" end="7684" title="French-Canadian" label="French-Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7693" end="7707" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032545" start="7802" end="7811" title="Red River Colony" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q313691" start="8110" end="8120" title="Louis Riel" label="Louis Riel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515604" start="8139" end="8163" title="Gabriel Dumont Institute" label="Gabriel Dumont Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q420555" start="8377" end="8382" title="Aggry beads" label="Aggry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236011" start="8660" end="8672" title="Powder glass beads" label="powder-glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6405875" start="8673" end="8684" title="Kiffa beads" label="Kiffa beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435588" start="8961" end="8977" title="Glass beadmaking" label="Glass beadmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q17138728" start="8979" end="8990" title="Beadweaving" label="Beadweaving"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3401" wikidata="Q131436" url="?curid=3401" title="Board game">
<text>A board game is a type of tabletop game that involves small objects () that are placed and/or moved in particular ways on a patterned board (game board), potentially including other components, e.g. dice.

Many board games feature a competition between two or more players. To give a few examples: in checkers (British English name &#x27;draughts&#x27;), a player wins by capturing all opposing pieces, while Eurogames often end with a calculation of final scores. &quot;Pandemic&quot; is a cooperative game where players all win or lose as a team, and peg solitaire is a puzzle for one person.

There are many varieties of board games. Their representation of real-life situations can range from having no inherent theme, such as checkers, to having a specific theme and narrative, such as &quot;Cluedo&quot;. Rules can range from the very simple, such as in snakes and ladders; to deeply complex, as in &quot;Advanced Squad Leader&quot;. Play components now often include custom figures or shaped counters, and distinctively shaped player pieces commonly known as meeples as well as traditional cards and dice.

The time required to learn or master varies greatly from game to game, but is not necessarily related to the number or complexity of rules; for example, chess or Go possess relatively simple but have great strategic depth.

==History==

===Ancient===
Classical board games are divided into four categories: race games (such as pachisi), space games (such as noughts and crosses), chase games (such as hnefatafl), and games of displacement (such as chess).

Board games have been played, traveled, and evolved in most cultures and societies throughout history. Several important historical sites, artifacts, and documents shed light on early board games such as Jiroft civilization game boards in Iran. Senet, found in Predynastic and First Dynasty burials of Egypt, and 3100 BC respectively, is the oldest board game known to have existed. Senet was pictured in a fresco painting found in Merknera&#x27;s tomb (3300–2700 BC). Also from predynastic Egypt is mehen.

Hounds and jackals, another ancient Egyptian board game, appeared around 2000 BC. The first complete set of this game was discovered from a Theban tomb that dates to the 13th dynasty. This game was also popular in Mesopotamia and the Caucasus.

Backgammon originated in ancient Mesopotamia about 5,000 years ago. Ashtapada, chess, pachisi and chaupar originated in India. Go (4th century BC) and liubo (1st century BC) originated in China. The board game Patolli originated in Mesoamerica and was played by a wide range of pre-Columbian cultures such as the Toltecs and the Aztecs. The royal game of Ur was found in the royal tombs of Ur, dating to Mesopotamia 4,600 years ago.

===Europe===

Board games have a long tradition in Europe. The oldest records of board gaming in Europe date back to Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot; (written in the 8th century BC), in which he mentions the Ancient Greek game of &quot;petteia&quot;. This game of &quot;petteia&quot; would later evolve into the Roman &quot;ludus latrunculorum&quot;. Board gaming in ancient Europe was not unique to the Greco-Roman world, with records estimating that the ancient Norse game of &quot;hnefatafl&quot; was developed sometime before 400 AD. In ancient Ireland, the game of &quot;fidchell&quot; or &quot;ficheall&quot;, is said to date back to at least 144 AD, though this is likely an anachronism. A fidchell board dating from the 10th century has been uncovered in Co. Westmeath, Ireland.

In the United Kingdom, association of dice and cards with gambling led to all dice games except backgammon being treated as lotteries by dice in the Gaming Acts of 1710 and 1845. Early board game producers in the second half of the eighteenth century were mapmakers. The global popularization of board games, with special themes and branding, coincided with the formation of the global dominance of the British Empire. John Wallis was an English board game publisher, bookseller, map/chart seller, printseller, music seller, and cartographer. With his sons John Wallis Jr. and Edward Wallis, he was one of the most prolific publishers of board games of the late 18th and early 19th centuries. John Betts&#x27; &quot;A Tour of the British Colonies and Foreign Possessions&quot; and William Spooner&#x27;s &quot;A Voyage of Discovery&quot; were popular in the British empire. is a genre of wargaming developed in 19th century Prussia to teach battle tactics to officers.

===The Americas===

The board game &quot;Travellers&#x27; Tour Through the United States&quot; and its sister game &quot;Traveller&#x27;s Tour Through Europe&quot; were published by New York City bookseller F. &amp; R. Lockwood in 1822 and claim the distinction of being the first board games published in the United States.

Margaret Hofer described the period of the 1880s–1920s as &quot;The Golden Age&quot; of board gaming in America. Board game popularity was boosted, like that of many items, through mass production, which made them cheaper and more easily available.

===Asia and Africa===
Different traditional board games are popular in Asian and African countries. In China, Go and many variations of chess are popular. In Africa and the Middle East, mancala is a popular board game archetype with many regional variations. In India, a community game called Carrom is popular. A popular board game of flicking stones (Alkkagi) is popular in South Korea.

===Modern===

In the late 1990s, companies began producing more new games to serve a growing worldwide market. In the 2010s, several publications said board games were amid a new Golden Age or &quot;renaissance&quot;. Board game venues also grew in popularity; in 2016 alone, more than 5,000 board game cafés opened in the U.S., and they were reported to be very popular in China as well. 

Board games have been used as a mechanism for science communication.

==Luck, strategy, and diplomacy==
Some games, such as chess, depend completely on player skill, while many children&#x27;s games such as &quot;Candy Land&quot; and &quot;snakes and ladders&quot; require no decisions by the players and are decided purely by luck.
Many games require some level of both skill and luck. A player may be hampered by bad luck in backgammon, &quot;Monopoly&quot;, or &quot;Risk&quot;; but over many games, a skilled player will win more often. The elements of luck can also make for more excitement at times, and allow for more diverse and multifaceted strategies, as concepts such as expected value and risk management must be considered.

Luck may be introduced into a game by several methods. The use of dice of various sorts goes back to the earliest board games. These can decide everything from how many steps a player moves their token, as in &quot;Monopoly&quot;, to how their forces fare in battle, as in &quot;Risk&quot;, or which resources a player gains, as in &quot;Catan&quot;. Other games such as &quot;Sorry!&quot; use a deck of special cards that, when shuffled, create randomness. &quot;Scrabble&quot; creates a similar effect using randomly picked letters. Other games use spinners, timers of random length, or other sources of randomness. German-style board games are notable for often having fewer elements of luck than many North American board games. Luck may be reduced in favour of skill by introducing symmetry between players. For example, in a dice game such as &quot;Ludo&quot;, by giving each player the choice of rolling the dice or using the previous player&#x27;s roll.

Another important aspect of some games is diplomacy, that is, players, making deals with one another. Negotiation generally features only in games with three or more players, cooperative games being the exception. An important facet of &quot;Catan&quot;, for example, is convincing players to trade with you rather than with opponents. In &quot;Risk&quot;, two or more players may team up against others. &quot;Easy&quot; diplomacy involves convincing other players that someone else is winning and should therefore be teamed up against. &quot;Advanced&quot; diplomacy (e.g., in the aptly named game &quot;Diplomacy&quot;) consists of making elaborate plans together, with the possibility of betrayal.

In perfect information games, such as chess, each player has complete information on the state of the game, but in other games, such as &quot;Tigris and Euphrates&quot; or &quot;Stratego&quot;, some information is hidden from players. This makes finding the best move more difficult and may involve estimating probabilities by the opponents.

==Software==

Many board games are now available as video games. These are aptly termed digital board games, and their distinguishing characteristic compared to traditional board games is they can now be played online against a computer or other players. Some websites (such as boardgamearena.com, yucata.de, etc.) allow play in real time and immediately show the opponents&#x27; moves, while others use email to notify the players after each move. The Internet and cheaper home printing has also influenced board games via print-and-play games that may be purchased and printed. Some games use external media such as audio cassettes or DVDs in accompaniment to the game.

There are also virtual tabletop programs that allow online players to play a variety of existing and new board games through tools needed to manipulate the game board but do not necessarily enforce the game&#x27;s rules, leaving this up to the players. There are generalized programs such as &quot;Vassal&quot;, &quot;Tabletop Simulator&quot; and &quot;Tabletopia&quot; that can be used to play any board or card game, while programs like &quot;Roll20&quot; and &quot;Fantasy Grounds&quot; are more specialized for role-playing games. Some of these virtual tabletops have worked with the license holders to allow for use of their game&#x27;s assets within the program; for example, &quot;Fantasy Grounds&quot; has licenses for both &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; and &quot;Pathfinder&quot; materials, while &quot;Tabletop Simulator&quot; allows game publishers to provide paid downloadable content for their games. However, as these games offer the ability to add in the content through user modifications, there are also unlicensed uses of board game assets available through these programs.

==Market==

While the board gaming market is estimated to be smaller than that for video games, it has also experienced significant growth from the late 1990s. A 2012 article in &quot;The Guardian&quot; described board games as &quot;making a comeback&quot;. Other expert sources suggest that board games never went away, and that board games have remained a popular leisure activity which has only grown over time. Another from 2014 gave an estimate that put the growth of the board game market at &quot;between 25% and 40% annually&quot; since 2010, and described the current time as the &quot;golden era for board games&quot;. The rise in board game popularity has been attributed to quality improvement (more elegant mechanics, , artwork, and graphics) as well as increased availability thanks to sales through the Internet. Crowd-sourcing for board games is a large facet of the market, with $233 million raised on Kickstarter in 2020.

A 1991 estimate for the global board game market was over $1.2 billion. A 2001 estimate for the United States &quot;board games and puzzle&quot; market gave a value of under $400 million, and for United Kingdom, of about £50 million. A 2009 estimate for the Korean market was put at 800 million won, and another estimate for the American board game market for the same year was at about $800 million. A 2011 estimate for the Chinese board game market was at over 10 billion yuan. A 2013 estimate put the size of the German toy market at 2.7 billion euros (out of which the board games and puzzle market is worth about 375 million euros), and Polish markets at 2 billion and 280 million zlotys, respectively. In 2009, Germany was considered to be the best market per capita, with the highest number of games sold per individual.

=== Hobby board games ===
Some academics, such as Erica Price and Marco Arnaudo, have differentiated &quot;hobby&quot; board games and gamers from other board games and gamers. A 2014 estimate placed the U.S. and Canada market for hobby board games (games produced for a &quot;gamer&quot; market) at only $75 million, with the total size of what it defined as the &quot;hobby game market&quot; (&quot;the market for those games regardless of whether they&#x27;re sold in the hobby channel or other channels,&quot;) at over $700 million. A similar 2015 estimate suggested a hobby game market value of almost $900 million.

==Research==

A dedicated field of research into gaming exists, known as game studies or ludology.

While there has been a fair amount of scientific research on the psychology of older board games (e.g., chess, Go, mancala), less has been done on contemporary board games such as &quot;Monopoly&quot;, &quot;Scrabble&quot;, and &quot;Risk&quot;, and especially modern board games such as &quot;Catan&quot;, &quot;Agricola&quot;, and &quot;Pandemic&quot;. Much research has been carried out on chess, partly because many tournament players are publicly ranked in national and international lists, which makes it possible to compare their levels of expertise. The works of Adriaan de Groot, William Chase, Herbert A. Simon, and Fernand Gobet have established that knowledge, more than the ability to anticipate moves, plays an essential role in chess-playing ability.

Linearly arranged board games have improved children&#x27;s spatial numerical understanding. This is because the game is similar to a number line in that they promote a linear understanding of numbers rather than the innate logarithmic one.

Research studies show that board games such as &quot;Snakes and Ladders&quot; result in children showing significant improvements in aspects of basic number skills such as counting, recognizing numbers, numerical estimation, and number comprehension. They also practice fine motor skills each time they grasp a game piece. Playing board games has also been tied to improving children&#x27;s executive functions and help reduce risks of dementia for the elderly. Related to this is a growing academic interest in the topic of game accessibility, culminating in the development of guidelines for assessing the accessibility of modern tabletop games and the extent to which they are playable for people with disabilities.

Additionally, board games can be therapeutic. Bruce Halpenny, a games inventor said when interviewed about his game, &quot;The Great Train Robbery&quot;:With crime you deal with every basic human emotion and also have enough elements to combine action with melodrama. The player&#x27;s imagination is fired as they plan to rob the train. Because of the gamble, they take in the early stage of the game there is a build-up of tension, which is immediately released once the train is robbed. Release of tension is therapeutic and useful in our society because most jobs are boring and repetitive.

Playing games has been suggested as a viable addition to the traditional educational curriculum if the content is appropriate and the gameplay informs students on the curriculum content.

==Categories==
There are several ways in which board games can be classified, and considerable overlap may exist, so that a game belongs to several categories.

The namesake of the board game, gameboards would seem to be a necessary and sufficient condition of the genre, though card games that do not use a standard deck of cards (as well as games that use neither cards nor a gameboard) are often colloquially included, with some scholars therefore referring to said genre as that of &quot;table and board games&quot; or &quot;tabletop games&quot;, or seeing board games as a subgenre of tabletop games.

H. J. R. Murray&#x27;s &quot;A History of Board Games Other Than Chess&quot; (1952) has been called the first attempt to develop a &quot;scheme for the classification of board games&quot;. David Parlett&#x27;s &quot;Oxford History of Board Games&quot; (1999) defines four primary categories: race games (where the goal is to be the first to move all one&#x27;s pieces to the final destination), space games (in which the object is to arrange the pieces into some special configuration), chase games (asymmetrical games, where players start the game with different sets of pieces and objectives) and displace games (where the main objective is the capture the opponents&#x27; pieces). Parlett also distinguishes between abstract and thematic games, the latter having a specific theme or frame narrative (ex. regular chess versus, for example, Star Wars-themed chess).
The following is a list of some of the most common game categories:

* Abstract strategy games – e.g. chess, checkers, Go, reversi, tafl games, or modern games such as &quot;Abalone&quot;, &quot;Dameo&quot;, &quot;Stratego&quot;, &quot;Hive&quot;, or &quot;GIPF&quot;
** Chess variants – traditional variants e.g. shogi, xiangqi, or janggi; modern variants e.g. Chess960, Grand Chess, Hexagonal chess, or Alice Chess
* Alignment games – e.g. renju, gomoku, Connect6, Nine men&#x27;s morris, or tic-tac-toe
* Auction games – e.g. &quot;Hoity Toity&quot;, &quot;Power Grid&quot;
* Configuration games – e.g. Lines of Action, Hexade, or &quot;Entropy&quot;
* Connection games – e.g. TwixT, Hex, or Havannah
* Cooperative games – e.g. &quot;Max the Cat&quot;, &quot;Caves and Claws&quot;, or &quot;Pandemic&quot;
* Count and capture games – e.g. mancala games
* Cross and circle games – e.g. Yut, Ludo, or &quot;Aggravation&quot;
* Deduction games – e.g. &quot;Mastermind&quot; or &quot;Black Box&quot;
* Dexterity games – e.g. &quot;Tumblin&#x27; Dice&quot; or &quot;Pitch Car&quot;
* Economic simulation games – e.g. &quot;The Business Game&quot;, &quot;Monopoly&quot;, &quot;The Game of Life&quot;, &quot;Power Grid&quot;, or &quot;Food Chain Magnate&quot;
* Educational games – e.g. &quot;Arthur Saves the Planet&quot;, &quot;Cleopatra and the Society of Architects&quot;, or &quot;Shakespeare: The Bard Game&quot;
* Elimination games – e.g. draughts, Alquerque, Fanorona, Yoté, or Surakarta
* Family games – e.g. &quot;Roll Through the Ages&quot;, &quot;Birds on a Wire&quot;, or &quot;For Sale&quot;
* Fantasy games – e.g. &quot;Shadows Over Camelot&quot;
* German-style board games or &quot;Eurogames&quot; – e.g. &quot;Catan&quot;, &quot;Carcassonne&quot;, Decatur • The Game, Carson City, or &quot;Puerto Rico&quot;
* Guessing games – e.g. &quot;Pictionary&quot; or Battleship
* Hidden-movement games – e.g. &quot;Clue&quot; or Escape from the Aliens in Outer Space
* Hidden-role games – e.g. &quot;Mafia&quot; or &quot;The Resistance&quot;
* Historical simulation games – e.g. &quot;Through the Ages&quot; or &quot;Railways of the World&quot;
* Horror games – e.g. &quot;Arkham Horror&quot;
* Large multiplayer games – e.g. &quot;Take It Easy&quot; or &quot;Swat&quot; (2010)
* Learning/communication non-competitive games – e.g. The Ungame (1972)
* Mancala games – e.g. Wari, Oware, or The Glass Bead Game
* Multiplayer games – e.g. &quot;Risk&quot;, &quot;Monopoly&quot;, or Four-player chess
* Musical games – e.g. &quot;Spontuneous&quot;
* Negotiation games – e.g. &quot;Diplomacy&quot;
* Paper-and-pencil games – e.g. tic-tac-toe or dots and boxes
* Physical skill games – e.g. &quot;Camp Granada&quot;
* Position games (no captures; win by leaving the opponent unable to move) – e.g. kōnane, mū tōrere, or the L game
* Race games – e.g. Pachisi, backgammon, snakes and ladders, hyena chase, or &quot;Worm Up&quot;
* Role-playing games – e.g. Dungeons &amp; Dragons
* Roll-and-move games – e.g. &quot;Monopoly&quot; or &quot;Life&quot;
* Running-fight games – e.g. bul
* Share-buying games (games in which players buy stakes in each other&#x27;s positions) – typically longer economic-management games, e.g. &quot;Acquire&quot; or &quot;Panamax&quot;
* Single-player puzzle games – e.g. &quot;peg solitaire&quot; or &quot;Sudoku&quot;
* Space games - e.g. &quot;Terraforming Mars (board game)&quot;
* Spiritual development games (games with no winners or losers) – e.g. &quot;Transformation Game&quot; or &quot;Psyche&#x27;s Key&quot;
* Stacking games – e.g. Lasca or &quot;DVONN&quot;
* Storytelling games – e.g. &quot;Dixit&quot; or &quot;Tales of the Arabian Nights&quot;
* Territory games – e.g. Go or Reversi
* Tile-based games – e.g. &quot;Carcassonne&quot;, &quot;Scrabble&quot;, &quot;Tigris and Euphrates&quot;, or &quot;Evo&quot;
* Train games – e.g. &quot;Ticket to Ride&quot;, &quot;Steam&quot;, or 18xx
* Trivia games – e.g. &quot;Trivial Pursuit&quot;
* Two-player-only themed games – e.g. &quot;En Garde&quot; or &quot;Dos de Mayo&quot;
* Two-player-only abstract games - e.g. &quot;Checkers&quot;
* Unequal forces (or &quot;hunt&quot;) games – e.g. fox and geese or tablut
* Wargames – ranging from &quot;Risk&quot;, &quot;Diplomacy&quot;, or &quot;Axis &amp; Allies&quot;, to &quot;Attack!&quot; or &quot;Conquest of the Empire&quot;
* Word games – e.g. &quot;Scrabble&quot;, &quot;Boggle&quot;, Anagrams, or &quot;What&#x27;s My Word?&quot; (2010)
==Glossary ==

Although many board games have a jargon all their own, there is a generalized terminology to describe concepts applicable to basic game mechanics and attributes common to nearly all board games.

== See also ==

* Board game awards
* BoardGameGeek—a website for board game enthusiasts
* &quot;Going Cardboard&quot;—a documentary movie
* History of games
* Interactive movie—DVD games
* List of board games
* List of game manufacturers
* Mind sport
==References==
==Further reading==

* Austin, Roland G. &quot;Greek Board Games.&quot; &quot;Antiquity&quot; 14. September 1940: 257–271
* 
* 
* Fiske, Willard. &quot;Chess in Iceland and in Icelandic Literature—with historical notes on other table-games&quot;. Florentine Typographical Society, 1905.
* Golladay, Sonja Musser, &quot;Los Libros de Acedrex Dados E Tablas: Historical, Artistic and Metaphysical Dimensions of Alfonso X&#x27;s Book of Games&quot; (PhD diss., University of Arizona, 2007)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Rollefson, Gary O., &quot;A Neolithic Game Board from Ain Ghazal, Jordan&quot;, Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research, No. 286. (May 1992), pp. 1–5.
* 
==External links==

* BoardGameGeek
* BoardGameTheories
* International Board Game Studies Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131436" start="2" end="12" title="Board game" label="board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244175" start="26" end="39" title="tabletop game" label="tabletop game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258741" start="141" end="151" title="game board" label="game board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293" start="301" end="309" title="Draughts" label="checkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q788553" start="409" end="417" title="Eurogame" label="Eurogame"/>
<link wikidata="Q531592" start="471" end="479" title="Pandemic (board game)" label="Pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783817" start="491" end="507" title="Cooperative board game" label="cooperative game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411087" start="553" end="566" title="peg solitaire" label="peg solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q13698" start="572" end="578" title="puzzle" label="puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293" start="731" end="739" title="checkers" label="checkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17245" start="797" end="803" title="Cluedo" label="Cluedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q697302" start="860" end="878" title="snakes and ladders" label="snakes and ladders"/>
<link wikidata="Q379731" start="911" end="932" title="Advanced Squad Leader" label="Advanced Squad Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q95993854" start="1066" end="1073" title="meeples" label="meeples"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="1267" end="1272" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="1276" end="1278" title="Go (board game)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q796171" start="1441" end="1448" title="pachisi" label="pachisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q210339" start="1472" end="1491" title="noughts and crosses" label="noughts and crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q750693" start="1515" end="1524" title="hnefatafl" label="hnefatafl"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="1562" end="1567" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149433" start="1775" end="1794" title="Jiroft culture" label="Jiroft civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258741" start="1795" end="1805" title="game board" label="game board"/>
<link wikidata="Q582169" start="1816" end="1821" title="Senet" label="Senet"/>
<link wikidata="Q208520" start="1832" end="1843" title="Predynastic Egypt" label="Predynastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203859" start="1848" end="1861" title="First dynasty of Egypt" label="First Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="1978" end="1984" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099570" start="2071" end="2076" title="Mehen (game)" label="mehen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637382" start="2079" end="2097" title="Hounds and jackals" label="Hounds and jackals"/>
<link wikidata="Q101583" start="2219" end="2230" title="Thebes, Egypt" label="Theban tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q721807" start="2249" end="2261" title="13th dynasty" label="13th dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="2293" end="2304" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="2313" end="2321" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11411" start="2324" end="2334" title="Backgammon" label="Backgammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805945" start="2392" end="2401" title="Ashtapada" label="Ashtapada"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="2403" end="2408" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q796171" start="2410" end="2417" title="pachisi" label="pachisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091142" start="2422" end="2429" title="chaupar" label="chaupar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="2451" end="2453" title="Go (board game)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477158" start="2475" end="2480" title="liubo" label="liubo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700475" start="2534" end="2541" title="Patolli" label="Patolli"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="2556" end="2567" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="2602" end="2615" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q187897" start="2637" end="2643" title="Toltec" label="Toltec"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="2653" end="2659" title="Aztecs" label="Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q937315" start="2665" end="2681" title="Royal Game of Ur" label="royal game of Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="2875" end="2880" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="2894" end="2899" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q126178422" start="2992" end="2999" title="petteia" label="petteia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700280" start="3080" end="3099" title="ludus latrunculorum" label="ludus latrunculorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q750693" start="3240" end="3249" title="Tafl games" label="hnefatafl"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="3290" end="3292" title="Anno Domini" label="AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439618" start="3332" end="3340" title="fidchell" label="fidchell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3356" end="3364" title="ficheall" label="ficheall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520187" start="3708" end="3712" title="Gaming Act 1710" label="1710"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520189" start="3717" end="3721" title="Gaming Act 1845" label="1845"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="3947" end="3961" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262828" start="3963" end="3974" title="John Wallis (publisher)" label="John Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="4073" end="4085" title="cartographer" label="cartographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="4468" end="4475" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q126095041" start="4555" end="4602" title="Travellers&amp;#x27; Tour Through the United States" label="Travellers&amp;#x27; Tour Through the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="5021" end="5036" title="mass production" label="mass production"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="5200" end="5202" title="Go (game)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q267989" start="5276" end="5283" title="mancala" label="mancala"/>
<link wikidata="Q900489" start="5383" end="5389" title="Carrom" label="Carrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802970" start="5443" end="5450" title="Alkkagi" label="Alkkagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="5466" end="5477" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q114706033" start="5772" end="5787" title="board game café" label="board game café"/>
<link wikidata="Q472328" start="5917" end="5938" title="science communication" label="science communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032102" start="6084" end="6094" title="Candy Land" label="Candy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q697302" start="6111" end="6129" title="snakes and ladders" label="snakes and ladders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11411" start="6298" end="6308" title="backgammon" label="backgammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17243" start="6316" end="6324" title="Monopoly (game)" label="Monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12541" start="6341" end="6345" title="Risk (game)" label="Risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="6553" end="6567" title="expected value" label="expected value"/>
<link wikidata="Q189447" start="6572" end="6587" title="risk management" label="risk management"/>
<link wikidata="Q45089" start="6675" end="6679" title="dice" label="dice"/>
<link wikidata="Q937315" start="6714" end="6734" title="Royal Game of Ur" label="earliest board games"/>
<link wikidata="Q17271" start="6947" end="6952" title="Catan" label="Catan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303559" start="6986" end="6992" title="Sorry! (game)" label="Sorry!"/>
<link wikidata="Q47883" start="7021" end="7026" title="Playing card" label="cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q170436" start="7073" end="7081" title="Scrabble" label="Scrabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q788553" start="7227" end="7250" title="German-style board game" label="German-style board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030283" start="7464" end="7468" title="Ludo (game)" label="Ludo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783817" start="7747" end="7764" title="Cooperative board game" label="cooperative games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871" start="8178" end="8187" title="Diplomacy (game)" label="Diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074338" start="8278" end="8297" title="perfect information" label="perfect information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374184" start="8417" end="8437" title="Tigris and Euphrates" label="Tigris and Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q241538" start="8453" end="8461" title="Stratego" label="Stratego"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="8829" end="8835" title="Internet" label="online"/>
<link wikidata="Q753532" start="8947" end="8956" title="real time (media)" label="real time"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860440" start="9306" end="9322" title="virtual tabletop" label="virtual tabletop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276959" start="9589" end="9595" title="Vassal Engine" label="Vassal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20652409" start="9609" end="9627" title="Tabletop Simulator" label="Tabletop Simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q96407561" start="9644" end="9654" title="Tabletopia" label="Tabletopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30057746" start="9736" end="9742" title="Roll20" label="Roll20"/>
<link wikidata="Q10280029" start="9759" end="9774" title="Fantasy Grounds" label="Fantasy Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144761" start="10068" end="10078" title="Pathfinder (periodicals)" label="Pathfinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344644" start="10167" end="10192" title="microtransaction" label="paid downloadable content"/>
<link wikidata="Q865493" start="10282" end="10300" title="mod (video gaming)" label="user modifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="10472" end="10483" title="video games" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="10573" end="10585" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751513" start="11110" end="11119" title="Game mechanic" label="mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q275969" start="11218" end="11232" title="Crowdsourcing" label="Crowd-sourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q25530138" start="11805" end="11809" title="yuan (currency)" label="yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q123213" start="12017" end="12023" title="Polish zloty" label="zlotys"/>
<link wikidata="Q675281" start="12855" end="12867" title="game studies" label="game studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="12986" end="12991" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="12993" end="12995" title="Go (board game)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q267989" start="12997" end="13004" title="mancala" label="mancala"/>
<link wikidata="Q17243" start="13068" end="13076" title="Monopoly (game)" label="Monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q170436" start="13090" end="13098" title="Scrabble" label="Scrabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q12541" start="13116" end="13120" title="Risk (game)" label="Risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17271" start="13176" end="13181" title="Catan" label="Catan"/>
<link wikidata="Q396644" start="13195" end="13203" title="Agricola (board game)" label="Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q531592" start="13221" end="13229" title="Pandemic (board game)" label="Pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188394" start="13453" end="13469" title="Adriaan de Groot" label="Adriaan de Groot"/>
<link wikidata="Q181529" start="13486" end="13502" title="Herbert A. Simon" label="Herbert A. Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406499" start="13508" end="13521" title="Fernand Gobet" label="Fernand Gobet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35689" start="13783" end="13794" title="number line" label="number line"/>
<link wikidata="Q783092" start="14282" end="14301" title="executive functions" label="executive functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q587332" start="14657" end="14671" title="Bruce Barrymore Halpenny" label="Bruce Halpenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q858057" start="14675" end="14689" title="games inventor" label="games inventor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600401" start="14728" end="14763" title="The Great Train Robbery (board game)" label="&amp;quot;The Great Train Robbery&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607563" start="15560" end="15568" title="namesake" label="namesake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258741" start="15588" end="15598" title="Game board" label="gameboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q875267" start="15618" end="15652" title="necessary and sufficient condition" label="necessary and sufficient condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="15660" end="15665" title="genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244175" start="15924" end="15938" title="Tabletop game" label="tabletop games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667032" start="16002" end="16017" title="H. J. R. Murray" label="H. J. R. Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176049" start="16191" end="16204" title="David Parlett" label="David Parlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099522" start="16294" end="16303" title="race game" label="race game"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16397" end="16408" title="space games" label="space games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16489" end="16500" title="chase games" label="chase games"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16601" end="16615" title="displace games" label="displace games"/>
<link wikidata="Q573573" start="16721" end="16729" title="Abstract strategy game" label="abstract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053916" start="16734" end="16742" title="Theme (narrative)" label="thematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="16844" end="16853" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q573573" start="16940" end="16962" title="Abstract strategy game" label="Abstract strategy game"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="16971" end="16976" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293" start="16978" end="16986" title="checkers" label="checkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="16988" end="16990" title="Go (board game)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q748139" start="16992" end="16999" title="reversi" label="reversi"/>
<link wikidata="Q750693" start="17001" end="17011" title="tafl games" label="tafl games"/>
<link wikidata="Q17247" start="17043" end="17050" title="Abalone (game)" label="Abalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212163" start="17064" end="17069" title="Dameo" label="Dameo"/>
<link wikidata="Q241538" start="17083" end="17091" title="Stratego" label="Stratego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399188" start="17105" end="17109" title="Hive (game)" label="Hive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268423" start="17126" end="17130" title="GIPF (game)" label="GIPF"/>
<link wikidata="Q299191" start="17140" end="17153" title="Chess variant" label="Chess variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131375" start="17183" end="17188" title="shogi" label="shogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q191448" start="17190" end="17197" title="xiangqi" label="xiangqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q715883" start="17202" end="17208" title="janggi" label="janggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q724903" start="17231" end="17239" title="Chess960" label="Chess960"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542570" start="17241" end="17252" title="Grand Chess" label="Grand Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q643053" start="17254" end="17269" title="Hexagonal chess" label="Hexagonal chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q288181" start="17274" end="17285" title="Alice Chess" label="Alice Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139103" start="17311" end="17316" title="renju" label="renju"/>
<link wikidata="Q908381" start="17318" end="17324" title="gomoku" label="gomoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073196" start="17326" end="17334" title="Connect6" label="Connect6"/>
<link wikidata="Q209669" start="17336" end="17358" title="Nine men&amp;#x27;s morris" label="Nine men&amp;#x27;s morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q210339" start="17363" end="17374" title="tic-tac-toe" label="tic-tac-toe"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17377" end="17390" title=":Category:Auction board games" label="Auction games"/>
<link wikidata="Q353757" start="17404" end="17415" title="Hoity Toity" label="Hoity Toity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474394" start="17429" end="17439" title="Power Grid" label="Power Grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531943" start="17475" end="17490" title="Lines of Action" label="Lines of Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380791" start="17509" end="17516" title="Entropy (1977 board game)" label="Entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161688" start="17525" end="17540" title="Connection game" label="Connection game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362781" start="17549" end="17554" title="TwixT" label="TwixT"/>
<link wikidata="Q844874" start="17556" end="17559" title="Hex (board game)" label="Hex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591462" start="17564" end="17572" title="Havannah (board game)" label="Havannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783817" start="17575" end="17592" title="Cooperative board game" label="Cooperative games"/>
<link wikidata="Q531592" start="17663" end="17671" title="Pandemic (board game)" label="Pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q267989" start="17711" end="17718" title="mancala" label="mancala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188437" start="17727" end="17748" title="Cross and circle game" label="Cross and circle game"/>
<link wikidata="Q706464" start="17757" end="17760" title="Yut" label="Yut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030283" start="17762" end="17766" title="Ludo (board game)" label="Ludo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692235" start="17777" end="17788" title="Aggravation (board game)" label="Aggravation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17797" end="17812" title=":Category:Deduction board games" label="Deduction games"/>
<link wikidata="Q17286" start="17826" end="17836" title="Mastermind (board game)" label="Mastermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q880104" start="17852" end="17861" title="Black Box (game)" label="Black Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q46627" start="17870" end="17879" title="Dexterity" label="Dexterity"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17951" end="17976" title=":Category:Economic simulation board games" label="Economic simulation games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864103" start="17990" end="18007" title="The Business Game" label="The Business Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q17243" start="18021" end="18029" title="Monopoly (game)" label="Monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319521" start="18043" end="18059" title="The Game of Life" label="The Game of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474394" start="18073" end="18083" title="Power Grid" label="Power Grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43369997" start="18100" end="18118" title="Food Chain Magnate" label="Food Chain Magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140363" start="18127" end="18143" title="Educational game" label="Educational game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131744" start="18195" end="18234" title="Cleopatra and the Society of Architects" label="Cleopatra and the Society of Architects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293" start="18311" end="18319" title="draughts" label="draughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q519071" start="18321" end="18330" title="Alquerque" label="Alquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395834" start="18332" end="18340" title="Fanorona" label="Fanorona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061250" start="18342" end="18346" title="Yoté" label="Yoté"/>
<link wikidata="Q601529" start="18351" end="18360" title="Surakarta (game)" label="Surakarta"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18473" end="18486" title=":Category:Fantasy board games" label="Fantasy games"/>
<link wikidata="Q368848" start="18500" end="18520" title="Shadows Over Camelot" label="Shadows Over Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q788553" start="18529" end="18552" title="German-style board game" label="German-style board game"/>
<link wikidata="Q17271" start="18592" end="18597" title="Catan" label="Catan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17262" start="18611" end="18622" title="Carcassonne (board game)" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457040" start="18672" end="18683" title="Puerto Rico (board game)" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136054" start="18692" end="18705" title="Guessing game" label="Guessing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q565449" start="18720" end="18730" title="Pictionary" label="Pictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q953491" start="18740" end="18750" title="Battleship (game)" label="Battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q17265" start="18873" end="18878" title="Mafia (party game)" label="Mafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760289" start="18894" end="18908" title="The Resistance (game)" label="The Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432672" start="18990" end="19011" title="Railways of the World" label="Railways of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q597760" start="19046" end="19059" title="Arkham Horror" label="Arkham Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q373777" start="19105" end="19117" title="Take It Easy (game)" label="Take It Easy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502250" start="19205" end="19215" title="The Ungame" label="The Ungame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246588" start="19225" end="19238" title="List of mancala games" label="Mancala games"/>
<link wikidata="Q575620" start="19246" end="19250" title="Wari (game)" label="Wari"/>
<link wikidata="Q575620" start="19252" end="19257" title="Oware" label="Oware"/>
<link wikidata="Q11410" start="19284" end="19300" title="Multiplayer game" label="Multiplayer game"/>
<link wikidata="Q12541" start="19315" end="19319" title="Risk (game)" label="Risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q17243" start="19333" end="19341" title="Monopoly (game)" label="Monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q690264" start="19352" end="19369" title="Four-player chess" label="Four-player chess"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19419" end="19436" title=":Category:Negotiation tabletop games" label="Negotiation games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871" start="19450" end="19459" title="Diplomacy (game)" label="Diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347716" start="19468" end="19489" title="Paper-and-pencil game" label="Paper-and-pencil game"/>
<link wikidata="Q210339" start="19498" end="19509" title="tic-tac-toe" label="tic-tac-toe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142531" start="19513" end="19527" title="dots and boxes" label="dots and boxes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19530" end="19550" title=":Category:Board games of physical skill" label="Physical skill games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027201" start="19564" end="19576" title="Camp Granada" label="Camp Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428765" start="19665" end="19671" title="kōnane" label="kōnane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343187" start="19673" end="19682" title="mū tōrere" label="mū tōrere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797732" start="19691" end="19697" title="L game" label="L game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099522" start="19700" end="19709" title="Race game" label="Race game"/>
<link wikidata="Q796171" start="19718" end="19725" title="Pachisi" label="Pachisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11411" start="19727" end="19737" title="backgammon" label="backgammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q697302" start="19739" end="19757" title="snakes and ladders" label="snakes and ladders"/>
<link wikidata="Q966029" start="19759" end="19770" title="hyena chase" label="hyena chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643932" start="19797" end="19815" title="Tabletop role-playing game" label="Role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="19823" end="19845" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19848" end="19861" title=":Category:Roll-and-move board games" label="Roll-and-move"/>
<link wikidata="Q17243" start="19881" end="19889" title="Monopoly (game)" label="Monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319521" start="19905" end="19909" title="The Game of Life" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379938" start="19918" end="19936" title="Running-fight game" label="Running-fight game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410789" start="19945" end="19948" title="Bul (game)" label="bul"/>
<link wikidata="Q342547" start="20094" end="20101" title="Acquire" label="Acquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q852387" start="20117" end="20124" title="Panamax" label="Panamax"/>
<link wikidata="Q13698" start="20147" end="20153" title="puzzle" label="puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411087" start="20173" end="20186" title="peg solitaire" label="peg solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44914" start="20202" end="20208" title="Sudoku" label="Sudoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="20217" end="20222" title="Space" label="Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q36718832" start="20242" end="20272" title="Terraforming Mars (board game)" label="Terraforming Mars (board game)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20417" end="20431" title="List of abstract strategy games#Stacking games" label="Stacking games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241195" start="20439" end="20444" title="Lasca" label="Lasca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007571" start="20454" end="20459" title="DVONN" label="DVONN"/>
<link wikidata="Q25106378" start="20468" end="20486" title="List of storytelling games" label="Storytelling games"/>
<link wikidata="Q906623" start="20500" end="20505" title="Dixit (card game)" label="Dixit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11413" start="20580" end="20582" title="Go (game)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q748139" start="20586" end="20593" title="Reversi" label="Reversi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20596" end="20612" title=":Category:Tile-based board games" label="Tile-based games"/>
<link wikidata="Q17262" start="20626" end="20637" title="Carcassonne (board game)" label="Carcassonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q170436" start="20651" end="20659" title="Scrabble" label="Scrabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374184" start="20673" end="20693" title="Tigris and Euphrates" label="Tigris and Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061638" start="20710" end="20713" title="Evo (board game)" label="Evo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144589" start="20722" end="20732" title="Train game" label="Train game"/>
<link wikidata="Q228308" start="20747" end="20761" title="Ticket to Ride (board game)" label="Ticket to Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q204454" start="20791" end="20795" title="18xx" label="18xx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521451" start="20798" end="20804" title="Trivia" label="Trivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17250" start="20824" end="20839" title="Trivial Pursuit" label="Trivial Pursuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293" start="20978" end="20986" title="Checkers" label="Checkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5876333" start="21045" end="21058" title="Fox games" label="fox and geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q750693" start="21062" end="21068" title="Tafl games" label="tablut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931403" start="21071" end="21079" title="Board wargame" label="Wargames"/>
<link wikidata="Q12541" start="21101" end="21105" title="Risk (game)" label="Risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871" start="21119" end="21128" title="Diplomacy (game)" label="Diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q792553" start="21145" end="21162" title="Axis &amp;amp; Allies" label="Axis &amp;amp; Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435537" start="21179" end="21186" title="Attack! (board game)" label="Attack!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126593" start="21202" end="21224" title="Conquest of the Empire" label="Conquest of the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220419" start="21233" end="21242" title="Word game" label="Word game"/>
<link wikidata="Q170436" start="21257" end="21265" title="Scrabble" label="Scrabble"/>
<link wikidata="Q890566" start="21279" end="21285" title="Boggle" label="Boggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750856" start="21293" end="21301" title="Anagrams (game)" label="Anagrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q17951" start="21394" end="21400" title="jargon" label="jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725664" start="21439" end="21450" title="terminology" label="terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751513" start="21492" end="21505" title="game mechanic" label="game mechanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q85747954" start="21575" end="21592" title="Board game awards" label="Board game awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q887528" start="21595" end="21608" title="BoardGameGeek" label="BoardGameGeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577766" start="21654" end="21669" title="Going Cardboard" label="Going Cardboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867898" start="21698" end="21714" title="History of games" label="History of games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635956" start="21717" end="21734" title="Interactive movie" label="Interactive movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600160" start="21747" end="21766" title="List of board games" label="List of board games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243226" start="21769" end="21795" title="List of game manufacturers" label="List of game manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188693" start="21798" end="21808" title="Mind sport" label="Mind sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047315" start="21954" end="21968" title="Willard Fiske" label="Fiske, Willard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525688" start="22325" end="22343" title="Rollefson, Gary O." label="Rollefson, Gary O."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3402" wikidata="Q1053956" url="?curid=3402" title="Bead">
<text>A bead is a small, decorative object that is formed in a variety of shapes and sizes of a material such as stone, bone, shell, glass, plastic, wood, or pearl and with a small hole for threading or stringing. Beads range in size from under 1 millimeter (0.039 in) to over 1 centimeter (0.39 in) in diameter.

Beads represent some of the earliest forms of jewellery, with a pair of beads made from &quot;Nassarius&quot; sea snail shells dating to approximately 100,000 years ago thought to be the earliest known example.[1][2] Beadwork is the art or craft of making things with beads. Beads can be woven together with specialized thread, strung onto thread or soft, flexible wire, or adhered to a surface (e.g. fabric, clay).

==Types of beads==

Beads can be divided into several types of overlapping categories based on different criteria such as the materials from which they are made, the process used in their manufacturing, the place or period of origin, the patterns on their surface, or their general shape. In some cases, such as millefiori and cloisonné beads, multiple categories may overlap in an interdependent fashion.

==Components==
Beads can be made of many different materials. The earliest beads were made of a variety of natural materials which, after they were gathered, could be readily drilled and shaped. As humans became capable of obtaining and working with more difficult materials, those materials were added to the range of available substances.

Beads were a part of different cultures, each made with different materials throughout history and using beads to form something handmade. Beads came in different colors, shapes, and forms, what materials were used, and whether there was a meaning or meaning behind the beads.

In modern manufacturing, the most common bead materials are wood, plastic, glass, metal, and stone.

=== Natural materials ===
Beads are still made from many naturally occurring materials, both organic (i.e., of animal- or plant-based origin) and inorganic (purely mineral origin). However, some of these materials now routinely undergo some extra processing beyond mere shaping and drilling such as color enhancement via dyes or irradiation.

The natural organics include bone, coral, horn, ivory, seeds (such as tagua nuts), animal shells, and wood. For most of human history, pearls were the ultimate precious beads of natural origin because of their rarity; the modern pearl-culturing process has made them far more common. Amber and jet are also of natural organic origin although both are the result of partial fossilization.

The natural inorganics include various types of stones, ranging from gemstones to common minerals, and metals. Of the latter, only a few precious metals occur in pure forms, but other purified base metals may as well be placed in this category along with certain naturally occurring alloys such as electrum.

=== Synthetic materials ===

The oldest-surviving synthetic materials used for bead making have generally been ceramics: pottery and glass. Beads were also made from ancient alloys such as bronze and brass, but as those were more vulnerable to oxidation they have generally been less well-preserved at archaeological sites.

Many different subtypes of glass are now used for beadmaking, some of which have their component-specific names. Lead crystal beads have a high percentage of lead oxide in the glass formula, increasing the refractive index. Most of the other named glass types have their formulations and patterns inseparable from the manufacturing process.   

Small, colorful, fusible plastic beads can be placed on a solid plastic-backed peg array to form designs and then melted together with a clothes iron; alternatively, they can be strung into necklaces and bracelets or woven into keychains. Fusible beads come in many colors and degrees of transparency/opacity, including varieties that glow in the dark or have internal glitter; peg boards come in various shapes and several geometric patterns. Plastic toy beads, made by chopping plastic tubes into short pieces, were introduced in 1958 by Munkplast AB in Munka-Ljungby, Sweden. Known as Indian beads, they were originally sewn together to form ribbons. The pegboard for bead designs was invented in the early 1960s (patented 1962, patent granted 1967) by Gunnar Knutsson in Vällingby, Sweden, as a therapy for elderly homes; the pegboard later gained popularity as a toy for children.[1] The bead designs were glued to cardboard or Masonite boards and used as trivets. Later, when the beads were made of polyethylene, it became possible to fuse them with a flat iron. Hama come in three sizes: mini (diameter 2 mm (0.079 in)), midi (5 mm (0.20 in)) and maxi (10 mm (0.39 in)).[2] Perler beads come in two sizes called classic (5 mm) and biggie (10 mm). Pyssla beads (by IKEA) only come in one size (5 mm).

==Manufacturing==
Modern mass-produced beads are generally shaped by carving or casting, depending on the material and desired effect. In some cases, more specialized metalworking or glassworking techniques may be employed, or a combination of multiple techniques and materials may be used such as in cloisonné.

Beads are small circular shapes that come in different shapes and sizes. The materials are made from different qualities such as color, shape, shine, pattern, or even exotic materials used, etc. In making beads, they have to have holes in the center in putting through a string to hold the beads together using different techniques that can help. Some archaeologists had been working at Blombos cave located in South Africa, there was a recent discovery showing forty-one marine shell (&quot;Nassarius kraussianus&quot;) beads. It was estimated that it was made about seventy-five thousand years ago.

=== Glassworking ===

Most glass beads are pressed glass, mass-produced by preparing a molten batch of glass of the desired color and pouring it into molds to form the desired shape. This is also true of most plastic beads.

A smaller and more expensive subset of glass and lead crystal beads are cut into precise faceted shapes on an individual basis. This was once done by hand but has largely been taken over by precision machinery.

&quot;Fire-polished&quot; faceted beads are a less expensive alternative to hand-cut faceted glass or crystal. They derive their name from the second half of a two-part process: first, the glass batch is poured into round bead molds, then they are faceted with a grinding wheel. The faceted beads are then poured onto a tray and briefly reheated just long enough to melt the surface, &quot;polishing&quot; out any minor surface irregularities from the grinding wheel.

==== Specialized glass techniques and types ====

There are several specialized glassworking techniques that create a distinctive appearance throughout the body of the resulting beads, which are then primarily referred to by the glass type.

If the glass batch is used to create a large massive block instead of pre-shaping it as it cools, the result may then be carved into smaller items in the same manner as stone. Conversely, glass artisans may make beads by lampworking the glass on an individual basis; once formed, the beads undergo little or no further shaping after the layers have been properly annealed.

Most of these glass subtypes are some form of fused glass, although goldstone is created by controlling the reductive atmosphere and cooling conditions of the glass batch rather than by fusing separate components together.

Dichroic glass beads incorporate a semitransparent microlayer of metal between two or more layers. Fibre optic glass beads have an eyecatching chatoyant effect across the grain.

There are also several ways to fuse many small glass canes together into a multicolored pattern, resulting in millefiori beads or chevron beads (sometimes called &quot;trade beads&quot;). &quot;Furnace glass&quot; beads encase a multicolored core in a transparent exterior layer which is then annealed in a furnace.

More economically, millefiori beads can also be made by limiting the patterning process to long, narrow canes or rods known as murrine. Thin cross-sections, or &quot;decals&quot;, can then be cut from the murrine and fused into the surface of a plain glass bead.

== Shapes ==
Beads can be made in variety of shapes, including the following, as well as tubular and oval-shaped beads.

===Round===

This is the most common shape of beads that are strung on wire to create necklaces, and bracelets. The shape of the round beads lay together and are pleasing to the eye. Round beads can be made of glass, stone, ceramic, metal, or wood.

===Square or cubed===

Square beads can be to enhance a necklace design as a spacer however a necklace can be strung with just square beads. The necklaces with square beads are used in Rosary necklaces/prayer necklaces, and wooden or shell ones are made for beachwear.

===Hair pipe beads===
Elk rib bones were the original material for the long, tubular hair pipe beads. Today these beads are commonly made of bison and water buffalo bones and are popular for breastplates and chokers among Plains Indians. Black variations of these beads are made from the animals&#x27; horns.

===Seed beads===
Seed beads are uniformly shaped spheroidal or tube shaped beads ranging in size from under a millimetre to several millimetres. &quot;Seed bead&quot; is a generic term for any small bead. Usually rounded in shape, seed beads are most commonly used for loom and off-loom bead weaving.

== Place or period of origin ==

* African trade beads or slave beads may be antique beads that were manufactured in Europe and used for trade during the colonial period, such as chevron beads; or they may have been made in West Africa by and for Africans, such as Mauritanian Kiffa beads, Ghanaian and Nigerian powder glass beads, or African-made brass beads. Archaeologists have documented that as recently as the late-nineteenth century beads manufactured in Europe continued to accompany exploration of Africa using Indigenous routes into the interior.
* Austrian crystal is a generic term for cut lead-crystal beads, based on the location and prestige of the Swarovski firm.
* Czech glass beads are made in the Czech Republic, in particular an area called Jablonec nad Nisou. Production of glass beads in the area dates back to the 14th century, though production was depressed under communist rule. Because of this long tradition, their workmanship and quality has an excellent reputation.
* Islamic glass beads have been made in a wide geographical and historical range of Islamic cultures. Used and manufactured from medieval Spain and North Africa in the West and to China in the East, they can be identified by recognizable features, including styles and techniques.
* Vintage beads, in the collectibles and antique market, refers to items that are at least 25 or more years old. Vintage beads are available in materials that include lucite, plastic, crystal, metal and glass.
* With beads being something that&#x27;s popular, people are drawn to them and are intrigued to know more about them. People like archaeologists, beadmakers, collectors etc. are interested in beads in knowing more about them and doing research.

=== Miscellaneous ethnic beads ===
Tibetan Dzi beads and Rudraksha beads are used to make Buddhist and Hindu rosaries (malas). Magatama are traditional Japanese beads, and cinnabar was often used for making beads in China. Wampum are cylindrical white or purple beads made from quahog or North Atlantic channeled whelk shells by northeastern Native American tribes, such as the Wampanoag and Shinnecock. Job&#x27;s tears are seed beads popular among southeastern Native American tribes. Heishe are beads made of shells or stones by the Kewa Pueblo people of New Mexico.
==Symbolic meaning of beads==
In many parts of the world, beads are used for symbolic purposes, for example:

* use for prayer or devotion - e.g. rosary beads for Roman Catholics and many other Christians, misbaha for Shia and many other Muslims, japamala/nenju for Hindus, Buddhists, Jains, some Sikhs, Confucianism, Taoists/Daoists, Shinto, etc.
* use for anti-tension devices, e.g. Greek komboloi, or worry beads.
* use as currency e.g. Aggrey beads from Ghana.
* use for gaming e.g. oware beads for mancala.
* Different religions around the world like Hinduism, Buddhism, Christianity, and many more had a role to play. Beads were used to carry letters, patterns, and ideas in counting prayers. In the medieval times era, it was common to use prayer beads in different classes. The materials that were fashioned to make them were stones, metal including bones.

==History==
Beads are thought to be one of the earliest forms of trade between members of the human race. It is believed that bead trading was one of the reasons why humans developed language.[1] Beads are said to have been used and traded for most of human history. The oldest beads found to date were at Blombos Cave, about 72,000 years old, and at Ksar Akil[2] in Lebanon, about 40,000 years old.


==Surface patterns==

After shaping, glass and crystal beads can have their surface appearance enhanced by etching a translucent frosted layer, applying an additional color layer, or both. &quot;Aurora Borealis&quot;, or AB, is a surface coating that diffuses light into a rainbow. Other surface coatings are vitrail, moonlight, dorado, satin, star shine, and heliotrope.

* Faux beads are beads that are made to look like a more expensive original material, especially in the case of fake pearls and simulated rocks, minerals and gemstones. Precious metals and ivory are also imitated.

Tagua nuts from South America are used as an ivory substitute since the natural ivory trade has been restricted worldwide.

== Magnetic beads ==
Selecting magnetic materials are considered useful for medical care and medical research. By linking monoclonal antibodies or DNA to magnetic beads, or by using magnetic beads coated with streptavidin, a specific interaction with the corresponding target is ensured. By means of an external magnet, the recovery of material for further studies is greatly simplified. 

==See also==
* Fly tying#Bead (Spherical brass, tungsten, and glass beads are often used in Fly tying)
* Glass beadmaking
* Jewelry design
* Mardi Gras beads
* Murano beads
* Pearl
* Ultraviolet-sensitive bead

==References==
==Further reading==
* Beck, Horace (1928) &quot;Classification and Nomenclature of Beads and Pendants.&quot; Archaeologia 77. (Reprinted by Shumway Publishers York, PA 1981)
* Dubin, Lois Sherr. &quot;North American Indian Jewelry and Adornment: From Prehistory to the Present&quot;. New York: Harry N. Abrams, 1999: 170–171. .
* Dubin, Lois Sherr. &quot;The History of Beads: From 100,000 B.C. to the Present, Revised and Expanded Edition&quot;. New York: Harry N. Abrams, (2009). .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1053956" start="2" end="6" title="Bead" label="bead"/>
<link wikidata="Q49007" start="184" end="193" title="Yarn" label="threading"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="354" end="363" title="jewellery" label="jewellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q268148" start="402" end="411" title="Nassarius" label="Nassarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915129" start="525" end="533" title="Beadwork" label="Beadwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q49007" start="628" end="634" title="Yarn" label="thread"/>
<link wikidata="Q551997" start="673" end="677" title="wire" label="wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="709" end="715" title="Cloth" label="fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="717" end="721" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q748940" start="1037" end="1047" title="millefiori" label="millefiori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102226" start="1052" end="1061" title="cloisonné" label="cloisonné"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="1812" end="1816" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="1818" end="1825" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="1827" end="1832" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="1834" end="1839" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="1845" end="1850" title="stone" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="1964" end="1970" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="1975" end="1980" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="2017" end="2024" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="2174" end="2178" title="dyes" label="dyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="2225" end="2229" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q531601" start="2231" end="2236" title="Coral (precious)" label="coral"/>
<link wikidata="Q65284752" start="2238" end="2242" title="Horn (anatomy)" label="horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="2244" end="2249" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="2251" end="2255" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q161190" start="2266" end="2271" title="tagua" label="tagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="2279" end="2291" title="Exoskeleton" label="animal shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="2298" end="2302" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q43436" start="2331" end="2336" title="pearl" label="pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029022" start="2425" end="2448" title="Cultured pearl" label="pearl-culturing process"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="2480" end="2485" title="Amber" label="Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q543694" start="2490" end="2493" title="Jet (lignite)" label="jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="2569" end="2575" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="2633" end="2639" title="stones" label="stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="2654" end="2662" title="gemstone" label="gemstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="2674" end="2681" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="2688" end="2693" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q271449" start="2722" end="2736" title="precious metal" label="precious metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q428855" start="2778" end="2788" title="base metal" label="base metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q239481" start="2883" end="2891" title="electrum" label="electrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="3005" end="3012" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="3015" end="3022" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="3027" end="3032" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="3083" end="3089" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="3094" end="3099" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="3138" end="3147" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="3246" end="3251" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q392551" start="3332" end="3344" title="Lead crystal" label="Lead crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q407879" start="3377" end="3387" title="Lead(II) oxide" label="lead oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="3425" end="3441" title="refractive index" label="refractive index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702149" start="3581" end="3602" title="Fuse beads" label="fusible plastic beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650142" start="3701" end="3713" title="Ironing" label="clothes iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q487623" start="3852" end="3864" title="Transparency and translucency" label="transparency"/>
<link wikidata="Q691914" start="3865" end="3872" title="opacity" label="opacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531522" start="3933" end="3940" title="glitter" label="glitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126314" start="4120" end="4133" title="Munka-Ljungby" label="Munka-Ljungby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055342" start="4152" end="4163" title="Indian bead" label="Indian bead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808397" start="4497" end="4505" title="Masonite" label="Masonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q15707852" start="4525" end="4531" title="trivet" label="trivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q143429" start="4569" end="4581" title="polyethylene" label="polyethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q54078" start="4835" end="4839" title="IKEA" label="IKEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="4897" end="4910" title="mass-produced" label="mass-produced"/>
<link wikidata="Q13039303" start="4941" end="4948" title="carving" label="carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q496098" start="4952" end="4959" title="casting" label="casting"/>
<link wikidata="Q953045" start="5039" end="5051" title="metalworking" label="metalworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="5055" end="5060" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102226" start="5173" end="5182" title="cloisonné" label="cloisonné"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241657" start="5830" end="5843" title="pressed glass" label="pressed glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q8348044" start="5890" end="5916" title="Glass coloring and color marking" label="glass of the desired color"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="5996" end="6003" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666550" start="7156" end="7167" title="lampworking" label="lampworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339544" start="7298" end="7304" title="annealing (glass)" label="anneal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527106" start="7355" end="7366" title="fused glass" label="fused glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116835" start="7377" end="7386" title="Goldstone (gemstone)" label="goldstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209450" start="7533" end="7547" title="Dichroic glass" label="Dichroic glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="7632" end="7643" title="Fibre optic" label="Fibre optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068275" start="7676" end="7685" title="chatoyant" label="chatoyant"/>
<link wikidata="Q748940" start="7822" end="7832" title="millefiori" label="millefiori"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094446" start="7842" end="7854" title="chevron bead" label="chevron bead"/>
<link wikidata="Q132539" start="8849" end="8855" title="Rosary" label="Rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639521" start="9019" end="9028" title="hair pipe" label="hair pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="9075" end="9080" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q42710" start="9085" end="9098" title="water buffalo" label="water buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="9156" end="9170" title="Plains Indians" label="Plains Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q17138728" start="9513" end="9517" title="Bead weaving" label="loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17138728" start="9522" end="9530" title="Bead weaving" label="off-loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832030" start="9604" end="9615" title="slave beads" label="slave beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6405875" start="9823" end="9834" title="Kiffa beads" label="Kiffa beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236011" start="9858" end="9876" title="powder glass beads" label="powder glass beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q611115" start="10210" end="10219" title="Swarovski" label="Swarovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="10262" end="10276" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q147607" start="10307" end="10325" title="Jablonec nad Nisou" label="Jablonec nad Nisou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340372" start="10626" end="10641" title="Islamic culture" label="Islamic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="10671" end="10685" title="Al-Andalus" label="medieval Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="11314" end="11319" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q839118" start="11322" end="11330" title="Dzi bead" label="Dzi bead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648541" start="11336" end="11350" title="Rudraksha bead" label="Rudraksha bead"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129913" start="11398" end="11403" title="Prayer beads" label="malas"/>
<link wikidata="Q334232" start="11406" end="11414" title="Magatama" label="Magatama"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="11431" end="11436" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q104614" start="11451" end="11459" title="cinnabar" label="cinnabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="11495" end="11500" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q943899" start="11502" end="11508" title="Wampum" label="Wampum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279087" start="11557" end="11563" title="quahog" label="quahog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017836" start="11582" end="11597" title="channeled whelk" label="channeled whelk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047264" start="11657" end="11666" title="Wampanoag" label="Wampanoag"/>
<link wikidata="Q241285" start="11671" end="11681" title="Shinnecock Indian Nation" label="Shinnecock"/>
<link wikidata="Q827098" start="11683" end="11699" title="Job&amp;#x27;s tears" label="Job&amp;#x27;s tears"/>
<link wikidata="Q5701058" start="11766" end="11772" title="Heishe" label="Heishe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550492" start="11815" end="11833" title="Kewa Pueblo, New Mexico" label="Kewa Pueblo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="11837" end="11847" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129913" start="11961" end="11987" title="Prayer beads" label="use for prayer or devotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q132539" start="11995" end="12007" title="rosary beads" label="rosary beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141821" start="12055" end="12062" title="misbaha" label="misbaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336519" start="12096" end="12104" title="japamala" label="japamala"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="12153" end="12165" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190393" start="12167" end="12170" title="Tao" label="Tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q190393" start="12175" end="12178" title="Dao" label="Dao"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="12184" end="12190" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433311" start="12240" end="12248" title="komboloi" label="komboloi"/>
<link wikidata="Q420555" start="12289" end="12301" title="Aggrey beads" label="Aggrey beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="12307" end="12312" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q575620" start="12336" end="12347" title="oware" label="oware beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q267989" start="12352" end="12359" title="mancala" label="mancala"/>
<link wikidata="Q884971" start="13021" end="13033" title="Blombos Cave" label="Blombos Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817236" start="13066" end="13075" title="Ksar Akil" label="Ksar Akil"/>
<link wikidata="Q43436" start="13607" end="13612" title="pearl" label="pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="13635" end="13643" title="minerals" label="minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="13648" end="13656" title="gemstone" label="gemstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="13679" end="13684" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q161190" start="13705" end="13714" title="Tagua nut" label="Tagua nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820248" start="13785" end="13796" title="ivory trade" label="ivory trade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14234" end="14248" title="Fly tying#Bead" label="Fly tying#Bead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428403" start="14311" end="14320" title="Fly tying" label="Fly tying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435588" start="14324" end="14340" title="Glass beadmaking" label="Glass beadmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189617" start="14343" end="14357" title="Jewelry design" label="Jewelry design"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758660" start="14360" end="14376" title="Mardi Gras beads" label="Mardi Gras beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q371383" start="14379" end="14391" title="Murano beads" label="Murano beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q43436" start="14394" end="14399" title="Pearl" label="Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880701" start="14402" end="14428" title="Ultraviolet-sensitive bead" label="Ultraviolet-sensitive bead"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3403" wikidata="Q17138728" url="?curid=3403" title="Bead weaving">
<text>Bead weaving (or beadweaving) is a set of techniques for weaving sheets and objects of seed beads. Threads are strung through and/or around the beads to hold them together. It can be done either on a loom or using one of a number of off-loom stitches.
==On-loom beadweaving==
When weaving on a loom, the beads are strung on the weft threads and locked in between the warp threads. Although loomed pieces are typically rectangular, it is possible to increase and decrease to produce angular or curvy shapes. Fringe can also be added during weaving or before the piece is removed from the loom.

===Frame looms===
The most common modern loom bead weaving technique requires two passes of the weft thread per row of beads. First, an entire row of beads is strung on the weft thread. Then the beads are pressed in between the warp threads from below. Then the needle is passed back through the beads, but above the warp threads, to lock the beads into place. 

Bead looms vary in size and are typically made of wood or metal. Usually, a comb or spring is used to hold the warp threads a bead-width apart (the lede image shows a threaded rod). Some looms have roller bars; these allow the weaver to produce pieces that are longer than the loom. Most looms are meant to sit on a table, but some have floor stands or are meant to sit in the lap. Cheap bead looms are sometimes made from styrofoam trays, wrapping the warp through evenly-spaced small slits notched into opposite edges.

===Heddle looms===

Heddle bead looms were popular in the United States near the beginning of the 20th century. They allow weaving of beads by raising every other thread and inserting strung beads in the shed, the space between the lowered and raised threads. There are still a few heddle bead looms being manufactured today. The most difficult part of loomwork is finishing off the warp threads.

==Off-loom beadweaving==
Off-loom beadweaving is a family of beadwork techniques in which seed beads are woven together into a flat fabric, a tubular rope, or a three-dimensional object such as a ball, clasp, box, or a piece of jewelry. Most off-loom techniques can be accomplished using a single needle and thread (no warp threads), and some have two-needle variations.
Different stitches produce pieces with distinct textures, shapes, and patterns. There are many different off-loom bead stitches, including new stitches (distinct thread paths) published as recently as 2015:
* albion stitch, developed by Heather Kingsley-Heath, published May 2009
* brick stitch, also known as Comanche or Cheyenne stitch
* chevron stitch, a triangular form of bead netting
* diamond weave, developed over a number of years by Gerlinde Lenz, published August 2015
* herringbone stitch, also known as Ndebele stitch
* hubble stitch and wave hubble stitch, created and developed by Melanie de Miguel, published 2015
* netting, to avoid confusion specifically &quot;bead&quot; netting
* peyote stitch, also known as gourd stitch
* plaiting, crossing multiple threads as in a plait or braid, using beads to connect the crossings
* pondo stitch, also known as African circle stitch
* right-angle weave
* Saint Petersburg chain
* square stitch, an off loom stitch that mimics the look of loomed bead projects. 
*ladder stitch, a foundation stitch that is used to build a base for brick stitch or herringbone stitch.
* triangle weave
Spiral Bead Weaving Stitches
* Cellini spiral, a tubular peyote stitch
* Dutch spiral
* African helix
* Russian spiral
*Chenille

==See also==
*Glass beadmaking
*Beadwork
*Bead embroidery
*Bead knitting
*Bead crochet
*Quillwork

==References==
==Further reading==
* Virginia Blakelock, &quot;Those Bad, Bad Beads!&quot; Virginia Blakelock Publisher, 1990.
* Don Pierce, &quot;Beading on a Loom.&quot; Interweave Press, 1999. 
* Carol Wilcox Wells, &quot;Creative Bead Weaving.&quot; Lark Books, 1996. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17138728" start="0" end="12" title="Bead weaving" label="Bead weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q17138728" start="17" end="28" title="Bead weaving" label="beadweaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445626" start="87" end="97" title="seed beads" label="seed beads"/>
<link wikidata="Q173056" start="200" end="204" title="loom" label="loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="328" end="332" title="weft" label="weft"/>
<link wikidata="Q116214300" start="367" end="371" title="Warp (weaving)" label="warp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353860" start="507" end="513" title="Fringe (trim)" label="Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49007" start="772" end="778" title="yarn" label="thread"/>
<link wikidata="Q142690" start="856" end="862" title="Sewing needle" label="needle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23834" start="1033" end="1037" title="comb" label="comb"/>
<link wikidata="Q102836" start="1041" end="1047" title="Spring (device)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607557" start="1124" end="1136" title="threaded rod" label="threaded rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276686" start="1334" end="1337" title="lap" label="lap"/>
<link wikidata="Q39515" start="1499" end="1505" title="Rigid heddle" label="Heddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391023" start="1683" end="1737" title="Shed (weaving)" label="shed, the space between the lowered and raised threads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915129" start="1938" end="1946" title="beadwork" label="beadwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053956" start="1972" end="1976" title="bead" label="bead"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="2009" end="2015" title="Cloth" label="fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965963" start="2530" end="2542" title="brick stitch" label="brick stitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744147" start="2730" end="2748" title="herringbone stitch" label="herringbone stitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179596" start="2948" end="2961" title="peyote stitch" label="peyote stitch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3091" end="3103" title="pondo stitch" label="pondo stitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390422" start="3143" end="3160" title="right-angle weave" label="right-angle weave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3163" end="3185" title="Saint Petersburg chain" label="Saint Petersburg chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582082" start="3188" end="3201" title="square stitch" label="square stitch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3376" end="3390" title="triangle weave" label="triangle weave"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3464" end="3476" title="Dutch spiral" label="Dutch spiral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3479" end="3492" title="African helix" label="African helix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435588" start="3535" end="3551" title="Glass beadmaking" label="Glass beadmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915129" start="3553" end="3561" title="Beadwork" label="Beadwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876057" start="3563" end="3578" title="Bead embroidery" label="Bead embroidery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876055" start="3580" end="3593" title="Bead knitting" label="Bead knitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876053" start="3595" end="3607" title="Bead crochet" label="Bead crochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123148" start="3609" end="3618" title="Quillwork" label="Quillwork"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="3406" wikidata="Q188360" url="?curid=3406" title="Branchiopoda">
<text>Branchiopoda is a class of crustaceans. It comprises fairy shrimp, clam shrimp, Diplostraca (or Cladocera), Notostraca, the Devonian &quot;Lepidocaris&quot; and possibly the Cambrian &quot;Rehbachiella&quot;. They are mostly small, freshwater animals that feed on plankton and detritus.

==Description==
Members of the Branchiopoda are unified by the presence of gills on many of the animals&#x27; appendages, including some of the mouthparts. This is also responsible for the name of the group (from the , gills, akin to , windpipe; , foot). They generally possess compound eyes and a carapace, which may be a shell of two valves enclosing the trunk (as in most Cladocera), broad and shallow (as in the Notostraca), or entirely absent (as in the Anostraca). In the groups where the carapace prevents the use of the trunk limbs for swimming (Cladocera and clam shrimp), the antennae are used for locomotion, as they are in the nauplius. Male fairy shrimp have an enlarged pair of antennae with which they grasp the female during mating, while the bottom-feeding Notostraca, the antennae are reduced to vestiges. The trunk limbs are beaten in a metachronal rhythm, causing a flow of water along the midline of the animal, from which it derives oxygen, food and, in the case of the Anostraca and Notostraca, movement.

==Ecology==
Branchiopods are found in continental fresh water, including temporary pools and in hypersaline lakes, and some in brackish water. Only two groups of water fleas include marine species: Family Podonidae in the order Diplostraca, and family Sididae in the order Diplostraca.
Most branchiopodans eat floating detritus or plankton, which they take using the setae on their appendages. But notostracans are omnivorous and very opportunistic feeders and will eat algae and bacteria in addition to animals as both predators and scavengers.

==Taxonomy==
In early taxonomic treatments, the current members of the Branchiopoda were all placed in a single genus, &quot;Monoculus&quot;. The taxon Branchiopoda was erected by Pierre André Latreille in 1817, initially at the rank of order.

The current upper-level classification of Branchiopoda, according to the World Register of Marine Species (2021), is as follows:

Class Branchiopoda 
: Subclass Sarsostraca 
::Order Anostraca 
:::Suborder Anostracina 
:::Suborder Artemiina 
: Subclass Phyllopoda 
:: Superorder Diplostraca 
::: Order Anomopoda 
::: Order Ctenopoda 
::: Order Cyclestherida 
::: Order Haplopoda 
::: Order Laevicaudata 
::: Order Onychopoda 
::: Order Spinicaudata 
:: Order Notostraca 
::Genus †&quot;Rehbachiella&quot;? 
In addition, the extinct genus &quot;Lepidocaris&quot; is generally placed in Branchiopoda.

===Anostraca===
The fairy shrimp of the order Anostraca are usually long (exceptionally up to ). Most species have 20 body segments, bearing 11 pairs of leaf-like &quot;phyllopodia&quot; (swimming legs), and the body lacks a carapace. They live in vernal pools and hypersaline lakes across the world, including pools in deserts, in ice-covered mountain lakes and in Antarctica. They swim &quot;upside-down&quot; and feed by filtering organic particles from the water or by scraping algae from surfaces. They are an important food for many birds and fish, and are cultured and harvested for use as fish food. There are 300 species spread across 8 families.

===Lipostraca===

Lipostraca contains a single extinct Early Devonian species, &quot;Lepidocaris rhyniensis&quot;, which is the most abundant animal in the Rhynie chert deposits. It resembles modern Anostraca, to which it is probably closely related, although its relationships to other orders remain unclear. The body is long, with 23 body segments and 19 pairs of appendages, but no carapace. It occurred chiefly among charophytes, probably in alkaline temporary pools.

===Notostraca===

The order Notostraca comprises the single family Triopsidae, containing the tadpole shrimp or shield shrimp. The two genera, &quot;Triops&quot; and &quot;Lepidurus&quot;, are considered living fossils, having not changed significantly in outward form since the Triassic. They have a broad, flat carapace, which conceals the head and bears a single pair of compound eyes. The abdomen is long, appears to be segmented and bears numerous pairs of flattened legs. The telson is flanked by a pair of long, thin caudal rami. Phenotypic plasticity within taxa makes species-level identification difficult, and is further compounded by variation in the mode of reproduction. The evidence of phenotypic plasticity of Arctic tadpole shrimp (&quot;Lepidurus arcticus&quot;, Notostraca) has been observed in Svalbard. Notostracans are the largest branchiopodans and are omnivores living on the bottom of temporary pools, ponds and shallow lakes.

===Laevicaudata, Spinicaudata and Cyclestherida (once Conchostraca)===

Clam shrimp are bivalved animals which have lived since at least the Devonian. The three groups are not believed to form a clade. They have 10–32 trunk segments, decreasing in size from front to back, and each bears a pair of legs which also carry gills. A strong muscle can close the two halves of the shell together.

===Anomopoda, Ctenopoda, Onychopoda, and Haplopoda (once Cladocera)===

These four orders make up a group of small crustaceans commonly called water fleas. Around 620 species have been recognised so far, with many more undescribed. They are ubiquitous in inland aquatic habitats, but rare in the oceans. Most are long, with a down-turned head, and a carapace covering the apparently unsegmented thorax and abdomen. There is a single median compound eye. Most species show cyclical parthenogenesis, where asexual reproduction is occasionally supplemented by sexual reproduction, which produces resting eggs that allow the species to survive harsh conditions and disperse to distant habitats. In the water bodies of the world, a lot of Cladocera are non-native species, many of which pose a great threat to aquatic ecosystems.

==Evolution==
The fossil record of branchiopods extends back at least into the Upper Cambrian and possibly further. The group is thought to be monophyletic, with the Anostraca having been the first group to branch off. It is thought that the group evolved in the seas, but was forced into temporary pools and hypersaline lakes by the evolution of bony fishes. Although they were previously considered the sister group to the remaining crustaceans, it is now widely accepted that crustaceans form a paraphyletic group, and Branchiopoda are thought to be sister to a clade comprising Xenocarida (Remipedia and Cephalocarida) and Hexapoda (insects and their relatives).

==See also==
*&quot;Vladicaris&quot;

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188360" start="0" end="12" title="Branchiopoda" label="Branchiopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q37517" start="18" end="23" title="class (biology)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="27" end="37" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q853383" start="53" end="65" title="Anostraca" label="fairy shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q22111101" start="67" end="78" title="clam shrimp" label="clam shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q768012" start="80" end="91" title="Diplostraca" label="Diplostraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344541" start="108" end="118" title="Notostraca" label="Notostraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527441" start="139" end="150" title="Lepidocaris" label="Lepidocaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q125022902" start="189" end="201" title="Rehbachiella" label="Rehbachiella"/>
<link wikidata="Q132390" start="363" end="367" title="gill" label="gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415392" start="398" end="407" title="appendage" label="appendage"/>
<link wikidata="Q498963" start="432" end="442" title="arthropod mouthparts" label="mouthparts"/>
<link wikidata="Q175449" start="524" end="532" title="windpipe" label="windpipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q942537" start="566" end="578" title="compound eye" label="compound eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q666115" start="586" end="594" title="carapace" label="carapace"/>
<link wikidata="Q204664" start="874" end="882" title="antenna (biology)" label="antennae"/>
<link wikidata="Q15114930" start="927" end="935" title="nauplius (larva)" label="nauplius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393858" start="1047" end="1061" title="bottom feeder" label="bottom-feeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q627214" start="1102" end="1110" title="Vestigiality" label="vestiges"/>
<link wikidata="Q56759471" start="1144" end="1162" title="metachronal rhythm" label="metachronal rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="1243" end="1249" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="1251" end="1255" title="food" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="1367" end="1378" title="freshwater" label="fresh water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103796" start="1390" end="1405" title="vernal pool" label="temporary pools"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912558" start="1413" end="1429" title="hypersaline lake" label="hypersaline lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="1444" end="1458" title="brackish water" label="brackish water"/>
<link wikidata="Q768012" start="1479" end="1490" title="Diplostraca" label="water fleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558988" start="1522" end="1531" title="Podonidae" label="Podonidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q768012" start="1545" end="1556" title="Diplostraca" label="Diplostraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4544090" start="1569" end="1576" title="Sididae" label="Sididae"/>
<link wikidata="Q768012" start="1590" end="1601" title="Diplostraca" label="Diplostraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q736879" start="1636" end="1644" title="detritus" label="detritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="1648" end="1656" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q126780" start="1684" end="1688" title="seta" label="seta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344541" start="1715" end="1727" title="notostracans" label="notostracans"/>
<link wikidata="Q312771" start="2044" end="2066" title="Pierre André Latreille" label="Pierre André Latreille"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="2093" end="2097" title="taxonomic rank" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="2101" end="2106" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q853383" start="2270" end="2281" title="Sarsostraca" label="Sarsostraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q853383" start="2291" end="2300" title="Anostraca" label="Anostraca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2314" end="2325" title="Anostracina" label="Anostracina"/>
<link wikidata="Q134772" start="2339" end="2348" title="Artemiina" label="Artemiina"/>
<link wikidata="Q188360" start="2361" end="2371" title="Phyllopoda" label="Phyllopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q768012" start="2387" end="2398" title="Diplostraca" label="Diplostraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769984" start="2410" end="2419" title="Anomopoda" label="Anomopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142742" start="2431" end="2440" title="Ctenopoda" label="Ctenopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q22111101" start="2452" end="2465" title="Cyclestherida" label="Cyclestherida"/>
<link wikidata="Q15886001" start="2477" end="2486" title="Haplopoda" label="Haplopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q22111101" start="2498" end="2510" title="Laevicaudata" label="Laevicaudata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024726" start="2522" end="2532" title="Onychopoda" label="Onychopoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q22111101" start="2544" end="2556" title="Spinicaudata" label="Spinicaudata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344541" start="2567" end="2577" title="Notostraca" label="Notostraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q125022902" start="2594" end="2606" title="Rehbachiella" label="Rehbachiella"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527441" start="2652" end="2663" title="Lepidocaris" label="Lepidocaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q853383" start="2754" end="2763" title="Anostraca" label="Anostraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q666115" start="2933" end="2941" title="carapace" label="carapace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103796" start="2956" end="2967" title="vernal pool" label="vernal pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912558" start="2973" end="2989" title="hypersaline lake" label="hypersaline lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="3028" end="3034" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="3074" end="3084" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252491" start="3124" end="3141" title="filter feeder" label="feed by filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="3190" end="3195" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="3354" end="3362" title="family (biology)" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527441" start="3450" end="3472" title="Lepidocaris" label="Lepidocaris rhyniensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633601" start="3521" end="3533" title="Rhynie chert" label="Rhynie chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415392" start="3731" end="3740" title="appendage" label="appendage"/>
<link wikidata="Q666115" start="3750" end="3758" title="carapace" label="carapace"/>
<link wikidata="Q133219" start="3786" end="3796" title="charophyte" label="charophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103796" start="3820" end="3835" title="vernal pool" label="temporary pools"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344541" start="3866" end="3876" title="Notostraca" label="Notostraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q114364" start="3987" end="3993" title="Triops" label="Triops"/>
<link wikidata="Q139749" start="4010" end="4019" title="Lepidurus" label="Lepidurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187419" start="4042" end="4055" title="living fossil" label="living fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="4117" end="4125" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q952557" start="4320" end="4326" title="telson" label="telson"/>
<link wikidata="Q295130" start="4375" end="4396" title="Phenotypic plasticity" label="Phenotypic plasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021106" start="4593" end="4611" title="Lepidurus arcticus" label="Lepidurus arcticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="4714" end="4722" title="omnivore" label="omnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103796" start="4748" end="4762" title="temporary pool" label="temporary pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="4932" end="4940" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="4986" end="4991" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133438" start="5089" end="5093" title="arthropod leg" label="legs"/>
<link wikidata="Q132390" start="5111" end="5115" title="gill" label="gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="5266" end="5271" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="5298" end="5308" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883954" start="5402" end="5413" title="undescribed species" label="undescribed"/>
<link wikidata="Q942537" start="5623" end="5635" title="compound eye" label="compound eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="5664" end="5679" title="parthenogenesis" label="parthenogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173432" start="5687" end="5707" title="asexual reproduction" label="asexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="5740" end="5759" title="sexual reproduction" label="sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q768012" start="5917" end="5926" title="Cladocera" label="Cladocera"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="6027" end="6040" title="fossil record" label="fossil record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269670" start="6088" end="6102" title="Upper Cambrian" label="Upper Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="6152" end="6164" title="monophyly" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q853383" start="6175" end="6184" title="Anostraca" label="Anostraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q631768" start="6216" end="6226" title="cladogenesis" label="branch off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103796" start="6298" end="6313" title="vernal pool" label="temporary pools"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912558" start="6318" end="6334" title="hypersaline lake" label="hypersaline lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q27207" start="6356" end="6367" title="Osteichthyes" label="bony fishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="6414" end="6426" title="sister group" label="sister group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043532" start="6591" end="6601" title="Xenocarida" label="Xenocarida"/>
<link wikidata="Q490800" start="6603" end="6612" title="Remipedia" label="Remipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132649" start="6617" end="6630" title="Cephalocarida" label="Cephalocarida"/>
<link wikidata="Q105146" start="6636" end="6644" title="Hexapoda" label="Hexapoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="6646" end="6652" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q21078786" start="6697" end="6707" title="Vladicaris" label="Vladicaris"/>
</links>
</doc>
