<doc id="2185" wikidata="Q35323" url="?curid=2185" title="Arabs">
<text>The Arabs (,  , ; , , ), also known as the Arab people, are an ethnic group mainly inhabiting the Arab world in West Asia and North Africa. A significant Arab diaspora is present in various parts of the world.

Arabs have been in the Fertile Crescent for thousands of years. In the 9th century BCE, the Assyrians made written references to Arabs as inhabitants of the Levant, Mesopotamia, and Arabia. Throughout the Ancient Near East, Arabs established influential civilizations starting from 3000 BCE onwards, such as Dilmun, Gerrha, and Magan, playing a vital role in trade between Mesopotamia, and the Mediterranean. Other prominent tribes include Midian, ʿĀd, and Thamud mentioned in the Bible and Quran. Later, in 900 BCE, the Qedarites enjoyed close relations with the nearby Canaanite and Aramaean states, and their territory extended from Lower Egypt to the Southern Levant. From 1200 BCE to 110 BCE, powerful kingdoms emerged such as Saba, Lihyan, Minaean, Qataban, Hadhramaut, Awsan, and Homerite emerged in Arabia. According to the Abrahamic tradition, Arabs are descendants of Abraham through his son Ishmael.
During classical antiquity, the Nabataeans established their kingdom with Petra as the capital in 300 BCE, by 271 CE, the Palmyrene Empire with the capital Palmyra, led by Queen Zenobia, encompassed the Syria Palaestina, Arabia Petraea, Egypt, and large parts of Anatolia. The Arab Itureans inhabited Lebanon, Syria, and northern Palestine (Galilee) during the Hellenistic and Roman periods. The Osroene and Hatran were Arab kingdoms in Upper Mesopotamia around 200 CE. In 164 CE, the Sasanians recognized the Arabs as &quot;Arbayistan&quot;, meaning &quot;land of the Arabs,&quot; as they were part of Adiabene in upper Mesopotamia. The Arab Emesenes ruled by 46 BCE Emesa (Homs), Syria. During late antiquity, the Tanukhids, Salihids, Lakhmids, Kinda, and Ghassanids were dominant Arab tribes in the Levant, Mesopotamia, and Arabia, they predominantly embraced Christianity.

During the Middle Ages, Islam fostered a vast Arab union, leading to significant Arab migrations to the Maghreb, the Levant, and neighbouring territories under the rule of Arab empires such as the Rashidun, Umayyad, Abbasid, and Fatimid, ultimately leading to the decline of the Byzantine and Sasanian empires. At its peak, Arab territories stretched from southern France to western China, forming one of history&#x27;s largest empires. The Great Arab Revolt in the early 20th century aided in dismantling the Ottoman Empire, ultimately leading to the formation of the Arab League on 22 March 1945, with its Charter endorsing the principle of a &quot;unified Arab homeland&quot;.

Arabs from Morocco to Iraq share a common bond based on ethnicity, language, culture, history, identity, ancestry, nationalism, geography, unity, and politics, which give the region a distinct identity and distinguish it from other parts of the Muslim world. They also have their own customs, literature, music, dance, media, food, clothing, society, sports, architecture, art and, mythology. Arabs have significantly influenced and contributed to human progress in many fields, including science, technology, philosophy, ethics, literature, politics, business, art, music, comedy, theatre, cinema, architecture, food, medicine, and religion. Before Islam, most Arabs followed polytheistic Semitic religion, while some tribes adopted Judaism or Christianity and a few individuals, known as the &quot;hanifs&quot;, followed a form of monotheism. Currently, around 93% of Arabs are Muslims, while the rest are mainly Arab Christians, as well as Arab groups of Druze and Baháʼís.

== Etymology ==

The earliest documented use of the word &quot;Arab&quot; in reference to a people appears in the Kurkh Monoliths, an Akkadian-language record of the Assyrian conquest of Aram (9th century BCE). The Monoliths used the term to refer to Bedouins of the Arabian Peninsula under King Gindibu, who fought as part of a coalition opposed to Assyria.

The related word &quot;ʾaʿrāb&quot; is used to refer to Bedouins today, in contrast to &quot;ʿArab&quot; which refers to Arabs in general. Both terms are mentioned around 40 times in pre-Islamic Sabaean inscriptions. The term &quot;ʿarab&quot; (&#x27;Arab&#x27;) occurs also in the titles of the Himyarite kings from the time of &#x27;Abu Karab Asad until MadiKarib Ya&#x27;fur. According to Sabaean grammar, the term &quot;ʾaʿrāb&quot; is derived from the term &quot;ʿarab&quot;. The term is also mentioned in Quranic verses, referring to people who were living in Madina and it might be a south Arabian loanword into Quranic language.

The oldest surviving indication of an Arab national identity is an inscription made in an archaic form of Arabic in 328 CE using the Nabataean alphabet, which refers to Imru&#x27; al-Qays ibn &#x27;Amr as &#x27;King of all the Arabs&#x27;. Herodotus refers to the Arabs in the Sinai, southern Palestine, and the frankincense region (Southern Arabia). Other Ancient-Greek historians like Agatharchides, Diodorus Siculus and Strabo mention Arabs living in Mesopotamia (along the Euphrates), in Egypt (the Sinai and the Red Sea), southern Jordan (the Nabataeans), the Syrian steppe and in eastern Arabia (the people of Gerrha). Inscriptions dating to the 6th century BCE in Yemen include the term &#x27;Arab&#x27;.

The most popular Arab account holds that the word &quot;Arab&quot; came from an eponymous father named Ya&#x27;rub, who was supposedly the first to speak Arabic. Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani had another view; he states that Arabs were called &quot;gharab&quot; (&#x27;westerners&#x27;) by Mesopotamians because Bedouins originally resided to the west of Mesopotamia; the term was then corrupted into &quot;Arab&quot;.

Yet another view is held by al-Masudi that the word &quot;Arab&quot; was initially applied to the Ishmaelites of the Arabah valley. In Biblical etymology, &quot;Arab&quot; (Hebrew: &quot;arvi&quot;) comes from the desert origin of the Bedouins it originally described (&quot;arava&quot; means &#x27;wilderness&#x27;).

The root &quot;ʿ-r-b&quot; has several additional meanings in Semitic languages—including &#x27;west, sunset&#x27;, &#x27;desert&#x27;, &#x27;mingle&#x27;, &#x27;mixed&#x27;, &#x27;merchant&#x27; and &#x27;raven&#x27;—and are &quot;comprehensible&quot; with all of these having varying degrees of relevance to the emergence of the name. It is also possible that some forms were metathetical from , &#x27;moving around&#x27; (Arabic: , &#x27;traverse&#x27;) and hence, it is alleged, &#x27;nomadic&#x27;.

== Origins ==

Arabic is a Semitic language that belongs to the Afroasiatic language family. The majority of scholars accept the &quot;Arabian peninsula&quot; has long been accepted as the original &quot;Urheimat&quot; (linguistic homeland) of the Semitic languages. with some scholars investigating if its origins are in the Levant. The ancient Semitic-speaking peoples lived in the ancient Near East, including the Levant, Mesopotamia, and the Arabian Peninsula from the 3rd millennium BCE to the end of antiquity. Proto-Semitic likely reached the Arabian Peninsula by the 4th millennium BCE, and its daughter languages spread outward from there, while Old Arabic began to differentiate from Central Semitic by the start of the 1st millennium BCE. Central Semitic is a branch of the Semitic language includes Arabic, Aramaic, Canaanite, Phoenician, Hebrew and others. The origins of Proto-Semitic may lie in the Arabian Peninsula, with the language spreading from there to other regions. This theory proposes that Semitic peoples reached Mesopotamia and other areas from the deserts to the west, such as the Akkadians who entered Mesopotamia around the late 4th millennium BCE. The origins of Semitic peoples are thought to include various regions Mesopotamia, the Levant, the Arabian Peninsula, and North Africa. Some view that Semitic may have originated in the Levant around 3800 BCE and subsequently spread to the Horn of Africa around 800 BCE from Arabia, as well as to North Africa.

According to Arab–Islamic–Jewish traditions, Ishmael, the son of Abraham and Hagar was &quot;father of the Arabs&quot;. Ishmael was considered the ancestor of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, the founder of Islam. The tribes of Central West Arabia called themselves the &quot;people of Abraham and the offspring of Ishmael.&quot; Ibn Khaldun, an Arab scholar in the 8th century, described the Arabs as having Ishmaelite origins.

The Quran mentions that Ibrahim (Abraham) and his wife Hajar (Hagar) bore a prophetic child named Ishmael, who was gifted by God a favor above other nations. Ibrahim and Ishmael built the Kaaba in Mecca, which was originally constructed by Adam. According to the Samaritan book Asaṭīr: &quot;And after the death of Abraham, Ishmael reigned twenty-seven years; And all the children of Nebaot ruled for one year in the lifetime of Ishmael; And for thirty years after his death from the river of Egypt to the river Euphrates; and they built Mecca.&quot; The Targum Onkelos annotates (Genesis 25:16), describing the extent of their settlements: The Ishmaelites lived from Hindekaia (India) to Chalutsa (possibly in Arabia), by the side of Mizraim (Egypt), and from the area around Arthur (Assyria) up towards the north. This description suggests that the Ishmaelites were a widely dispersed group with a presence across a significant portion of the ancient Near East.

== History ==

The nomads of Arabia have been spreading through the desert fringes of the Fertile Crescent since at least 3000 BCE, but the first known reference to the Arabs as a distinct group is from an Assyrian scribe recording a battle in 853 BCE. The history of the Arabs during the pre-Islamic period in various regions, including Arabia, Levant, Mesopotamia, and Egypt. The Arabs were mentioned by their neighbors, such as Assyrian and Babylonian Royal Inscriptions from 9th to 6th century BCE. There are also records from Sargon&#x27;s reign that mention sellers of iron to people called Arabs in Ḫuzaza in Babylon, causing Sargon to prohibit such trade out of fear that the Arabs might use the resource to manufacture weapons against the Assyrian army. The history of the Arabs in relation to the Bible shows that they were a significant part of the region and played a role in the lives of the Israelites. The study asserts that the Arab nation is an ancient and significant entity; however, it highlights that the Arabs lacked a collective awareness of their unity. They did not inscribe their identity as Arabs or assert exclusive ownership over specific territories.
Magan, Midian, and ʿĀd are all ancient tribes or civilizations that are mentioned in Arabic literature and have roots in the Arabia. Magan (, &#x27;), known for its production of copper and other metals, the region was an important trading center in ancient times and is mentioned in the Qur&#x27;an as a place where Musa (Moses) traveled during his lifetime. Midian (, &#x27;), on the other hand, was a region located in the northwestern part of the Arabia, the people of Midian are mentioned in the Qur&#x27;an as having worshiped idols and having been punished by God for their disobedience. Moses also lived in Midian for a time, where he married and worked as a shepherd. ʿĀd (, &quot;&quot;), as mentioned earlier, was an ancient tribe that lived in the southern Arabia, the tribe was known for its wealth, power, and advanced technology, but they were ultimately destroyed by a powerful windstorm as punishment for their disobedience to God. ʿĀd is regarded as one of the original Arab tribes.
The historian Herodotus provided extensive information about Arabia, describing the spices, terrain, folklore, trade, clothing, and weapons of the Arabs. In his third book, he mentioned the Arabs as a force to be reckoned with in the north of the Arabian Peninsula just before Cambyses&#x27; campaign against Egypt. Other Greek and Latin authors who wrote about Arabia include Theophrastus, Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, and Pliny the Elder. The Jewish historian Flavius Josephus wrote about the Arabs and their king, mentioning their relationship with Cleopatra, the queen of Egypt. The tribute paid by the Arab king to Cleopatra was collected by Herod, the king of the Jews, but the Arab king later became slow in his payments and refused to pay without further deductions. Geshem the Arab was an Arab man who opposed Nehemiah in the Hebrew Bible (Neh. 2:19, 6:1). He was likely the chief of the Arab tribe &quot;Gushamu&quot; and have been a powerful ruler with influence stretching from northern Arabia to Judah. The Arabs and the Samaritans made efforts to hinder Nehemiah&#x27;s rebuilding of the walls of Jerusalem.

The term &quot;Saracens&quot; was a term used in the early centuries, both in Greek and Latin writings, to refer to the &quot;Arabs&quot; who lived in and near what was designated by the Romans as Arabia Petraea (Levant) and Arabia Deserta (Arabia). The Christians of Iberia used the term &quot;Moor&quot; to describe all the Arabs and Muslims of that time. Arabs of Medina referred to the nomadic tribes of the deserts as the A&#x27;raab, and considered themselves sedentary, but were aware of their close racial bonds. Hagarenes is a term widely used by early Syriac, Greek, and Armenian to describe the early Arab conquerors of Mesopotamia, Syria and Egypt, refers to the descendants of Hagar, who bore a son named Ishmael to Abraham in the Old Testament. In the Bible, the Hagarenes referred to as &quot;Ishmaelites&quot; or &quot;Arabs.&quot; The Arab conquests in the 7th century was a sudden and dramatic conquest led by Arab armies, which quickly conquered much of the Middle East, North Africa, and Spain. It was a significant moment for Islam, which saw itself as the successor of Judaism and Christianity.

=== Antiquity ===
Limited local historical coverage of these civilizations means that archaeological evidence, foreign accounts and Arab oral traditions are largely relied on to reconstruct this period. Prominent civilizations at the time included, Dilmun civilization was an important trading centre which at the height of its power controlled the Arabian Gulf trading routes. The Sumerians regarded Dilmun as holy land. Dilmun is regarded as one of the oldest ancient civilizations in the Middle East. which arose around the 4th millennium BCE and lasted to 538 BCE. Gerrha was an ancient city of Eastern Arabia, on the west side of the Gulf, Gerrha was the center of an Arab kingdom from approximately 650 BCE to circa CE 300. Thamud, which arose around the 1st millennium BCE and lasted to about 300 CE. From the beginning of the first millennium BCE, Proto-Arabic, or Ancient North Arabian, texts give a clearer picture of the Arabs&#x27; emergence. The earliest are written in variants of epigraphic south Arabian &quot;musnad&quot; script, including the 8th century BCE Hasaean inscriptions of eastern Saudi Arabia, the Thamudic texts found throughout the Arabian Peninsula and Sinai.

The Qedarites were a largely nomadic ancient Arab tribal confederation centred in the Wādī Sirḥān in the Syrian Desert. They were known for their nomadic lifestyle and for their role in the caravan trade that linked the Arabian Peninsula with the Mediterranean world. The Qedarites gradually expanded their territory over the course of the 8th and 7th centuries BCE, and by the 6th century BCE, they had consolidated into a kingdom that covered a large area in northern Arabia, southern Palestine, and the Sinai Peninsula. The Qedarites were influential in the ancient Near East, and their kingdom played a significant role in the political and economic affairs of the region for several centuries.

Sheba ( &quot;Saba&quot;) is kingdom mentioned in the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament) and the Quran, though Sabaean was a South Arabian languaged and not an Arabic one. Sheba features in Jewish, Muslim, and Christian traditions, whose lineage goes back to Qahtan son of Hud, one of the ancestors of the Arabs, Sheba was mentioned in Assyrian inscriptions and in the writings of Greek and Roman writers. One of the ancient written references that also spoke of Sheba is the Old Testament, which stated that the people of Sheba supplied Syria and Egypt with incense, especially frankincense, and exported gold and precious stones to them. Sabaeans are mentioned several times in the Hebrew Bible. In the Quran, they are described as either (, not to be confused with , ), or as (). They were known for their prosperous trade and agricultural economy, which was based on the cultivation of frankincense and myrrh. These highly valued aromatic resins were exported to Egypt, Greece, and Rome, making the Sabaeans wealthy and powerful, they also traded in spices, textiles, and other luxury goods. The Maʾrib Dam was one of the greatest engineering achievements of the ancient world, and it provided water for the city of Maʾrib and the surrounding agricultural lands.

Lihyan also called Dadān or Dedan was a powerful and highly organized ancient Arab kingdom that played a vital cultural and economic role in the north-western region of the Arabian Peninsula and used Dadanitic language. The Lihyanites were known for their advanced organization and governance, and they played a significant role in the cultural and economic life of the region. The kingdom was centered around the city of Dedan (modern-day Al Ula), and it controlled a large territory that extended from Yathrib in the south to parts of the Levant in the north. The Arab genealogies consider the Banu Lihyan to be Ishmaelites, and used Dadanitic language.

The Kingdom of Ma&#x27;in was an ancient Arab kingdom with a hereditary monarchy system and a focus on agriculture and trade. Proposed dates range from the 15th century BCE to the 1st century CE Its history has been recorded through inscriptions and classical Greek and Roman books, although the exact start and end dates of the kingdom are still debated. The Ma&#x27;in people had a local governance system with councils called &quot;Mazood,&quot; and each city had its own temple that housed one or more gods. They also adopted the Phoenician alphabet and used it to write their language. The kingdom eventually fell to the Arab Sabaean people.Qataban was an ancient kingdom located in the South Arabia, which existed from the early 1st millennium BCE till the late 1st or 2nd centuries CE. It developed into a centralized state in the 6th century BCE with two co-kings ruling poles. Qataban expanded its territory, including the conquest of Ma&#x27;in and successful campaigns against the Sabaeans. It challenged the supremacy of the Sabaeans in the region and waged a successful war against Hadramawt in the 3rd century BCE. Qataban&#x27;s power declined in the following centuries, leading to its annexation by Hadramawt and Ḥimyar in the 1st century CE.

The Kingdom of Hadhramaut it was known for its rich cultural heritage, as well as its strategic location along important trade routes that connected the Middle East, South Asia, and East Africa. The Kingdom was established around the 3rd century BCE, and it reached its peak during the 2nd century CE, when it controlled much of the southern Arabian Peninsula. The kingdom was known for its impressive architecture, particularly its distinctive towers, which were used as watchtowers, defensive structures, and homes for wealthy families. The people of Hadhramaut were skilled in agriculture, especially in growing frankincense and myrrh. They had a strong maritime culture and traded with India, East Africa, and Southeast Asia. Although the kingdom declined in the 4th century, Hadhramaut remained a cultural and economic center. Its legacy can still be seen today.

The ancient Kingdom of Awsān (8th–7th century BCE) was indeed one of the most important small kingdoms of South Arabia, and its capital Ḥajar Yaḥirr was a significant center of trade and commerce in the ancient world. The destruction of the city in the 7th century BCE by the king and Mukarrib of Saba&#x27; Karab El Watar is a significant event in the history of South Arabia. The victory of the Sabaeans over Awsān is also a testament to the military might and strategic prowess of the Sabaeans, who were one of the most powerful and influential kingdoms in the region.

The Himyarite Kingdom or Himyar, was an ancient kingdom that existed from around the 2nd century BCE to the 6th century CE. It was centered in the city of Zafar, which is located in present-day Yemen. The Himyarites were an Arab people who spoke a South Arabian language and were known for their prowess in trade and seafaring, they controlled the southern part of Arabia and had a prosperous economy based on agriculture, commerce, and maritime trade, they were skilled in irrigation and terracing, which allowed them to cultivate crops in the arid environment. The Himyarites converted to Judaism in the 4th century CE, and their rulers became known as the &quot;Kings of the Jews&quot;, this conversion was likely influenced by their trade connections with the Jewish communities of the Red Sea region and the Levant, however, the Himyarites also tolerated other religions, including Christianity and the local pagan religions.

==== Classical antiquity ====

The Nabataeans were nomadic Arabs who settled in a territory centred around their capital of Petra in what is now Jordan. Their early inscriptions were in Aramaic, but gradually switched to Arabic, and since they had writing, it was they who made the first inscriptions in Arabic. The Nabataean alphabet was adopted by Arabs to the south, and evolved into modern Arabic script around the 4th century. This is attested by Safaitic inscriptions (beginning in the 1st century BCE) and the many Arabic personal names in Nabataean inscriptions. From about the 2nd century BCE, a few inscriptions from Qaryat al-Faw reveal a dialect no longer considered &quot;proto-Arabic&quot;, but &quot;pre-classical Arabic&quot;. Five Syriac inscriptions mentioning Arabs have been found at Sumatar Harabesi, one of which dates to the 2nd century CE.
Arabs are first recorded in Palmyra in the late first millennium BCE. The soldiers of the sheikh Zabdibel, who aided the Seleucids in the battle of Raphia (217 BCE), were described as Arabs; Zabdibel and his men were not actually identified as Palmyrenes in the texts, but the name &quot;Zabdibel&quot; is a Palmyrene name leading to the conclusion that the sheikh hailed from Palmyra. After the Battle of Edessa in 260 CE. Valerian&#x27;s capture by the Sassanian king Shapur I was a significant blow to Rome, and it left the empire vulnerable to further attacks. Zenobia was able to capture most of the Near East, including Egypt and parts of Asia Minor. However, their empire was short-lived, as Aurelian was able to defeat the Palmyrenes and recover the lost territories. The Palmyrenes were helped by their Arab allies, but Aurelian was also able to leverage his own alliances to defeat Zenobia and her army. Ultimately, the Palmyrene Empire lasted only a few years, but it had a significant impact on the history of the Roman Empire and the Near East.

Most scholars identify the Itureans as an Arab people who inhabited the region of Iturea, emerged as a prominent power in the region after the decline of the Seleucid Empire in the 2nd century BCE, from their base around Mount Lebanon and the Beqaa Valley, they came to dominate vast stretches of Syrian territory, and appear to have penetrated into northern parts of Palestine as far as the Galilee. Tanukhids were an Arab tribal confederation that lived in the central and eastern Arabian Peninsula during the late ancient and early medieval periods. As mentioned earlier, they were a branch of the Rabi&#x27;ah tribe, which was one of the largest Arab tribes in the pre-Islamic period. They were known for their military prowess and played a significant role in the early Islamic period, fighting in battles against the Byzantine and Sassanian empires and contributing to the expansion of the Arab empire.

The Osroene Arabs, also known as the Abgarids, were in possession of the city of Edessa in the ancient Near East for a significant period of time. Edessa was located in the region of Osroene, which was an ancient kingdom that existed from the 2nd century BCE to the 3rd century CE. They established a dynasty known as the Abgarids, which ruled Edessa for several centuries. The most famous ruler of the dynasty was Abgar V, who is said to have corresponded with Jesus Christ and is believed to have converted to Christianity. The Abgarids played an important role in the early history of Christianity in the region, and Edessa became a center of Christian learning and scholarship. The Kingdom of Hatra was an ancient city located in the region of Mesopotamia, it was founded in the 2nd or 3rd century BCE and flourished as a major center of trade and culture during the Parthian Empire. The rulers of Hatra were known as the Arsacid dynasty, which was a branch of the Parthian ruling family. However, in the 2nd century CE, the Arab tribe of Banu Tanukh seized control of Hatra and established their own dynasty. The Arab rulers of Hatra assumed the title of &quot;malka,&quot; which means king in Arabic, and they often referred to themselves as the &quot;King of the Arabs.&quot;
The Osroeni and Hatrans were part of several Arab groups or communities in upper Mesopotamia, which also included the Arabs of Adiabene which was an ancient kingdom in northern Mesopotamia, its chief city was Arbela (&quot;Arba-ilu&quot;), where Mar Uqba had a school, or the neighboring Hazzah, by which name the later Arabs also called Arbela. This Arab presence in upper Mesopotamia was acknowledged by the Sasanians, who called the region Arbayistan, meaning &quot;land of the Arabs&quot;, is first attested as a province in the Ka&#x27;ba-ye Zartosht inscription of the second Sasanian King of Kings, Shapur I (), which was erected in 262. The Emesene were a dynasty of Arab priest-kings that ruled the city of Emesa (modern-day Homs, Syria) in the Roman province of Syria from the 1st century CE to the 3rd century CE. The dynasty is notable for producing a number of high priests of the god El-Gabal, who were also influential in Roman politics and culture. The first ruler of the Emesene dynasty was Sampsiceramus I, who came to power in 64 CE. He was succeeded by his son, Iamblichus, who was followed by his own son, Sampsiceramus II. Under Sampsiceramus II, Emesa became a client kingdom of the Roman Empire, and the dynasty became more closely tied to Roman political and cultural traditions.

==== Late antiquity ====
The Ghassanids, Lakhmids and Kindites were the last major migration of pre-Islamic Arabs out of Yemen to the north. The Ghassanids increased the Semitic presence in then-Hellenized Syria, the majority of Semites were Aramaic peoples. They mainly settled in the Hauran region and spread to modern Lebanon, Palestine and Jordan. Greeks and Romans referred to all the nomadic population of the desert in the Near East as Arabi. The Romans called Yemen &quot;Arabia Felix&quot;. The Romans called the vassal nomadic states within the Roman Empire &quot;Arabia Petraea&quot;, after the city of Petra, and called unconquered deserts bordering the empire to the south and east Arabia Magna. The Lakhmids as a dynasty inherited their power from the Tanukhids, the mid Tigris region around their capital Al-Hira. They ended up allying with the Sassanids against the Ghassanids and the Byzantine Empire. The Lakhmids contested control of the Central Arabian tribes with the Kindites with the Lakhmids eventually destroying the Kingdom of Kinda in 540 after the fall of their main ally Himyar. The Persian Sassanids dissolved the Lakhmid dynasty in 602, being under puppet kings, then under their direct control. The Kindites migrated from Yemen along with the Ghassanids and Lakhmids, but were turned back in Bahrain by the Abdul Qais Rabi&#x27;a tribe. They returned to Yemen and allied themselves with the Himyarites who installed them as a vassal kingdom that ruled Central Arabia from &quot;Qaryah Dhat Kahl&quot; (the present-day called Qaryat al-Faw). They ruled much of the Northern/Central Arabian peninsula, until they were destroyed by the Lakhmid king Al-Mundhir, and his son &#x27;Amr.

The Ghassanids were an Arab tribe in the Levant in the early third century. According to Arab genealogical tradition, they were considered a branch of the Azd tribe. They fought alongside the Byzantines against the Sasanians and Arab Lakhmids. Most Ghassanids were Christians, converting to Christianity in the first few centuries, and some merged with Hellenized Christian communities. After the Muslim conquest of the Levant, few Ghassanids became Muslims, and most remained Christian and joined Melkite and Syriac communities within what is now Jordan, Palestine, Syria, and Lebanon. The Salihids were Arab foederati in the 5th century, were ardent Christians, and their period is less documented than the preceding and succeeding periods due to a scarcity of sources. Most references to the Salihids in Arabic sources derive from the work of Hisham ibn al-Kalbi, with the Tarikh of Ya&#x27;qubi considered valuable for determining the Salihids&#x27; fall and the terms of their foedus with the Byzantines.

=== Middle Ages ===
During the Middle Ages, Arab civilization flourished and the Arabs made significant contributions to the fields of science, mathematics, medicine, philosophy, and literature, with the rise of great cities like Baghdad, Cairo, and Cordoba, they became centers of learning, attracting scholars, scientists, and intellectuals. Arabs forged many empires and dynasties, most notably, the Rashidun Empire, the Umayyad Empire, the Abbasid Empire, the Fatimid Empire, among others. These empires were characterized by their expansion, scientific achievements, and cultural flourishing, extended from Spain to India. The region was vibrant and dynamic during the Middle Ages and left a lasting impact on the world.The rise of Islam began when Muhammad and his followers migrated from Mecca to Medina in an event known as the Hijra. Muhammad spent the last ten years of his life engaged in a series of battles to establish and expand the Muslim community. From 622 to 632, he led the Muslims in a state of war against the Meccans. During this period, the Arabs conquered the region of Basra, and under the leadership of Umar, they established a base and built a mosque there. Another conquest was Midian, but due to its harsh environment, the settlers eventually moved to Kufa. Umar successfully defeated rebellions by various Arab tribes, bringing stability to the entire Arabian peninsula and unifying it. Under the leadership of Uthman, the Arab empire expanded through the conquest of Persia, with the capture of Fars in 650 and parts of Khorasan in 651. The conquest of Armenia also began in the 640s. During this time, the Rashidun Empire extended its rule over the entire Sassanid Empire and more than two-thirds of the Eastern Roman Empire. However, the reign of Ali ibn Abi Talib, the fourth caliph, was marred by the First Fitna, or the First Islamic Civil War, which lasted throughout his rule. After a peace treaty with Hassan ibn Ali and the suppression of early Kharijite disturbances, Muawiyah I became the Caliph. This marked a significant transition in leadership.

==== Arab empires ====

===== Rashidun era (632–661) =====

After the death of Muhammad in 632, Rashidun armies launched campaigns of conquest, establishing the Caliphate, or Islamic Empire, one of the largest empires in history. It was larger and lasted longer than the previous Arab empire Tanukhids of Queen Mawia or the Arab Palmyrene Empire. The Rashidun state was a completely new state and unlike the Arab kingdoms of its century such as the Himyarite, Lakhmids or Ghassanids.

During the Rashidun era, the Arab community expanded rapidly, conquering many territories and establishing a vast Arab empire, which is marked by the reign of the first four caliphs, or leaders, of the Arab community. These caliphs are Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali, who are collectively known as the Rashidun, meaning &quot;rightly guided.&quot; The Rashidun era is significant in Arab and Islamic history as it marks the beginning of the Arab empire and the spread of Islam beyond the Arabian Peninsula. During this time, the Arab community faced numerous challenges, including internal divisions and external threats from neighboring empires.

Under the leadership of Abu Bakr, the Arab community successfully quelled a rebellion by some tribes who refused to pay Zakat, or Islamic charity. During the reign of Umar ibn al-Khattab, the Arab empire expanded significantly, conquering territories such as Egypt, Syria, and Iraq. The reign of Uthman ibn Affan was marked by internal dissent and rebellion, which ultimately led to his assassination. Ali, the cousin and son-in-law of Muhammad, succeeded Uthman as caliph but faced opposition from some members of the Islamic community who believed he was not rightfully appointed. Despite these challenges, the Rashidun era is remembered as a time of great progress and achievement in Arab and Islamic history. The caliphs established a system of governance that emphasized justice and equality for all members of the Islamic community. They also oversaw the compilation of the Quran into a single text and spread Arabic teachings and principles throughout the empire. Overall, the Rashidun era played a crucial role in shaping Arab history and continues to be revered by Muslims worldwide as a period of exemplary leadership and guidance.

===== Umayyad era (661–750 and 756–1031) =====

In 661, the Rashidun Caliphate fell into the hands of the Umayyad dynasty and Damascus was established as the empire&#x27;s capital. The Umayyads were proud of their Arab identity and sponsored the poetry and culture of pre-Islamic Arabia. They established garrison towns at Ramla, Raqqa, Basra, Kufa, Mosul and Samarra, all of which developed into major cities. Caliph Abd al-Malik established Arabic as the Caliphate&#x27;s official language in 686. Caliph Umar II strove to resolve the conflict when he came to power in 717, demanding that all Muslims be treated as equals, but his intended reforms did not take effect, as he died after only three years of rule. By now, discontent with the Umayyads swept the region and an uprising occurred in which the Abbasids came to power and moved the capital to Baghdad.

Umayyads expanded their Empire westwards capturing North Africa from the Byzantines. Before the Arab conquest, North Africa was conquered or settled by various people including Punics, Vandals and Romans. After the Abbasid Revolution, the Umayyads lost most of their territories with the exception of Iberia.

Their last holding became known as the Emirate of Córdoba. It was not until the rule of the grandson of the founder of this new emirate that the state entered a new phase as the Caliphate of Córdoba. This new state was characterized by an expansion of trade, culture and knowledge, and saw the construction of masterpieces of al-Andalus architecture and the library of Al-Ḥakam II which housed over 400,000 volumes. With the collapse of the Umayyad state in 1031 CE, Al-Andalus was divided into small kingdoms.

===== Abbasid era (750–1258 and 1261–1517) =====

The Abbasids were the descendants of Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib, one of the youngest uncles of Muhammad and of the same Banu Hashim clan. The Abbasids led a revolt against the Umayyads and defeated them in the Battle of the Zab effectively ending their rule in all parts of the Empire with the exception of al-Andalus. In 762, the second Abbasid Caliph al-Mansur founded the city of Baghdad and declared it the capital of the Caliphate. Unlike the Umayyads, the Abbasids had the support of non-Arab subjects. The Islamic Golden Age was inaugurated by the middle of the 8th century by the ascension of the Abbasid Caliphate and the transfer of the capital from Damascus to the newly founded city of Baghdad. The Abbasids were influenced by the Quranic injunctions and hadith such as &quot;The ink of the scholar is more holy than the blood of martyrs&quot; stressing the value of knowledge.

During this period the Arab Empire became an intellectual centre for science, philosophy, medicine and education as the Abbasids championed the cause of knowledge and established the &quot;House of Wisdom&quot; in Baghdad. Rival dynasties such as the Fatimids of Egypt and the Umayyads of al-Andalus were also major intellectual centres with cities such as Cairo and Córdoba rivaling Baghdad. The Abbasids ruled for 200 years before they lost their central control when Wilayas began to fracture in the 10th century; afterwards, in the 1190s, there was a revival of their power, which was ended by the Mongols, who conquered Baghdad in 1258 and killed the Caliph Al-Musta&#x27;sim. Members of the Abbasid royal family escaped the massacre and resorted to Cairo, which had broken from the Abbasid rule two years earlier; the Mamluk generals taking the political side of the kingdom while Abbasid Caliphs were engaged in civil activities and continued patronizing science, arts and literature.

===== Fatimid era (909–1171) =====
The Fatimid caliphate was founded by al-Mahdi Billah, a descendant of Fatimah, the daughter of Muhammad, the Fatimid Caliphate was a Shia that existed from 909 to 1171 CE. The empire was based in North Africa, with its capital in Cairo, and at its height, it controlled a vast territory that included parts of modern-day Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, Syria, and Palestine. The Fatimid state took shape among the Kutama, in the West of the North African littoral, in Algeria, in 909 conquering Raqqada, the Aghlabid capital. In 921 the Fatimids established the Tunisian city of Mahdia as their new capital. In 948 they shifted their capital to Al-Mansuriya, near Kairouan in Tunisia, and in 969 they conquered Egypt and established Cairo as the capital of their caliphate.

The Fatimids were known for their religious tolerance and intellectual achievements, they established a network of universities and libraries that became centers of learning in the Islamic world. They also promoted the arts, architecture, and literature, which flourished under their patronage. One of the most notable achievements of the Fatimids was the construction of the Al-Azhar Mosque and Al-Azhar University in Cairo. Founded in 970 CE, it is one of the oldest universities in the world and remains an important center of Islamic learning to this day. The Fatimids also had a significant impact on the development of Islamic theology and jurisprudence. They were known for their support of Shia Islam and their promotion of the Ismaili branch of Shia Islam. Despite their many achievements, the Fatimids faced numerous challenges during their reign. They were constantly at war with neighboring empires, including the Abbasid Caliphate and the Byzantine Empire. They also faced internal conflicts and rebellions, which weakened their empire over time. In 1171 CE, the Fatimid Caliphate was conquered by the Ayyubid dynasty, led by Saladin. Although the Fatimid dynasty came to an end, its legacy continued to influence Arab-Islamic culture and society for centuries to come.

===== Ottoman era (1517–1918) =====

From 1517 to 1918, The Ottomans defeated the Mamluk Sultanate in Cairo, and ended the Abbasid Caliphate in the battles of Marj Dabiq and Ridaniya. They entered the Levant and Egypt as conquerors, and brought down the Abbasid caliphate after it lasted for many centuries. In 1911, Arab intellectuals and politicians from throughout the Levant formed al-Fatat (&quot;the Young Arab Society&quot;), a small Arab nationalist club, in Paris. Its stated aim was &quot;raising the level of the Arab nation to the level of modern nations.&quot; In the first few years of its existence, al-Fatat called for greater autonomy within a unified Ottoman state rather than Arab independence from the empire. Al-Fatat hosted the Arab Congress of 1913 in Paris, the purpose of which was to discuss desired reforms with other dissenting individuals from the Arab world. However, as the Ottoman authorities cracked down on the organization&#x27;s activities and members, al-Fatat went underground and demanded the complete independence and unity of the Arab provinces.

The Arab Revolt was a military uprising of Arab forces against the Ottoman Empire during World War I, began in 1916, led by Sherif Hussein bin Ali, the goal of the revolt was to gain independence for the Arab lands under Ottoman rule and to create a unified Arab state. The revolt was sparked by a number of factors, including the Arab desire for greater autonomy within the Ottoman Empire, resentment towards Ottoman policies, and the influence of Arab nationalist movements. The Arab Revolt was a significant factor in the eventual defeat of the Ottoman Empire. The revolt helped to weaken Ottoman military power and tie up Ottoman forces that could have been deployed elsewhere. It also helped to increase support for Arab independence and nationalism, which would have a lasting impact on the region in the years to come. The Empire&#x27;s defeat and the occupation of part of its territory by the Allied Powers in the aftermath of World War I, the Sykes–Picot Agreement had a significant impact on the Arab world and its people. The agreement divided the Arab territories of the Ottoman Empire into zones of control for France and Britain, ignoring the aspirations of the Arab people for independence and self-determination.

=== Renaissance ===


The Golden Age of Arab Civilization known as the &quot;Islamic Golden Age&quot;, traditionally dated from the 8th century to the 13th century. The period is traditionally said to have ended with the collapse of the Abbasid caliphate due to Siege of Baghdad in 1258. During this time, Arab scholars made significant contributions to fields such as mathematics, astronomy, medicine, and philosophy. These advancements had a profound impact on European scholars during the Renaissance.

The Arabs shared its knowledge and ideas with Europe, including translations of Arabic texts. These translations had a significant impact on culture of Europe, leading to the transformation of many philosophical disciplines in the medieval Latin world. Additionally, the Arabs made original innovations in various fields, including the arts, agriculture, alchemy, music, and pottery, and traditional star names such as Aldebaran, scientific terms like &quot;&quot; (whence also &quot;&quot;), &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, etc. and names of commodities such as &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, etc.

From the medieval scholars of the Renaissance of the 12th century, who had focused on studying Greek and Arabic works of natural sciences, philosophy, and mathematics, rather than on such cultural texts. Arab logician, most notably Averroes, had inherited Greek ideas after they had invaded and conquered Egypt and the Levant. Their translations and commentaries on these ideas worked their way through the Arab West into Iberia and Sicily, which became important centers for this transmission of ideas. From the 11th to the 13th century, many schools dedicated to the translation of philosophical and scientific works from Classical Arabic to Medieval Latin were established in Iberia, most notably the Toledo School of Translators. This work of translation from Arab culture, though largely unplanned and disorganized, constituted one of the greatest transmissions of ideas in history.

During the Timurid Renaissance spanning the late 14th, the 15th, and the early 16th centuries, there was a significant exchange of ideas, art, and knowledge between different cultures and civilizations. Arab scholars, artists, and intellectuals played a role in this cultural exchange, contributing to the overall intellectual atmosphere of the time. They participated in various fields, including literature, art, science, and philosophy. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the Arab Renaissance was a cultural and intellectual movement that emerged. The term &quot;Nahda&quot; means &quot;awakening&quot; or &quot;renaissance&quot; in Arabic, and refers to a period of renewed interest in Arabic language, literature, and culture.

=== Modern period ===

The modern period in Arab history refers to the time period from the late 19th century to the present day. During this time, the Arab world experienced significant political, economic, and social changes. One of the most significant events of the modern period was the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, the end of Ottoman rule led to the emergence of new nation-states in the Arab world.

Sharif Hussein was supposed, in the event of the success of the Arab revolution and the victory of the Allies in World War I, to be able to establish an independent Arab state consisting of the Arabian Peninsula and the Fertile Crescent, including Iraq and the Levant. He aimed to become &quot;King of the Arabs&quot; in this state, however, the Arab revolution only succeeded in achieving some of its objectives, including the independence of the Hejaz and the recognition of Sharif Hussein as its king by the Allies. Arab nationalism emerged as a major movement in the early 20th century, with many Arab intellectuals, artists, and political leaders seeking to promote unity and independence for the Arab world. This movement gained momentum after World War II, leading to the formation of the Arab League and the creation of several new Arab states. Pan-Arabism that emerged in the early 20th century and aimed to unite all Arabs into a single nation or state. It emphasized on a shared ancestry, culture, history, language and identity and sought to create a sense of pan-Arab identity and solidarity.

The roots of pan-Arabism can be traced back to the Arab Renaissance or Al-Nahda movement of the late 19th century, which saw a revival of Arab culture, literature, and intellectual thought. The movement emphasized the importance of Arab unity and the need to resist colonialism and foreign domination. One of the key figures in the development of pan-Arabism was the Egyptian statesman and intellectual, Gamal Abdel Nasser, who led the 1952 revolution in Egypt and became the country&#x27;s president in 1954. Nasser promoted pan-Arabism as a means of strengthening Arab solidarity and resisting Western imperialism. He also supported the idea of Arab socialism, which sought to combine pan-Arabism with socialist principles. Similar attempts were made by other Arab leaders, such as Hafez al-Assad, Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr, Faisal I of Iraq, Muammar Gaddafi, Saddam Hussein, Gaafar Nimeiry and Anwar Sadat.

Many proposed unions aimed to create a unified Arab entity that would promote cooperation and integration among Arab countries. However, the initiatives faced numerous challenges and obstacles, including political divisions, regional conflicts, and economic disparities. The United Arab Republic (UAR) was a political union formed between Egypt and Syria in 1958, with the goal of creating a federal structure that would allow each member state to retain its identity and institutions. However, by 1961, Syria had withdrawn from the UAR due to political differences, and Egypt continued to call itself the UAR until 1971, when it became the Arab Republic of Egypt. In the same year the UAR was formed, another proposed political union, the Arab Federation, was established between Jordan and Iraq, but it collapsed after only six months due to tensions with the UAR and the 14 July Revolution. A confederation called the United Arab States, which included the UAR and the Mutawakkilite Kingdom of Yemen, was also created in 1958 but dissolved in 1961. Later attempts to create a political and economic union among Arab countries included the Federation of Arab Republics, which was formed by Egypt, Libya, and Syria in the 1970s but dissolved after five years due to political and economic challenges. Muammar Gaddafi, the leader of Libya, also proposed the Arab Islamic Republic with Tunisia, aiming to include Algeria and Morocco, instead the Arab Maghreb Union was formed in 1989.

During the latter half of the 20th century, many Arab countries experienced political upheaval and conflicts, including, revolutions. The Arab-Israeli conflict remains a major issue in the region, and has resulted in ongoing tensions and periodic outbreaks of violence. In recent years, the Arab world has faced new challenges, including economic and social inequalities, demographic changes, and the impact of globalization. The Arab Spring was a series of pro-democracy uprisings and protests that swept across several countries in the Arab world in 2010 and 2011. The uprisings were sparked by a combination of political, economic, and social grievances and called for democratic reforms and an end to authoritarian rule. While the protests resulted in the downfall of some long-time authoritarian leaders, they also led to ongoing conflicts and political instability in other countries.

== Identity ==
Arab identity is defined independently of religious identity, and pre-dates the spread of Islam, with historically attested Arab Christian kingdoms and Arab Jewish tribes. Today, however, most Arabs are Muslim, with a minority adhering to other faiths, largely Christianity, but also Druze and Baháʼí. Paternal descent has traditionally been considered the main source of affiliation in the Arab world when it comes to membership into an ethnic group or clan.

Arab identity is shaped by a range of factors, including ancestry, history, language, customs, and traditions. Arab identity has been shaped by a rich history that includes the rise and fall of empires, colonization, and political turmoil. Despite the challenges faced by Arab communities, their shared cultural heritage has helped to maintain a sense of unity and pride in their identity. Today, Arab identity continues to evolve as Arab communities navigate complex political, social, and economic landscapes. Despite this, the Arab identity remains an important aspect of the cultural and historical fabric of the Arab world, and continues to be celebrated and preserved by communities around the world.

== Subgroups ==
Arab tribes are prevalent in the Arabian Peninsula, Mesopotamia, Levant, Egypt, Maghreb, the Sudan region and Horn Africa.

The Arabs of the Levant are traditionally divided into Qays and Yaman tribes. The distinction between Qays and Yaman dates back to the pre-Islamic era and was based on tribal affiliations and geographic locations.; they include Banu Kalb, Kinda, Ghassanids, and Lakhmids. The Qays were made up of tribes such as Banu Kilab, Banu Tayy, Banu Hanifa, and Banu Tamim, among others. The Yaman, on the other hand, were composed of tribes such as Banu Hashim, Banu Makhzum, Banu Umayya, and Banu Zuhra, among others.

There are also many Arab tribes indigenous to Mesopotamia (Iraq) and Iran, including from well before the Arab conquest of Persia in 633 CE. The largest group of Iranian Arabs are the Ahwazi Arabs, including Banu Ka&#x27;b, Bani Turuf and the Musha&#x27;sha&#x27;iyyah sect. Smaller groups are the Khamseh nomads in Fars province and the Arabs in Khorasan.
As a result of the centuries-long Arab migration to the Maghreb, various Arab tribes (including Banu Hilal, Banu Sulaym and Maqil) also settled in the Maghreb and formed the sub-tribes which exist to present-day. The Banu Hilal spent almost a century in Egypt before moving to Libya, Tunisia and Algeria, and another century later moved to Morocco.

According to Arab traditions, tribes are divided into different divisions called Arab skulls, which are described in the traditional custom of strength, abundance, victory, and honor. A number of them branched out, which later became independent tribes (sub-tribes). The majority of Arab tribes are descended from these major tribes.

They are:

* Bakr, has descendants in Arabia and Iraq.
* Kinanah, has descendants in Arabia, Iraq, Egypt, Sudan, Palestine, Tunisia, Morocco, and Syria.
* Hawazin, has descendants in Arabia, Libya, Algeria, Morocco, Sudan, and Iraq.
* Tamim, has descendants in Arabia, Iraq, Iran, Palestine, Algeria, and Morocco
* Azd, has descendants in Arabia, Iraq, Levant, and North Africa.
* Ghatafan, has descendants in Arabia and the Maghreb.
* Madhhij, has descendants in Arabia and Iraq.
* Abd al-Qays, has descendants in Arabia.
* Al Qays (القيس), has descendants in Arabia.
* Quda&#x27;a, has descendants in Arabia, Syria, and North Africa.

== Geographic distribution ==
=== Arab homeland ===
The total number of Arabs living in the Arab nations is estimated at 366 million by the CIA Factbook (as of 2014). The estimated number of Arabs in countries outside the Arab League is estimated at 17.5 million, yielding a total of close to 384 million. The Arab world stretches around , from the Atlantic Ocean in the west to the Arabian Sea in the east and from the Mediterranean Sea in the north to the Horn of Africa and the Indian Ocean in the southeast.

=== Arab diaspora ===

Arab diaspora refers to descendants of the Arab immigrants who, voluntarily or as refugees, emigrated from their native lands in non-Arab countries, primarily in East Africa, South America, Europe, North America, Australia and parts of South Asia, Southeast Asia, the Caribbean, and West Africa. According to the International Organization for Migration, there are 13 million first-generation Arab migrants in the world, of which 5.8 million reside in Arab countries. Arab expatriates contribute to the circulation of financial and human capital in the region and thus significantly promote regional development. In 2009, Arab countries received a total of US$35.1 billion in remittance in-flows and remittances sent to Jordan, Egypt and Lebanon from other Arab countries are 40 to 190 per cent higher than trade revenues between these and other Arab countries. The 250,000 strong Lebanese community in West Africa is the largest non-African group in the region. Arab traders have long operated in Southeast Asia and along the East Africa&#x27;s Swahili coast. Zanzibar was once ruled by Omani Arabs. Most of the prominent Indonesians, Malaysians, and Singaporeans of Arab descent are Hadhrami people with origins in southern Arabia in the Hadramawt coastal region.

==== Europe ====
There are millions of Arabs living in Europe, mostly concentrated in France (about 6,000,000 in 2005). Most Arabs in France are from the Maghreb but some also come from the Mashreq areas of the Arab world. Arabs in France form the second largest ethnic group after French people. In Italy, Arabs first arrived on the southern island of Sicily in the 9th century. The largest modern societies on the island from the Arab world are Tunisians and Moroccans, who make up 10.9% and 8% respectively of the foreign population of Sicily, which in itself constitutes 3.9% of the island&#x27;s total population. The modern Arab population of Spain numbers 1,800,000, and there have been Arabs in Spain since the early 8th century when the Muslim conquest of Hispania created the state of Al-Andalus. In Germany the Arab population numbers over 1,401,950. in the United Kingdom between 366,769 and 500,000, and in Greece between 250,000 and 750,000). In addition, Greece is home to people from Arab countries who have the status of refugees (e.g. refugees of the Syrian civil war). In the Netherlands 180,000, and in Denmark 121,000. Other countries are also home to Arab populations, including Norway, Austria, Bulgaria, Switzerland, North Macedonia, Romania and Serbia. As of late 2015, Turkey had a total population of 78.7 million, with Syrian refugees accounting for 3.1% of that figure based on conservative estimates. Demographics indicated that the country previously had 1,500,000 to 2,000,000 Arab residents, Turkey&#x27;s Arab population is now 4.5 to 5.1% of the total population, or approximately 4–5 million people.

==== Americas ====
Arab immigration to the United States began in significant numbers during the 1880s, and today, an estimated 2 million Americans trace their roots to an Arab background according the Census Bureau. Arab Americans are found in every state, but more than two thirds of them live in just ten states, and one-third live in Los Angeles, Detroit, and New York City specifically. Most Arab Americans were born in the US, and nearly 82% of US-based Arabs are citizens.

Arab immigrants began to arrive in Canada in small numbers in 1882. Their immigration was relatively limited until 1945, after which time it increased progressively, particularly in the 1960s and thereafter. According to the website &quot;Who are Arab Canadians&quot;, Montreal, the Canadian city with the largest Arab population, has approximately 267,000 Arab inhabitants.

Latin America has the largest Arab population outside of the Arab World. Latin America is home to anywhere from 17–25 to 30 million people of Arab descent, which is more than any other diaspora region in the world. The Brazilian and Lebanese governments claim there are 7 million Brazilians of Lebanese descent. Also, the Brazilian government claims there are 4 million Brazilians of Syrian descent. Other large Arab communities includes Argentina (about 3,500,000)

The interethnic marriage in the Arab community, regardless of religious affiliation, is very high; most community members have only one parent who has Arab ethnicity. Colombia (over 3,200,000), Venezuela (over 1,600,000), Mexico (over 1,100,000), Chile (over 800,000), and Central America, particularly El Salvador, and Honduras (between 150,000 and 200,000). Arab Haitians (257,000) a large number of whom live in the capital are more often than not, concentrated in financial areas where the majority of them establish businesses.

==== Caucasus ====
In 1728, a Russian officer described a group of Arab nomads who populated the Caspian shores of Mughan (in present-day Azerbaijan). It is believed that these groups migrated to the South Caucasus in the 16th century. The 1888 edition of Encyclopædia Britannica also mentioned a certain number of Arabs populating the Baku Governorate of the Russian Empire. They retained an Arabic dialect at least into the mid-19th century, there are nearly 30 settlements still holding the name &quot;Arab&quot; (for example, Arabgadim, Arabojaghy, Arab-Yengija, etc.). From the time of the Arab conquest of the South Caucasus, continuous small-scale Arab migration from various parts of the Arab world occurred in Dagestan. The majority of these lived in the village of Darvag, to the north-west of Derbent. The latest of these accounts dates to the 1930s. Most Arab communities in southern Dagestan underwent linguistic Turkicisation, thus nowadays Darvag is a majority-Azeri village.

==== Central, South, East and Southeast Asia ====
According to the &quot;History of Ibn Khaldun&quot;, the Arabs that were once in Central Asia have been either killed or have fled the Tatar invasion of the region. However, today many people in Central Asia identify as Arabs. Most Arabs of Central Asia are fully integrated into local populations, and sometimes call themselves the same as locals (for example, Tajiks, Uzbeks) but they use special titles to show their Arab origin such as Sayyid, Khoja or Siddiqui.
There are only two communities in India which claim Arab descent, the Chaush of the Deccan region and the Chavuse of Gujarat. These groups are largely descended from Hadhrami migrants who settled in these two regions in the 18th century. However, neither community still speaks Arabic, although the Chaush have seen re-immigration to Eastern Arabia and thus a re-adoption of Arabic. In South Asia, where Arab ancestry is considered prestigious, some communities have origin myths that claim Arab ancestry. Several communities following the Shafi&#x27;i madhab (in contrast to other South Asian Muslims who follow the Hanafi madhab) claim descent from Arab traders like the Konkani Muslims of the Konkan region, the Mappilla of Kerala, and the Labbai and Marakkar of Tamil Nadu and a few Christian groups in India that claim and have Arab roots are situated in the state of Kerala. South Asian Iraqi biradri may have records of their ancestors who migrated from Iraq in historical documents. The Sri Lankan Moors are the third largest ethnic group in Sri Lanka, constituting 9.2% of the country&#x27;s total population. Some sources trace the ancestry of the Sri Lankan Moors to Arab traders who settled in Sri Lanka at some time between the 8th and 15th centuries. There are about 118,866 Arab-Indonesians of Hadrami descent in the 2010 Indonesian census.

==== Sub-Saharan Africa ====
Afro-Arabs are individuals and groups from Africa who are of partial Arab descent. Most Afro-Arabs inhabit the Swahili Coast in the African Great Lakes region, although some can also be found in parts of the Arab world. Large numbers of Arabs migrated to West Africa, particularly Côte d&#x27;Ivoire (home to over 100,000 Lebanese), Senegal (roughly 30,000 Lebanese), Sierra Leone (roughly 10,000 Lebanese today; about 30,000 prior to the outbreak of civil war in 1991), Liberia, and Nigeria. Since the end of the civil war in 2002, Lebanese traders have become re-established in Sierra Leone. The Arabs of Chad occupy northern Cameroon and Nigeria (where they are sometimes known as Shuwa), and extend as a belt across Chad and into Sudan, where they are called the Baggara grouping of Arab ethnic groups inhabiting the portion of Africa&#x27;s Sahel. There are 171,000 in Cameroon, 150,000 in Niger), and 107,000 in the Central African Republic.

== Religion ==

Arabs are mostly Muslims with a Sunni majority and a Shia minority, one exception being the Ibadis, who predominate in Oman. Arab Christians generally follow Eastern Churches such as the Greek Orthodox and Greek Catholic churches, though a minority of Protestant Church followers also exists. There are also Arab communities consisting of Druze and Baháʼís. Historically, there were also sizeable populations of Arab Jews around the Arab World.

Before the coming of Islam, most Arabs followed a pagan religion with a number of deities, including Hubal, Wadd, Allāt, Manat, and Uzza. A few individuals, the &quot;hanifs&quot;, had apparently rejected polytheism in favor of monotheism unaffiliated with any particular religion. Some tribes had converted to Christianity or Judaism. The most prominent Arab Christian kingdoms were the Ghassanid and Lakhmid kingdoms. When the Himyarite king converted to Judaism in the late 4th century, the elites of the other prominent Arab kingdom, the Kindites, being Himyirite vassals, apparently also converted (at least partly). With the expansion of Islam, polytheistic Arabs were rapidly Islamized, and polytheistic traditions gradually disappeared.

Today, Sunni Islam dominates in most areas, vastly so in Levant, North Africa, West Africa and the Horn of Africa. Shia Islam is dominant in Bahrain and southern Iraq while northern Iraq is mostly Sunni. Substantial Shia populations exist in Lebanon, Yemen, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, northern Syria and Al-Batinah Region in Oman. There are small numbers of Ibadi and non-denominational Muslims too. The Druze community is concentrated in Levant.

Christianity had a prominent presence In pre-Islamic Arabia among several Arab communities, including the Bahrani people of Eastern Arabia, the Christian community of Najran, in parts of Yemen, and among certain northern Arabian tribes such as the Ghassanids, Lakhmids, Taghlib, Banu Amela, Banu Judham, Tanukhids and Tayy. In the early Christian centuries, Arabia was sometimes known as &quot;Arabia heretica&quot;, due to its being &quot;well known as a breeding-ground for heterodox interpretations of Christianity.&quot;
Christians make up 5.5% of the population of Western Asia and North Africa. In Lebanon, Christians number about 40.5% of the population. In Syria, Christians make up 10% of the population. Christians in Palestine make up 8% and 0.7% of the populations, respectively. In Egypt, Christians number about 10% of the population. In Iraq, Christians constitute 0.1% of the population.

In Israel, Arab Christians constitute 2.1% (roughly 9% of the Arab population). Arab Christians make up 8% of the population of Jordan. Most North and South American Arabs are Christian, so are about half of the Arabs in Australia who come particularly from Lebanon, Syria and Palestine. One well known member of this religious and ethnic community is Saint Abo, martyr and the patron saint of Tbilisi, Georgia. Arab Christians also live in holy Christian cities such as Nazareth, Bethlehem and the Christian Quarter of the Old City of Jerusalem and many other villages with holy Christian sites.

== Culture ==
Arab culture is shaped by a long and rich history that spans thousands of years, from the Atlantic Ocean in the west to the Arabian Sea in the east, and from the Mediterranean Sea in the north to the Horn of Africa and the Indian Ocean in the southeast. The various religions the Arabs have adopted throughout their history and the various empires and kingdoms that have ruled and took lead of the Arabic civilization have contributed to the ethnogenesis and formation of modern Arab culture. Language, literature, gastronomy, art, architecture, music, spirituality, philosophy and mysticism are all part of the cultural heritage of the Arabs.

=== Language ===
Arabic is a Semitic language of the Afro-Asiatic family. The first evidence for the emergence of the language appears in military accounts from 853 BCE. Today it has developed widely used as a &quot;lingua franca&quot; for more than 500 million people. It is also a liturgical language for 1.7 billion Muslims. Arabic is one of six official languages of the United Nations, and is revered in Islam as the language of the Quran.

Arabic has two main registers. Classical Arabic is the form of the Arabic language used in literary texts from Umayyad and Abbasid times (7th to 9th centuries). It is based on the medieval dialects of Arab tribes. Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) is the direct descendant used today throughout the Arab world in writing and in formal speaking, for example, prepared speeches, some radio broadcasts, and non-entertainment content, while the lexis and stylistics of Modern Standard Arabic are different from Classical Arabic. There are also various regional dialects of colloquial spoken Arabic that both vary greatly from both each other and from the formal written and spoken forms of Arabic.

=== Mythology ===
Arabic mythology comprises the ancient beliefs of the Arabs. Prior to Islam the Kaaba of Mecca was covered in symbols representing the myriad demons, djinn, demigods, or simply tribal gods and other assorted deities which represented the polytheistic culture of pre-Islamic. It has been inferred from this plurality an exceptionally broad context in which mythology could flourish.

The most popular beasts and demons of Arabian mythology are Bahamut, Dandan, Falak, Ghoul, Hinn, Jinn, Karkadann, Marid, Nasnas, Qareen, Roc, Shadhavar, Werehyena and other assorted creatures which represented the profoundly polytheistic environment of pre-Islamic.

The most prominent symbol of Arabian mythology is the Jinn or genie. Jinns are supernatural beings that can be good or evil. They are not purely spiritual, but are also physical in nature, being able to interact in a tactile manner with people and objects and likewise be acted upon. The &quot;jinn&quot;, humans, and angels make up the known sapient creations of God.

Ghouls also feature in the mythology as a monster or evil spirit associated with graveyards and consuming human flesh. In Arabic folklore, ghouls belonged to a diabolic class of jinn and were said to be the offspring of Iblīs, the prince of darkness in Islam. They were capable of constantly changing form, but always retained donkey&#x27;s hooves.

=== Literature ===
The Quran, the main holy book of Islam, had a significant influence on the Arabic language, and marked the beginning of Arabic literature. Muslims believe it was transcribed in the Arabic dialect of the Quraysh, the tribe of Muhammad. As Islam spread, the Quran had the effect of unifying and standardizing Arabic.

Not only is the Quran the first work of any significant length written in the language, but it also has a far more complicated structure than the earlier literary works with its 114 &quot;suwar&quot; (chapters) which contain 6,236 &quot;ayat&quot; (verses). It contains injunctions, narratives, homilies, parables, direct addresses from God, instructions and even comments on how the Quran will be received and understood. It is also admired for its layers of metaphor as well as its clarity, a feature which is mentioned in An-Nahl, the 16th surah.

Al-Jahiz (born 776, in Basra – December 868/January 869) was an Arab prose writer and author of works of literature, Mu&#x27;tazili theology, and politico-religious polemics. A leading scholar in the Abbasid Caliphate, his canon includes two hundred books on various subjects, including Arabic grammar, zoology, poetry, lexicography, and rhetoric. Of his writings, only thirty books survive. Al-Jāḥiẓ was also one of the first Arabian writers to suggest a complete overhaul of the language&#x27;s grammatical system, though this would not be undertaken until his fellow linguist Ibn Maḍāʾ took up the matter two hundred years later.

There is a small remnant of pre-Islamic poetry, but Arabic literature predominantly emerges in the Middle Ages, during the Golden Age of Islam. Imru&#x27; al-Qais was a king and poet in the 6th century, he was the last king of Kindite. He is among the finest Arabic poetry to date, as well sometimes considered the father of Arabic poetry. &quot;Kitab al-Aghani&quot; by Abul-Faraj was called by the 14th-century historian Ibn Khaldun the register of the Arabs. Literary Arabic is derived from Classical Arabic, based on the language of the Quran as it was analyzed by Arabic grammarians beginning in the 8th century.

A large portion of Arabic literature before the 20th century is in the form of poetry, and even prose from this period is either filled with snippets of poetry or is in the form of &quot;saj&quot; or rhymed prose. The &quot;ghazal&quot; or love poem had a long history being at times tender and chaste and at other times rather explicit. In the Sufi tradition the love poem would take on a wider, mystical and religious importance.

Arabic epic literature was much less common than poetry, and presumably originates in oral tradition, written down from the 14th century or so. Maqama or rhymed prose is intermediate between poetry and prose, and also between fiction and non-fiction. Maqama was an incredibly popular form of Arabic literature, being one of the few forms which continued to be written during the decline of Arabic in the 17th and 18th centuries.

Arabic literature and culture declined significantly after the 13th century, to the benefit of Turkish and Persian. A modern revival took place beginning in the 19th century, alongside resistance against Ottoman rule. The literary revival is known as &quot;al-Nahda&quot; in Arabic, and was centered in Egypt and Lebanon. Two distinct trends can be found in the &quot;nahda&quot; period of revival.

The first was a neo-classical movement which sought to rediscover the literary traditions of the past, and was influenced by traditional literary genres—such as the &quot;maqama&quot;—and works like &quot;One Thousand and One Nights&quot;. In contrast, a modernist movement began by translating Western modernist works—primarily novels—into Arabic. A tradition of modern Arabic poetry was established by writers such as Francis Marrash, Ahmad Shawqi and Hafiz Ibrahim. Iraqi poet Badr Shakir al-Sayyab is considered to be the originator of free verse in Arabic poetry.

=== Cuisine ===
Arab cuisine is largely divided into Khaleeji cuisine, Levantine cuisine and Maghrebi cuisine. Arab cuisine has influenced other cuisines various cultures, including Ottoman, Persian, and Andalusian.

It is characterized by a variety of herbs and spices, including cumin, coriander, cinnamon, sumac, za&#x27;atar, cardamom, mint, saffron, sesame, thyme turmeric and parsley. Arab cuisine is also known for its sweets and desserts, such as Knafeh, Baklava, Halva, and Qatayef. Arabic coffee, or qahwa, is a traditional drink that is served with dates.

===Art===
Arabic art has taken various forms, including, among other things, jewelry, textiles and architecture. Arabic script has also traditionally been heavily embellished with often colorful Arabic calligraphy, with one notable and widely used example being Kufic script. Arabic miniatures (Arabic: الْمُنَمْنَمَات الْعَرَبِيَّة, &quot;Al-Munamnamāt al-ʿArabīyah&quot;) are small paintings on paper, usually book or manuscript illustrations but also sometimes separate artworks that occupy entire pages. The earliest example dates from around 690 CE, with a flourishing of the art from between 1000 and 1200 CE in the Abbasid caliphate. The art form went through several stages of evolution while witnessing the fall and rise of several Arab caliphates.

Arab miniaturists got totally assimilated and subsequently disappeared due to the Ottoman occupation of the Arab world. Nearly all forms of Islamic miniatures (Persian miniatures, Ottoman miniatures and Mughal miniatures) owe their existences to Arabic miniatures, as Arab patrons were the first to demand the production of illuminated manuscripts in the Caliphate, it was not until the 14th century that the artistic skill reached the non-Arab regions of the Caliphate.

Despite the considerable changes in Arabic miniature style and technique, even during their last decades, the early Umayyad Arab influence could still be noticed. Arabic miniature artists include Ismail al-Jazari, who illustrated his own &quot;Book of Knowledge of Ingenious Mechanical Devices.&quot;

The Abbasid artist, Yahya Al-Wasiti, who probably lived in Baghdad in the late Abbasid era (12th to 13th-centuries), was one of the pre-eminent exponents of the Baghdad school. In the period 1236–1237, he transcribed and illustrated the book &quot;Maqamat&quot; (also known as the &quot;Assemblies&quot; or the &quot;Sessions&quot;), a series of anecdotes of social satire written by Al-Hariri of Basra. The narrative concerns the travels of a middle-aged man as he uses his charm and eloquence to swindle his way across the Arabic world.
With most surviving Arabic manuscripts in western museums, Arabic miniatures occupy very little space in modern Arab culture. Arabesque is a form of artistic decoration consisting of &quot;surface decorations based on rhythmic linear patterns of scrolling and interlacing foliage, tendrils&quot; or plain lines, often combined with other elements. Another definition is &quot;Foliate ornament, typically using leaves, derived from stylised half-palmettes, which were combined with spiralling stems&quot;. It usually consists of a single design which can be &#x27;tiled&#x27; or seamlessly repeated as many times as desired.

===Architecture===

The Arab world is home to around 8% of UNESCO World Heritage Sites (List of World Heritage Sites in the Arab states). The oldest examples of architecture include those of pre-Islamic Arabia, as well as Nabataean architecture that developed in the ancient kingdom of the Nabataeans, a nomadic Arab tribe that controlled a significant portion of the Middle East from the 4th century BCE to the 2nd century CE. The Nabataeans were known for their skill in carving out elaborate buildings, tombs, and other structures from the sandstone cliffs of the region. One of the most famous examples of Nabataean architecture is the city of Petra, which is located in modern-day Jordan, was the capital of the Nabataean kingdom and is renowned for its impressive rock-cut architecture.

Prior to the start of the Arab conquests, Arab tribal client states, the Lakhmids and Ghassanids, were located on the borders of the Sassanid and Byzantine empires and were exposed to the cultural and architectural influences of both. They most likely played a significant role in transmitting and adapting the architectural traditions of these two empires to the later Arab Islamic dynasties.

The Arab empire expanded rapidly, and with it, came a diverse range of architectural influences. One of the most notable architectural achievements of the Arab Empire is the Great Mosque of Damascus in Syria, which was built in the early 8th century, was constructed on the site of a Christian basilica and incorporated elements of Byzantine and Roman architecture, such as arches, columns, and intricate mosaics. Another important architectural is the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem, which was built in the late 7th century. The mosque features an impressive dome and a large prayer hall, as well as intricate geometric patterns and calligraphy on the walls.

=== Music ===
Arabic music, while independent and flourishing in the 2010s, has a long history of interaction with many other regional musical styles and genres. It is an amalgam of the music of the Arab people in the Arabian Peninsula and the music of all the peoples that make up the Arab world today. Pre-Islamic Arab music was similar to that of Ancient Middle Eastern music. Most historians agree that there existed distinct forms of music in the Arabian peninsula in the pre-Islamic period between the 5th and 7th century CE. Arab poets of that &quot;Jahili poets&quot;, meaning &quot;the poets of the period of ignorance&quot;—used to recite poems with a high notes. It was believed that Jinns revealed poems to poets and music to musicians. By the 11th century, Islamic Iberia had become a center for the manufacture of instruments. These goods spread gradually throughout France, influencing French troubadours, and eventually reaching the rest of Europe. The English words lute, rebec, and naker are derived from Arabic oud, rabab, and naqareh.

A number of musical instruments used in classical music are believed to have been derived from Arabic musical instruments: the lute was derived from the &quot;Oud&quot;, the rebec (ancestor of violin) from the &quot;Maghreb rebab&quot;, the guitar from &quot;qitara&quot;, which in turn was derived from the Persian Tar, naker from &quot;naqareh&quot;, adufe from &quot;al-duff&quot;, alboka from &quot;al-buq&quot;, &quot;anafil&quot; from &quot;al-nafir&quot;, exabeba from &quot;al-shabbaba&quot; (flute), atabal (bass drum) from &quot;al-tabl&quot;, atambal from &quot;al-tinbal&quot;, the balaban, the castanet from &quot;kasatan&quot;, sonajas de azófar from &quot;sunuj al-sufr&quot;, the conical bore wind instruments, the xelami from the &quot;sulami&quot; or &quot;fistula&quot; (flute or musical pipe), the shawm and dulzaina from the reed instruments &quot;zamr&quot; and &quot;al-zurna&quot;, the gaita from the &quot;ghaita&quot;, rackett from &quot;iraqya&quot; or &quot;iraqiyya&quot;, geige (violin) from &quot;ghichak&quot;, and the theorbo from the &quot;tarab&quot;.

During the 1950s and the 1960s, Arabic music began to take on a more Western tone – artists Umm Kulthum, Abdel Halim Hafez, and Shadia along with composers Mohamed Abd al-Wahab and Baligh Hamdi pioneered the use of western instruments in Egyptian music. By the 1970s several other singers had followed suit and a strand of Arabic pop was born. Arabic pop usually consists of Western styled songs with Arabic instruments and lyrics. Melodies are often a mix between Eastern and Western. Beginning in the mid-1980s, Lydia Canaan, musical pioneer widely regarded as the first rock star of the Middle East

=== Spirituality ===

Arab polytheism was the dominant religion in pre-Islamic Arabia. Gods and goddesses, including Hubal and the goddesses al-Lāt, Al-&#x27;Uzzá and Manāt, were worshipped at local shrines, such as the Kaaba in Mecca, whilst Arabs in the south, in what is today&#x27;s Yemen, worshipped various gods, some of which represented the Sun or Moon. Different theories have been proposed regarding the role of Allah in Meccan religion. Many of the physical descriptions of the pre-Islamic gods are traced to idols, especially near the Kaaba, which is said to have contained up to 360 of them. Until about the fourth century, almost all Arabs practised polytheistic religions. Although significant Jewish and Christian minorities developed, polytheism remained the dominant belief system in pre-Islamic Arabia.

The religious beliefs and practices of the nomadic bedouin were distinct from those of the settled tribes of towns such as Mecca. Nomadic religious belief systems and practices are believed to have included fetishism, totemism and veneration of the dead but were connected principally with immediate concerns and problems and did not consider larger philosophical questions such as the afterlife. Settled urban Arabs, on the other hand, are thought to have believed in a more complex pantheon of deities. While the Meccans and the other settled inhabitants of the Hejaz worshipped their gods at permanent shrines in towns and oases, the bedouin practised their religion on the move.

Most notable Arab gods and goddesses: &#x27;Amm, A&#x27;ra, Abgal, Allah, Al-Lat, Al-Qaum, Almaqah, Anbay, ʿAṯtar, Basamum, Dhu l-Khalasa, Dushara, Haukim, Hubal, Isāf and Nā&#x27;ila, Manaf, Manāt, Nasr, Nuha, Quzah, Ruda, Sa&#x27;d, Shams, Samas, Syn, Suwa&#x27;, Ta&#x27;lab, Theandrios, al-&#x27;Uzzá, Wadd, Ya&#x27;uq, Yaghūth, Yatha, Aglibol, Astarte, Atargatis, Baalshamin, Bēl, Bes, Ēl, Ilāh, Inanna/Ishtar, Malakbel, Nabū, Nebo, Nergal, Yarhibol.

=== Philosophy ===
The philosophical thought in the Arab world is heavily influenced by Arabic Philosophy. Schools of Arabic/Islamic thought include Avicennism and Averroism. The first great Arab thinker in the Islamic tradition is widely regarded to be al-Kindi (801–873 A.D.), a Neo-Platonic philosopher, mathematician and scientist who lived in Kufa and Baghdad (modern day Iraq). After being appointed by the Abbasid Caliphs to translate Greek scientific and philosophical texts into Arabic, he wrote a number of original treatises of his own on a range of subjects, from metaphysics and ethics to mathematics and pharmacology.

Much of his philosophical output focuses on theological subjects such as the nature of God, the soul and prophetic knowledge. Doctrines of the Arabic philosophers of the 9th–12th century who influenced medieval Scholasticism in Europe. The Arabic tradition combines Aristotelianism and Neoplatonism with other ideas introduced through Islam. Influential thinkers include the non-Arabs al-Farabi and Avicenna. The Arabic philosophic literature was translated into Hebrew and Latin, this contributed to the development of modern European philosophy. The Arabic tradition was developed by Moses Maimonides and Ibn Khaldun.

=== Science ===

Arabic science underwent considerable development during the Middle Ages (8th to 13th centuries CE), a source of knowledge that later spread throughout Medieval Europe and greatly influenced both medical practice and education. The language of recorded science was Arabic. Scientific treatises were composed by thinkers originating from across the Muslim world. These accomplishments occurred after Muhammad united the Arab tribes and the spread of Islam beyond the Arabian peninsula.

Within a century after Muhammed&#x27;s death (632 CE), an empire ruled by Arabs was established. It encompassed a large part of the planet, stretching from southern Europe to North Africa to Central Asia and on to India. In 711 CE, Arab Muslims invaded southern Spain; al-Andalus was a center of Arabic scientific accomplishment. Soon after, Sicily too joined the greater Islamic world. Another center emerged in Baghdad from the Abbasids, who ruled part of the Islamic world during a historic period later characterized as the &quot;Golden Age&quot; (~750 to 1258 CE).

This era can be identified as the years between 692 and 945, and ended when the caliphate was marginalized by local Muslim rulers in Baghdad – its traditional seat of power. From 945 onward until the sacking of Baghdad by the Mongols in 1258, the Caliph continued on as a figurehead, with power devolving more to local subordinates. The pious scholars of Islam, men and women collectively known as the ulama, were the most influential element of society in the fields of Sharia law, speculative thought and theology. Arabic scientific achievement is not as yet fully understood, but is very large. These achievements encompass a wide range of subject areas, especially mathematics, astronomy, and medicine. Other subjects of scientific inquiry included physics, alchemy and chemistry, cosmology, ophthalmology, geography and cartography, sociology, and psychology.
Al-Battani was an astronomer, astrologer and mathematician of the Islamic Golden Age. His work is considered instrumental in the development of science and astronomy. One of Al-Battani&#x27;s best-known achievements in astronomy was the determination of the solar year as being 365 days, 5 hours, 46 minutes and 24 seconds which is only 2 minutes and 22 seconds off. In mathematics, al-Battānī produced a number of trigonometrical relationships. Al-Zahrawi, regarded by many as the greatest surgeon of the Middle Ages. His surgical treatise &quot;De chirurgia&quot; is the first illustrated surgical guide ever written. It remained the primary source for surgical procedures and instruments in Europe for the next 500 years. The book helped lay the foundation to establish surgery as a scientific discipline independent from medicine, earning al-Zahrawi his name as one of the founders of this field.

Other notable Arabic contributions include among other things: the pioneering of organic chemistry by Jābir ibn Hayyān, establishing the science of cryptology and cryptanalysis by al-Kindi, the development of analytic geometry by Ibn al-Haytham, who has been described as the &quot;world&#x27;s first true scientist&quot;, the discovery of the pulmonary circulation by Ibn al-Nafis, the discovery of the itch mite parasite by Ibn Zuhr, the first use of irrational numbers as an algebraic objects by Abū Kāmil, the first use of the positional decimal fractions by al-Uqlidisi, the development of the Arabic numerals and an early algebraic symbolism in the Maghreb, the Thabit number and Thābit theorem by Thābit ibn Qurra, the discovery of several new trigonometric identities by Ibn Yunus and al-Battani, the mathematical proof for Ceva&#x27;s theorem by Ibn Hűd, the invention of the equatorium by al-Zarqali, the discovery of the physical reaction by Avempace, the identification of more than 200 new plants by Ibn al-Baitar the Arab Agricultural Revolution, and the Tabula Rogeriana, which was the most accurate world map in pre-modern times by al-Idrisi.

Several universities and educational institutions of the Arab world such as the University of Al Quaraouiyine, Al Azhar University, and Al Zaytuna University are considered to be the oldest in the world. Founded by Fatima al Fihri in 859 as a mosque, the University of Al Quaraouiyine in Fez is the oldest existing, continually operating and the first degree awarding educational institution in the world according to UNESCO and Guinness World Records and is sometimes referred to as the oldest university.

There are many scientific Arabic loanwords in Western European languages, including , mostly via Old French. This includes traditional star names such as Aldebaran, scientific terms like &quot;&quot; (whence also &quot;&quot;), &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, etc.

Under Ottoman rule, cultural life and science in the Arab world declined. In the 20th and 21st centuries, Arabs who have won important science prizes include Ahmed Zewail and Elias Corey (Nobel Prize), Michael DeBakey and Alim Benabid (Lasker Award), Omar M. Yaghi (Wolf Prize), Huda Zoghbi (Shaw Prize), Zaha Hadid (Pritzker Prize), and Michael Atiyah (both Fields Medal and Abel Prize). Rachid Yazami was one of the co-inventors of the lithium-ion battery, and Tony Fadell was important in the development of the iPod and the iPhone.

=== Theatre ===
Arab theatre is a rich and diverse cultural form that encompasses a wide range of styles, genres, and historical influences. Its roots in the pre-Islamic era, when poetry, storytelling, and musical performances were the main forms of artistic expressionIt refers to theatrical performances that are created by Arab playwrights, actors, and directors. The roots of Arab theatre can be traced back to ancient Arabic poetry and storytelling, which often incorporated music and dance. In the early Arabic period, storytelling evolved into a more formalized art form that was performed in public gatherings and festivals.

During the Islamic Golden Age in the 8th and 9th centuries, the city of Baghdad emerged as a hub of intellectual and artistic activity, including theatre. The court of the Abbasid Caliphate was home to many influential playwrights and performers, who helped to develop and popularize theatre throughout the Islamic world. Arab theatre has a long tradition of incorporating comedy and satire into its performances, often using humor to address social and political issues.

Arab theatre encompasses a wide range of dramatic genres, including tragedy, melodrama, and historical plays. Many Arab playwrights have used drama to address contemporary issues, the role of women in Arab society, and the challenges facing young people in the modern world. In recent decades, many Arab theatre artists have pushed the boundaries of the form, experimenting with new styles and techniques. This has led to the emergence of a vibrant contemporary theatre scene in many Arab countries, with innovative productions and performances that challenge traditional notions of Arab identity and culture.

=== Fashion ===
Arab fashion and design have a rich history and cultural significance that spans centuries, each with its unique fashion and design traditions. One of the most notable aspects of Arab fashion is the use of luxurious fabrics and intricate embroidery. Traditional garments, such as the Abaya and Thobe, are often made from high-quality fabrics like silk, satin, brocade, and are embellished with intricate embroidery and beading. In recent years, Arab fashion has gained global recognition, with designers like Elie Saab, Zuhair Murad, and Reem Acra showcasing their designs on international runways.

These designers incorporate traditional Arab design elements into their collections, such as ornate patterns, luxurious fabrics, and intricate embellishments. In addition to fashion, Arab design is also characterized by its intricate geometric patterns, calligraphy, and use of vibrant colors. Arabic art and architecture, with their intricate geometric patterns and motifs, have influenced Arab design for centuries. Arab designers also incorporate traditional motifs, such as the paisley and the arabesque, into their work. Overall, Arab fashion elements are rooted in the rich cultural heritage of the Arab world and continue to inspire designers today.

=== Wedding and marriage ===
Arabic weddings have changed greatly in the past 100 years. Original traditional Arabic weddings are supposed to be very similar to modern-day Bedouin weddings and rural weddings, and they are in some cases unique from one region to another, even within the same country. The practice of marrying of relatives is a common feature of Arab culture.

In the Arab world today between 40% and 50% of all marriages are consanguineous or between close family members, though these figures may vary among Arab nations. In Egypt, around 40% of the population marry a cousin. A 1992 survey in Jordan found that 32% were married to a first cousin; a further 17.3% were married to more distant relatives. 67% of marriages in Saudi Arabia are between close relatives as are 54% of all marriages in Kuwait, whereas 18% of all Lebanese were between blood relatives. Due to the actions of Muhammad and the Rightly Guided Caliphs, marriage between cousins is explicitly allowed in Islam and the Quran itself does not discourage or forbid the practice. Nevertheless, opinions vary on whether the phenomenon should be seen as exclusively based on Islamic practices as a 1992 study among Arabs in Jordan did not show significant differences between Christian Arabs or Muslim Arabs when comparing the occurrence of consanguinity.

== Genetics ==
Arabs are genetically diverse, arising from admixture with indigenous peoples of pre-Islamic Middle East and North Africa, following the Islamic expansion. Genetic ancestry components related to the Arabian Peninsula display an increasing frequency pattern from west to east over North Africa. A similar frequency pattern exist across northeastern Africa with decreasing genetic affinities to groups of the Arabian Peninsula along the Nile river valley across Sudan and South Sudan the more they go south. This genetic cline of admixture is dated to the time of Arab expansion and immigration to the Maghreb and northeast Africa. Genetic research has indicated that Palestinian Arabs and Jews share common genetic ancestry and are closely related. According to a 2016 study, indigenous Arabs from the Arabian Peninsula are direct descendants of the first Eurasian populations established by Out of Africa migrations. They are also very distant from contemporary Eurasians although there is signal of European admixture.

== See also ==
* Arab Union
* Arab world
* Lists of Arab companies
* North African Arabs

== References ==
===Notes===

===Citations===

===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (2 volumes)
* 
* 
* 
* Touma, Habib Hassan. &quot;The Music of the Arabs&quot;. Portland, Oregon: Amadeus P, 1996. .
* Lipinski, Edward. &quot;Semitic Languages: Outlines of a Comparative Grammar&quot;, 2nd ed., Orientalia Lovanensia Analecta: Leuven 2001
* Kees Versteegh, &quot;The Arabic Language&quot;, Edinburgh University Press (1997)
* The Catholic Encyclopedia, Robert Appleton Company, 1907, Online Edition, K. Night 2003: article Arabia
* History of Arabic language(1894), Jelsoft Enterprises Ltd.
* The Arabic language, National Institute for Technology and Liberal Education web page (2006)
* Hooker, Richard. &quot;Pre-Islamic Arabic Culture.&quot; WSU Web Site. 6 June 1999. Washington State University.
* Owen, Roger. &quot;State Power and Politics in the Making of the Modern Middle East 3rd Ed&quot; p. 57 
* 

==Further reading==
* Price-Jones, David. &quot;The Closed Circle: an Interpretation of the Arabs&quot;. Pbk. ed., with a new preface by the author. Chicago: I. R. Dee, 2002. xiv, 464 p. 
* Ankerl, Guy. &quot;Coexisting Contemporary Civilizations: Arabo-Muslim, Bharati, Chinese, and Western.&quot; INU PRESS, Geneva, 2000. .

==External links==

* www.LasPortal.org
* ArabCultureFund AFAC (archived 2 December 2016)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="4" end="9" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="43" end="54" title="Arabs" label="Arab people"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="63" end="75" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="98" end="108" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="112" end="121" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="126" end="138" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017280" start="154" end="167" title="Arab diaspora" label="Arab diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q170526" start="234" end="250" title="Fertile Crescent" label="Fertile Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="303" end="310" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="368" end="374" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="376" end="387" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="393" end="399" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="416" end="433" title="Ancient Near East" label="Ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q748846" start="519" end="525" title="Dilmun" label="Dilmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514721" start="527" end="533" title="Gerrha" label="Gerrha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429914" start="539" end="544" title="Magan (civilization)" label="Magan"/>
<link wikidata="Q446185" start="605" end="618" title="History of the Mediterranean region" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q851761" start="651" end="657" title="Midian" label="Midian"/>
<link wikidata="Q345427" start="659" end="662" title="ʿĀd" label="ʿĀd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132376" start="668" end="674" title="Thamud" label="Thamud"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="692" end="697" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="702" end="707" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287491" start="732" end="741" title="Qedarites" label="Qedarites"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="782" end="791" title="Canaan#Canaanites" label="Canaanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q28151255" start="796" end="804" title="Aramaeans" label="Aramaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q463871" start="847" end="858" title="Lower Egypt" label="Lower Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q216068" start="943" end="947" title="Sabaeans" label="Saba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824836" start="949" end="955" title="Lihyan" label="Lihyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365851" start="957" end="964" title="Minaeans" label="Minaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q748595" start="966" end="973" title="Qataban" label="Qataban"/>
<link wikidata="Q369778" start="975" end="985" title="Kingdom of Hadhramaut" label="Hadhramaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q777779" start="987" end="992" title="Kingdom of Awsan" label="Awsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q289577" start="998" end="1006" title="Himyarite Kingdom" label="Homerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="1043" end="1052" title="Abrahamic religions" label="Abrahamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="1089" end="1096" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q183403" start="1113" end="1120" title="Ishmael" label="Ishmael"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="1129" end="1148" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q220594" start="1154" end="1164" title="Nabataeans" label="Nabataeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11029653" start="1183" end="1190" title="Nabataean Kingdom" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788" start="1196" end="1201" title="Petra" label="Petra"/>
<link wikidata="Q877875" start="1244" end="1260" title="Palmyrene Empire" label="Palmyrene Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747" start="1278" end="1285" title="Palmyra" label="Palmyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q189705" start="1300" end="1307" title="Zenobia" label="Zenobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669578" start="1325" end="1341" title="Syria Palaestina" label="Syria Palaestina"/>
<link wikidata="Q221353" start="1343" end="1357" title="Arabia Petraea" label="Arabia Petraea"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="1359" end="1364" title="Egypt (Roman province)" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1385" end="1393" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514777" start="1404" end="1410" title="Iturea" label="Iturea"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="1423" end="1430" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="1432" end="1437" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="1463" end="1470" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="1483" end="1494" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q237234" start="1518" end="1525" title="Osroene" label="Osroene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412538" start="1530" end="1536" title="Kingdom of Hatra" label="Hatran"/>
<link wikidata="Q311819" start="1559" end="1576" title="Upper Mesopotamia" label="Upper Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="1607" end="1616" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11906377" start="1647" end="1657" title="Arbayistan" label="Arbayistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q149747" start="1725" end="1733" title="Adiabene" label="Adiabene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139438" start="1765" end="1773" title="Emesene dynasty" label="Emesenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="1790" end="1795" title="Emesa" label="Emesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="1797" end="1801" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="1804" end="1809" title="Roman Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="1818" end="1832" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818715" start="1838" end="1847" title="Tanukhids" label="Tanukhids"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136654" start="1849" end="1857" title="Salihids" label="Salihids"/>
<link wikidata="Q943191" start="1859" end="1867" title="Lakhmid kingdom" label="Lakhmids"/>
<link wikidata="Q605292" start="1869" end="1874" title="Kingdom of Kinda" label="Kinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q733668" start="1880" end="1890" title="Ghassanids" label="Ghassanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1985" end="1997" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2011" end="2022" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610620" start="2024" end="2029" title="Spread of Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q116191092" start="2081" end="2111" title="Arab migrations to the Maghreb" label="Arab migrations to the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q130417079" start="2113" end="2123" title="Arab migrations to the Levant" label="the Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q180465" start="2197" end="2205" title="Rashidun" label="Rashidun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="2207" end="2214" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="2216" end="2223" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="2229" end="2236" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2279" end="2288" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q887684" start="2293" end="2301" title="Muslim conquest of Persia" label="Sasanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="2324" end="2340" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="Arab territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="2356" end="2364" title="Southern France" label="southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q583544" start="2365" end="2371" title="Islam in France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078412" start="2383" end="2388" title="Islam in China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q478024" start="2405" end="2435" title="List of largest empires" label="history&amp;#x27;s largest empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q239060" start="2441" end="2458" title="Arab Revolt" label="Great Arab Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837704" start="2494" end="2505" title="Dissolution of the Ottoman Empire" label="dismantling"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2510" end="2524" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="2569" end="2580" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086771" start="2608" end="2615" title="Charter of the Arab League" label="Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193476" start="2651" end="2672" title="Pan-Arabism" label="unified Arab homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="2692" end="2699" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="2703" end="2707" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="2748" end="2756" title="Arabic" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309134" start="2758" end="2765" title="Arab culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999793" start="2767" end="2774" title="History of the Arabs" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q28169577" start="2776" end="2784" title="Arab identity" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502723" start="2786" end="2794" title="Tribes of Arabia" label="ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="2796" end="2807" title="Arab nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="2809" end="2818" title="Arab world" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q193476" start="2820" end="2825" title="Pan-Arabism" label="unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q84603170" start="2831" end="2839" title="Politics of the Arab League" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="2926" end="2938" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q194380" start="2974" end="2984" title="Arabic literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q624044" start="2986" end="2991" title="Arabic music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q48836268" start="2993" end="2998" title="Arab folk dances" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3000" end="3005" title="Arab culture#Media" label="media"/>
<link wikidata="Q623970" start="3007" end="3011" title="Arab cuisine" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309134" start="3013" end="3021" title="Arab clothing" label="clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579518" start="3032" end="3038" title="Sport policies of the Arab League" label="sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q212940" start="3040" end="3052" title="Arabic architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q189594" start="3054" end="3057" title="Islamic art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q97253422" start="3063" end="3072" title="Religion in pre-Islamic Arabia" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351730" start="3129" end="3143" title="Progress" label="human progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q785426" start="3170" end="3177" title="Arabic science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q16887156" start="3179" end="3189" title="List of inventions in the medieval Islamic world" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q193104" start="3191" end="3201" title="Arabic philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6032505" start="3203" end="3209" title="Islamic ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q194380" start="3211" end="3221" title="Arabic literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q84603170" start="3223" end="3231" title="Politics of the Arab League" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084587" start="3233" end="3241" title="Arab economy" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q189594" start="3243" end="3246" title="Arabic Art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q624044" start="3248" end="3253" title="Arabic music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q118897431" start="3255" end="3261" title="Arab humor" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783281" start="3272" end="3278" title="Arab cinema" label="cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q212940" start="3280" end="3292" title="Arabic architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q623970" start="3294" end="3298" title="Arab cuisine" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q624029" start="3300" end="3308" title="Arab medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3314" end="3322" title="History of Islam#Origins of Islam" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q97253422" start="3324" end="3336" title="Religion in pre-Islamic Arabia" label="Before Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="3358" end="3370" title="polytheistic" label="polytheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q446021" start="3371" end="3387" title="Ancient Semitic religion" label="Semitic religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817750" start="3400" end="3406" title="Jewish tribes of Arabia" label="tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="3415" end="3422" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="3426" end="3438" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q425381" start="3481" end="3486" title="hanif" label="hanif"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="3514" end="3524" title="monotheism" label="monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783216" start="3561" end="3568" title="Arab Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q431164" start="3596" end="3611" title="Arab Christians" label="Arab Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="3639" end="3644" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="3649" end="3656" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼís"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793123" start="3773" end="3788" title="Kurkh Monoliths" label="Kurkh Monoliths"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="3793" end="3810" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810449" start="3825" end="3850" title="Assyrian conquest of Aram" label="Assyrian conquest of Aram"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="3910" end="3917" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="3926" end="3943" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106716" start="3950" end="3962" title="Gindibu" label="King Gindibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="4009" end="4016" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070391" start="4214" end="4221" title="Sabaean language" label="Sabaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q289577" start="4315" end="4330" title="Himyarite Kingdom" label="Himyarite kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965311" start="4348" end="4368" title="Tubba Abu Karab As&amp;#x27;ad" label="&amp;#x27;Abu Karab Asad"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="4530" end="4535" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="4585" end="4591" title="Medina" label="Madina"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="4624" end="4632" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q855624" start="4790" end="4808" title="Nabataean alphabet" label="Nabataean alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271038" start="4826" end="4858" title="Imru&amp;#x27; al-Qays ibn &amp;#x27;Amr" label="Imru&amp;#x27; al-Qays ibn &amp;#x27;Amr"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="4897" end="4906" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q118468" start="4969" end="4988" title="Land of Frankincense" label="frankincense region"/>
<link wikidata="Q391216" start="5044" end="5057" title="Agatharchides" label="Agatharchides"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="5059" end="5075" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="5080" end="5086" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="5111" end="5122" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="5134" end="5143" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q220594" start="5205" end="5215" title="Nabataeans" label="Nabataeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q339162" start="5222" end="5235" title="Syrian steppe" label="Syrian steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514721" start="5273" end="5279" title="Gerrha" label="Gerrha"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="5450" end="5456" title="eponym" label="eponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118091" start="5473" end="5484" title="Ya&amp;#x27;rub" label="Ya&amp;#x27;rub"/>
<link wikidata="Q970628" start="5532" end="5564" title="Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani" label="Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="5663" end="5674" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168705" start="5821" end="5830" title="al-Masudi" label="al-Masudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597041" start="5891" end="5902" title="Ishmaelites" label="Ishmaelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q626682" start="5910" end="5916" title="Arabah" label="Arabah"/>
<link wikidata="Q191090" start="6490" end="6502" title="metathesis (linguistics)" label="metathetical"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="6681" end="6708" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afroasiatic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="6752" end="6769" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458559" start="6821" end="6829" title="Urheimat" label="Urheimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="6865" end="6882" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="6943" end="6949" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808759" start="6955" end="6987" title="ancient Semitic-speaking peoples" label="ancient Semitic-speaking peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="7001" end="7018" title="ancient Near East" label="ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658554" start="7134" end="7147" title="Proto-Semitic language" label="Proto-Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21661186" start="7272" end="7282" title="Old Arabic" label="Old Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433228" start="7367" end="7382" title="Central Semitic languages" label="Central Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="7436" end="7443" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q747547" start="7445" end="7454" title="Canaanite languages" label="Canaanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q36734" start="7456" end="7466" title="Phoenician language" label="Phoenician"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="7468" end="7474" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="7727" end="7736" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="7867" end="7878" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="7919" end="7931" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525701" start="8127" end="8141" title="Islamic–Jewish relations" label="Islamic–Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q183403" start="8154" end="8161" title="Ishmael" label="Ishmael"/>
<link wikidata="Q214617" start="8186" end="8191" title="Hagar" label="Hagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="8288" end="8296" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="8313" end="8318" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="8436" end="8447" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="8540" end="8545" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768161" start="8560" end="8567" title="Abraham in Islam" label="Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711668" start="8591" end="8596" title="Hagar in Islam" label="Hajar"/>
<link wikidata="Q214267" start="8612" end="8621" title="Prophecy" label="prophetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="8661" end="8664" title="Allah" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q29466" start="8724" end="8729" title="Kaaba" label="Kaaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q70899" start="8776" end="8780" title="Adam" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="8799" end="8808" title="Samaritan" label="Samaritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523217" start="8814" end="8820" title="The Asatir" label="Asaṭīr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773487" start="8920" end="8926" title="Nebaioth" label="Nebaot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="9020" end="9034" title="Nile" label="river of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="9048" end="9057" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="9074" end="9079" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508627" start="9091" end="9105" title="Targum Onkelos" label="Targum Onkelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303714" start="9117" end="9130" title="Toledot" label="Genesis 25:16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369215" start="9271" end="9278" title="Mizraim" label="Mizraim"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="9321" end="9328" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170526" start="9591" end="9607" title="Fertile Crescent" label="Fertile Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="9932" end="9939" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="9945" end="9954" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199461" start="10032" end="10051" title="Sargon of Akkad" label="Sargon&amp;#x27;s reign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="10117" end="10124" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429914" start="10682" end="10687" title="Magan (civilization)" label="Magan"/>
<link wikidata="Q851761" start="10689" end="10695" title="Midian" label="Midian"/>
<link wikidata="Q345427" start="10701" end="10704" title="ʿĀd" label="ʿĀd"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="10970" end="10981" title="Quran" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990155" start="10999" end="11003" title="Moses in Islam" label="Musa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="11005" end="11010" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149326" start="11166" end="11194" title="List of characters and names mentioned in the Quran" label="mentioned in the Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="11277" end="11282" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="11626" end="11629" title="Allah" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="11697" end="11706" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42527" start="11767" end="11772" title="spice" label="spice"/>
<link wikidata="Q186131" start="11775" end="11782" title="terrain" label="terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="11784" end="11792" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="11794" end="11799" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="11801" end="11809" title="clothing" label="clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="11815" end="11821" title="weapon" label="weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182483" start="11960" end="11968" title="Cambyses II" label="Cambyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="12060" end="12072" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="12074" end="12080" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="12082" end="12098" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="12104" end="12119" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="12142" end="12158" title="Josephus" label="Flavius Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="12232" end="12241" title="Cleopatra" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q51672" start="12327" end="12332" title="Herod the Great" label="Herod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290819" start="12455" end="12470" title="Geshem the Arabian" label="Geshem the Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025598" start="12499" end="12507" title="Nehemiah" label="Nehemiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q131640" start="12529" end="12532" title="Book of Nehemiah" label="Neh"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12534" end="12538" title="Nehemiah 2:19" label="2:19"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12540" end="12543" title="Nehemiah 6:1" label="6:1"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="12714" end="12724" title="Samaritans" label="Samaritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918723" start="12782" end="12800" title="walls of Jerusalem" label="walls of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763" start="12818" end="12826" title="Saracens" label="Saracens"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="12881" end="12886" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="12891" end="12896" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="12990" end="12996" title="Roman Empire" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q221353" start="13000" end="13014" title="Arabia Petraea" label="Arabia Petraea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859371" start="13028" end="13042" title="Arabia Deserta" label="Arabia Deserta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="13071" end="13077" title="Iberia" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="13092" end="13108" title="Moors" label="&amp;quot;Moor&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826437" start="13324" end="13333" title="Hagarenes" label="Hagarenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="13365" end="13371" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="13373" end="13378" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="13384" end="13392" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="13655" end="13669" title="Arab conquests" label="Arab conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="13850" end="13855" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748846" start="14170" end="14176" title="Dilmun" label="Dilmun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="14270" end="14282" title="Persian Gulf" label="Arabian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="14303" end="14308" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="14332" end="14341" title="Holy Land" label="holy land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="14412" end="14423" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514721" start="14490" end="14496" title="Gerrha" label="Gerrha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165357" start="14520" end="14534" title="Eastern Arabia" label="Eastern Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132376" start="14651" end="14657" title="Thamud" label="Thamud"/>
<link wikidata="Q28169699" start="14777" end="14789" title="Proto-Arabic language" label="Proto-Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472213" start="14794" end="14815" title="Ancient North Arabian" label="Ancient North Arabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q669777" start="14916" end="14926" title="Epigraph (literature)" label="epigraphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q446074" start="14947" end="14953" title="South Arabian alphabet" label="musnad"/>
<link wikidata="Q311341" start="14998" end="15005" title="Al-Ahsa Oasis" label="Hasaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q843030" start="15048" end="15056" title="Thamudic" label="Thamudic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="15106" end="15111" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287491" start="15118" end="15127" title="Qedarites" label="Qedarites"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="15143" end="15148" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530196" start="15200" end="15211" title="Wadi Sirhan" label="Wādī Sirḥān"/>
<link wikidata="Q339162" start="15219" end="15232" title="Syrian Desert" label="Syrian Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="15260" end="15265" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="15361" end="15374" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="15620" end="15635" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="15675" end="15692" title="ancient Near East" label="ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q216068" start="15814" end="15819" title="Sheba" label="Sheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="15868" end="15880" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="15882" end="15895" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="15905" end="15910" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="15998" end="16004" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="16006" end="16012" title="Islam" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="16018" end="16027" title="Christian" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575646" start="16067" end="16073" title="Qahtanite" label="Qahtan"/>
<link wikidata="Q816407" start="16074" end="16080" title="Ben" label="son of"/>
<link wikidata="Q193669" start="16081" end="16084" title="Hud (prophet)" label="Hud"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="16189" end="16194" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="16199" end="16204" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q216068" start="16448" end="16456" title="Sabaeans" label="Sabaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="16492" end="16504" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="16513" end="16518" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="16794" end="16798" title="Roman Empire" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303666" start="16908" end="16918" title="Marib Dam" label="Maʾrib Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q335478" start="17028" end="17034" title="Marib" label="Maʾrib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824836" start="17076" end="17082" title="Lihyan" label="Lihyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="17249" end="17266" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q21838040" start="17276" end="17285" title="Dadanitic" label="Dadanitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27242" start="17516" end="17522" title="Al-&amp;#x27;Ula" label="Al Ula"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="17580" end="17587" title="Medina" label="Yathrib"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597041" start="17690" end="17701" title="Ishmaelites" label="Ishmaelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q21838040" start="17712" end="17721" title="Dadanitic" label="Dadanitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365851" start="17737" end="17758" title="Minaeans" label="Kingdom of Ma&amp;#x27;in"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="17836" end="17847" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="17852" end="17857" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="18267" end="18286" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Phoenician alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q216068" start="18359" end="18371" title="Sabaeans" label="Arab Sabaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429935" start="18425" end="18437" title="South Arabia" label="South Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q289577" start="18963" end="18969" title="Himyarite Kingdom" label="Ḥimyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q369778" start="18998" end="19019" title="Kingdom of Hadhramaut" label="Kingdom of Hadhramaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="19046" end="19063" title="cultural heritage" label="cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="19115" end="19126" title="trade route" label="trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="19147" end="19158" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="19160" end="19170" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="19176" end="19187" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="19396" end="19408" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q777779" start="19875" end="19891" title="Kingdom of Awsan" label="Kingdom of Awsān"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429935" start="19969" end="19981" title="South Arabia" label="South Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q289577" start="20440" end="20457" title="Himyarite Kingdom" label="Himyarite Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q140131" start="20583" end="20596" title="Zafar, Yemen" label="city of Zafar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35025" start="20684" end="20706" title="Old South Arabian" label="South Arabian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429935" start="20784" end="20807" title="South Arabia" label="southern part of Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="21027" end="21034" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="21323" end="21335" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q220594" start="21403" end="21413" title="Nabataeans" label="Nabataeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="21554" end="21561" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q855624" start="21684" end="21702" title="Nabataean alphabet" label="Nabataean alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q472586" start="21820" end="21828" title="Safaitic" label="Safaitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q220594" start="21915" end="21924" title="Nabataean" label="Nabataean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829327" start="21995" end="22008" title="Qaryat al-Faw" label="Qaryat al-Faw"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="22116" end="22122" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q916854" start="22172" end="22188" title="Sumatar Harabesi" label="Sumatar Harabesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747" start="22260" end="22267" title="Palmyra" label="Palmyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="22322" end="22328" title="sheikh" label="sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165502" start="22628" end="22644" title="Battle of Edessa" label="Battle of Edessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q191455" start="22702" end="22710" title="Shapur I" label="Shapur I"/>
<link wikidata="Q189705" start="22797" end="22804" title="Zenobia" label="Zenobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46780" start="22931" end="22939" title="Aurelian" label="Aurelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514777" start="23318" end="23324" title="Iturea" label="Iturea"/>
<link wikidata="Q333711" start="23512" end="23525" title="Mount Lebanon" label="Mount Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202322" start="23534" end="23546" title="Beqaa Valley" label="Beqaa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="23588" end="23604" title="Syria (region)" label="Syrian territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="23659" end="23668" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="23683" end="23690" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818715" start="23692" end="23701" title="Tanukhids" label="Tanukhids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502723" start="23710" end="23735" title="Tribes of Arabia" label="Arab tribal confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631130" start="23892" end="23910" title="Rabi&amp;#x27;a ibn Nizar" label="Rabi&amp;#x27;ah tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q237234" start="24205" end="24218" title="Osroene" label="Osroene Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q65080892" start="24238" end="24246" title="Abgarid dynasty" label="Abgarids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190403" start="24282" end="24288" title="Edessa" label="Edessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="24296" end="24313" title="ancient Near East" label="ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q65080892" start="24604" end="24611" title="Abgarid dynasty" label="dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q320168" start="24616" end="24623" title="Abgar V" label="Abgar V"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="24663" end="24675" title="Jesus" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="24713" end="24725" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q34187" start="24870" end="24881" title="Religious studies" label="scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412538" start="24887" end="24903" title="Kingdom of Hatra" label="Kingdom of Hatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="24949" end="24960" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="25072" end="25087" title="Parthian Empire" label="Parthian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818715" start="25244" end="25255" title="Tanukhids" label="Banu Tanukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q466614" start="25274" end="25279" title="Hatra" label="Hatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q149747" start="25611" end="25619" title="Adiabene" label="Adiabene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="25641" end="25648" title="Monarchy" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="25661" end="25672" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132754" start="25693" end="25699" title="Erbil" label="Arbela"/>
<link wikidata="Q15955102" start="25894" end="25903" title="Sasanian dynasty" label="Sasanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11906377" start="25927" end="25937" title="Arbayistan" label="Arbayistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933308" start="26017" end="26051" title="Shapur I&amp;#x27;s inscription at the Ka&amp;#x27;ba-ye Zartosht" label="Ka&amp;#x27;ba-ye Zartosht inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q938153" start="26075" end="26088" title="King of Kings" label="King of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q191455" start="26090" end="26098" title="Shapur I" label="Shapur I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139438" start="26133" end="26140" title="Emesene dynasty" label="Emesene"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="26200" end="26205" title="Emesa" label="Emesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="26218" end="26222" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="26238" end="26261" title="Roman Syria" label="Roman province of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762" start="26382" end="26390" title="Elagabalus" label="El-Gabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915100" start="26421" end="26435" title="Political institutions of ancient Rome" label="Roman politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18277266" start="26492" end="26507" title="Sampsiceramus I" label="Sampsiceramus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q310916" start="26566" end="26576" title="Iamblichus" label="Iamblichus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946551" start="26611" end="26627" title="Sampsiceramus II" label="Sampsiceramus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="26690" end="26702" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q733668" start="26819" end="26829" title="Ghassanids" label="Ghassanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q943191" start="26831" end="26839" title="Lakhmids" label="Lakhmids"/>
<link wikidata="Q110352001" start="26844" end="26852" title="Kindites" label="Kindites"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="26996" end="27001" title="Syria (Byzantine province)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589883" start="27076" end="27082" title="Hauran" label="Hauran"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="27111" end="27118" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="27120" end="27129" title="Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="27134" end="27140" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q544230" start="27270" end="27282" title="Arabia Felix" label="Arabia Felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="27345" end="27357" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q221353" start="27364" end="27378" title="Arabia Petraea" label="Arabia Petraea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788" start="27404" end="27409" title="Petra" label="Petra"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="27485" end="27497" title="Arabia Magna" label="Arabia Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q943191" start="27503" end="27511" title="Lakhmids" label="Lakhmids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818715" start="27556" end="27562" title="Tanukh" label="Tanukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q310799" start="27610" end="27617" title="Al-Hira" label="Al-Hira"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="27650" end="27659" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sassanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="27691" end="27707" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q605292" start="27832" end="27848" title="Kingdom of Kinda" label="Kingdom of Kinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q289577" start="27890" end="27896" title="Himyar" label="Himyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="27902" end="27909" title="Persian people" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631130" start="28140" end="28151" title="Rabi`ah" label="Rabi&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q220605" start="28468" end="28478" title="Al-Mundhir III ibn al-Nu&amp;#x27;man" label="Al-Mundhir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283038" start="28492" end="28501" title="&amp;#x27;Amr III ibn al-Mundhir" label="&amp;#x27;Amr"/>
<link wikidata="Q733668" start="28508" end="28518" title="Ghassanids" label="Ghassanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883534" start="28659" end="28668" title="Azd" label="Azd tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="28696" end="28706" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantines"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="28719" end="28728" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="28795" end="28807" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136654" start="29095" end="29103" title="Salihids" label="Salihids"/>
<link wikidata="Q716228" start="29350" end="29369" title="Hisham ibn al-Kalbi" label="Hisham ibn al-Kalbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686089" start="29380" end="29402" title="Tarikh al-Yaqubi" label="Tarikh of Ya&amp;#x27;qubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="29546" end="29557" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="29650" end="29657" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="29659" end="29670" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="29672" end="29680" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="29682" end="29692" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="29698" end="29708" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="29745" end="29752" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="29754" end="29759" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="29765" end="29772" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="30127" end="30132" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610620" start="30244" end="30257" title="Spread of Islam" label="rise of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="30269" end="30277" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="30310" end="30315" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q35484" start="30319" end="30325" title="Medina" label="Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q131482" start="30351" end="30356" title="Hijrah" label="Hijra"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="30610" end="30615" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="30645" end="30649" title="Umar" label="Umar"/>
<link wikidata="Q851761" start="30722" end="30728" title="Midian" label="Midian"/>
<link wikidata="Q186234" start="30797" end="30801" title="Kufa" label="Kufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q37731" start="30957" end="30963" title="Uthman" label="Uthman"/>
<link wikidata="Q887684" start="31002" end="31020" title="Arab conquest of Persia" label="conquest of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178890" start="31067" end="31075" title="Khorasan province" label="Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621258" start="31088" end="31107" title="Arab conquest of armenia" label="conquest of Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="31204" end="31219" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sassanid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="31252" end="31272" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="31296" end="31313" title="Ali" label="Ali ibn Abi Talib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417059" start="31352" end="31363" title="First Fitna" label="First Fitna"/>
<link wikidata="Q182914" start="31457" end="31471" title="Hasan ibn Ali" label="Hassan ibn Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q189570" start="31501" end="31510" title="Kharijites" label="Kharijite"/>
<link wikidata="Q181154" start="31525" end="31535" title="Mu&amp;#x27;awiya I" label="Muawiyah I"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="31687" end="31695" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115723" start="31704" end="31719" title="Rashidun army" label="Rashidun armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="31769" end="31778" title="Caliphate" label="Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q478024" start="31810" end="31836" title="List of largest empires" label="largest empires in history"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818715" start="31900" end="31909" title="Tanukhids" label="Tanukhids"/>
<link wikidata="Q445782" start="31913" end="31924" title="Mavia (queen)" label="Queen Mawia"/>
<link wikidata="Q877875" start="31937" end="31953" title="Palmyrene Empire" label="Palmyrene Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q289577" start="32057" end="32066" title="Himyarite" label="Himyarite"/>
<link wikidata="Q943191" start="32068" end="32076" title="Lakhmids" label="Lakhmids"/>
<link wikidata="Q733668" start="32080" end="32090" title="Ghassanids" label="Ghassanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q334923" start="32329" end="32337" title="Abu Bakr" label="Abu Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="32339" end="32343" title="Umar" label="Umar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37731" start="32345" end="32351" title="Uthman" label="Uthman"/>
<link wikidata="Q39619" start="32356" end="32359" title="Ali" label="Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610620" start="32554" end="32569" title="spread of Islam" label="spread of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="32817" end="32826" title="rebellion" label="rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q124058" start="32861" end="32866" title="Zakat" label="Zakat"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="33007" end="33012" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="33018" end="33022" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="33177" end="33185" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189320" start="33517" end="33524" title="justice" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q45646" start="33990" end="34005" title="Banu Umayya" label="Umayyad dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="34010" end="34018" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q221447" start="34207" end="34212" title="Ramla" label="Ramla"/>
<link wikidata="Q283368" start="34214" end="34219" title="Raqqa" label="Raqqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="34221" end="34226" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q186234" start="34228" end="34232" title="Kufa" label="Kufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83317" start="34234" end="34239" title="Mosul" label="Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q170047" start="34244" end="34251" title="Samarra" label="Samarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="34295" end="34301" title="Caliph" label="Caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q36788" start="34302" end="34314" title="Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan" label="Abd al-Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q298403" start="34391" end="34398" title="Umar II" label="Umar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="34690" end="34698" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="34738" end="34745" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="34925" end="34931" title="Punics" label="Punics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933860" start="34963" end="34981" title="Abbasid Revolution" label="Abbasid Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="35097" end="35115" title="Emirate of Córdoba" label="Emirate of Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337854" start="35236" end="35256" title="Caliphate of Córdoba" label="Caliphate of Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="35384" end="35394" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q284531" start="35427" end="35438" title="Al-Ḥakam II" label="Al-Ḥakam II"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="35525" end="35535" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217177" start="35553" end="35567" title="Taifa" label="small kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q293599" start="35657" end="35682" title="Al-Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib" label="Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib"/>
<link wikidata="Q4987" start="35739" end="35750" title="Banu Hashim" label="Banu Hashim"/>
<link wikidata="Q289492" start="35829" end="35846" title="Battle of the Zab" label="Battle of the Zab"/>
<link wikidata="Q31066" start="35972" end="35981" title="al-Mansur" label="al-Mansur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="36002" end="36009" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="36132" end="36150" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="36279" end="36287" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="36317" end="36324" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="36362" end="36367" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="36386" end="36392" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q33018" start="36699" end="36714" title="House of Wisdom" label="House of Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="36761" end="36768" title="Fatimid" label="Fatimid"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="36773" end="36778" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="36787" end="36794" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="36867" end="36872" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="36877" end="36884" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="36894" end="36901" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q19576" start="36980" end="36987" title="Wilayah" label="Wilayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="37112" end="37119" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q369560" start="37125" end="37142" title="Siege of Baghdad (1258)" label="conquered Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q293454" start="37173" end="37190" title="Al-Musta&amp;#x27;sim" label="Al-Musta&amp;#x27;sim"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="37334" end="37340" title="Mamluk Sultanate (Cairo)" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q307629" start="37575" end="37590" title="Abdullah al-Mahdi Billah" label="al-Mahdi Billah"/>
<link wikidata="Q180123" start="37608" end="37615" title="Fatimah" label="Fatimah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="37671" end="37675" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="37768" end="37773" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="37859" end="37864" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="37866" end="37871" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="37873" end="37880" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="37882" end="37889" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="37891" end="37898" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="37900" end="37905" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="37911" end="37920" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427023" start="37961" end="37967" title="Kutama" label="Kutama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107354" start="38042" end="38049" title="Raqqada" label="Raqqada"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="38055" end="38063" title="Aghlabid" label="Aghlabid"/>
<link wikidata="Q466054" start="38126" end="38132" title="Mahdia" label="Mahdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q289618" start="38192" end="38204" title="Mansouria, Tunisia" label="Al-Mansuriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="38211" end="38219" title="Kairouan" label="Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="38503" end="38516" title="Muslim world" label="Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q312342" start="38698" end="38713" title="Al-Azhar Mosque" label="Al-Azhar Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q173959" start="38718" end="38737" title="Al-Azhar University" label="Al-Azhar University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12818349" start="38947" end="38963" title="Schools of Islamic theology" label="Islamic theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q484181" start="38968" end="38981" title="Fiqh" label="jurisprudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="39058" end="39065" title="Isma&amp;#x27;ilism" label="Ismaili"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="39274" end="39290" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="39437" end="39452" title="Ayyubid dynasty" label="Ayyubid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="39461" end="39468" title="Saladin" label="Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="39688" end="39704" title="Mamluk Sultanate (Cairo)" label="Mamluk Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q971248" start="39765" end="39775" title="Battle of Marj Dabiq" label="Marj Dabiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q537923" start="39780" end="39788" title="Battle of Ridaniya" label="Ridaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="39807" end="39813" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509593" start="40012" end="40030" title="Young Arab Society" label="Young Arab Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452638" start="40130" end="40141" title="Arab Nationalist Movement" label="Arab nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895856" start="40356" end="40377" title="Arab Congress of 1913" label="Arab Congress of 1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q239060" start="40698" end="40709" title="Arab Revolt" label="Arab Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q128906" start="40818" end="40840" title="Hussein bin Ali, King of Hejaz" label="Sherif Hussein bin Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837704" start="41228" end="41256" title="Dissolution of the Ottoman Empire" label="defeat of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="41596" end="41609" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519948" start="41617" end="41641" title="aftermath of World War I" label="aftermath of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q211674" start="41647" end="41668" title="Sykes–Picot Agreement" label="Sykes–Picot Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="42002" end="42020" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q369560" start="42187" end="42203" title="Siege of Baghdad (1258)" label="Siege of Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736514" start="42231" end="42244" title="List of pre-modern Arab scientists and scholars" label="Arab scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="42417" end="42428" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="42477" end="42483" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377906" start="42572" end="42589" title="culture of Europe" label="culture of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="42662" end="42682" title="Medieval Latin" label="medieval Latin world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477405" start="42773" end="42784" title="Arab Agricultural Revolution" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="42786" end="42793" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="42795" end="42800" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="42806" end="42813" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226611" start="42819" end="42841" title="List of Arabic star names" label="traditional star names"/>
<link wikidata="Q88540091" start="42850" end="42859" title="Aldebaran" label="Aldebaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q755709" start="43086" end="43117" title="Renaissance of the 12th century" label="Renaissance of the 12th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="43147" end="43152" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="43157" end="43163" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39837" start="43284" end="43292" title="Averroes" label="Averroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q317519" start="43357" end="43362" title="Muslim conquest of Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q248984" start="43371" end="43377" title="Muslim conquest of the Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="43474" end="43480" title="Al-Andalus" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250763" start="43485" end="43491" title="Emirate of Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654327" start="43676" end="43692" title="Classical Arabic" label="Classical Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="43696" end="43710" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q69199" start="43756" end="43784" title="Toledo School of Translators" label="Toledo School of Translators"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424763" start="43952" end="43971" title="Timurid Renaissance" label="Timurid Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520921" start="44428" end="44444" title="Arab Renaissance" label="Arab Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999793" start="44726" end="44738" title="History of the Arabs" label="Arab history"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="44834" end="44844" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="44869" end="44878" title="Politics" label="political"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="44880" end="44888" title="Economy" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="45058" end="45071" title="Nation state" label="nation-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="45195" end="45216" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies in World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q956357" start="45520" end="45545" title="Kingdom of Hejaz" label="independence of the Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="45611" end="45627" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="45842" end="45854" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q193476" start="45945" end="45956" title="Pan-Arabism" label="Pan-Arabism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266" start="46039" end="46045" title="nation" label="nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28169577" start="46082" end="46131" title="Arab identity" label="ancestry, culture, history, language and identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520921" start="46250" end="46266" title="Nahda" label="Arab Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="46603" end="46621" title="Gamal Abdel Nasser" label="Gamal Abdel Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780431" start="46635" end="46650" title="1952 Egyptian revolution" label="1952 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q624284" start="46846" end="46860" title="Arab socialism" label="Arab socialism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46961" end="46973" title="List of leaders of Middle Eastern and North African states#Leaders of Arab League member states" label="Arab leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q118725" start="46983" end="46997" title="Hafez al-Assad" label="Hafez al-Assad"/>
<link wikidata="Q238046" start="46999" end="47019" title="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr" label="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q212486" start="47021" end="47037" title="Faisal I of Iraq" label="Faisal I of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="47039" end="47054" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="47056" end="47070" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q311798" start="47072" end="47086" title="Gaafar Nimeiry" label="Gaafar Nimeiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42013" start="47091" end="47102" title="Anwar Sadat" label="Anwar Sadat"/>
<link wikidata="Q624115" start="47144" end="47156" title="Arab Union" label="unified Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q170468" start="47380" end="47400" title="United Arab Republic" label="United Arab Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="47746" end="47768" title="Egypt" label="Arab Republic of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q146713" start="47845" end="47860" title="Arab Federation" label="Arab Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="47886" end="47892" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="47897" end="47901" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988530" start="47979" end="47997" title="14 July Revolution" label="14 July Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q856843" start="48026" end="48044" title="United Arab States" label="United Arab States"/>
<link wikidata="Q580188" start="48077" end="48107" title="Mutawakkilite Kingdom of Yemen" label="Mutawakkilite Kingdom of Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44642" start="48247" end="48275" title="Federation of Arab Republics" label="Federation of Arab Republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="48304" end="48309" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q623944" start="48463" end="48484" title="Arab Islamic Republic" label="Arab Islamic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="48517" end="48524" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="48529" end="48536" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q370862" start="48550" end="48568" title="Arab Maghreb Union" label="Arab Maghreb Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="48728" end="48749" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab-Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="49001" end="49014" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="49020" end="49031" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="49539" end="49548" title="Religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610620" start="49577" end="49592" title="spread of Islam" label="spread of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q431164" start="49621" end="49635" title="Arab Christians" label="Arab Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817750" start="49649" end="49667" title="Jewish tribes of Arabia" label="Arab Jewish tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q770213" start="49758" end="49770" title="Christianity in the Middle East" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="49781" end="49786" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="49791" end="49797" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="49888" end="49898" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="49935" end="49947" title="Ethnicity" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q211503" start="49951" end="49955" title="clan" label="clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48349" start="50152" end="50158" title="empire" label="empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="50161" end="50173" title="colonization" label="colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017280" start="50635" end="50663" title="Arab diaspora" label="communities around the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="50823" end="50829" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267222" start="50861" end="50882" title="Qays and Yaman tribes" label="Qays and Yaman tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634445" start="51034" end="51043" title="Banu Kalb" label="Banu Kalb"/>
<link wikidata="Q110352001" start="51045" end="51050" title="Kinda (tribe)" label="Kinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q733668" start="51052" end="51062" title="Ghassanids" label="Ghassanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q943191" start="51068" end="51076" title="Lakhmids" label="Lakhmids"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378261" start="51118" end="51128" title="Banu Kilab" label="Banu Kilab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016793" start="51130" end="51139" title="Tayy" label="Banu Tayy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827586" start="51141" end="51152" title="Banu Hanifa" label="Banu Hanifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633574" start="51158" end="51168" title="Banu Tamim" label="Banu Tamim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4987" start="51246" end="51257" title="Banu Hashim" label="Banu Hashim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414972" start="51259" end="51271" title="Banu Makhzum" label="Banu Makhzum"/>
<link wikidata="Q45646" start="51273" end="51284" title="Umayyad dynasty" label="Banu Umayya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401619" start="51290" end="51300" title="Banu Zuhrah" label="Banu Zuhra"/>
<link wikidata="Q887684" start="51423" end="51446" title="Arab conquest of Persia" label="Arab conquest of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859361" start="51479" end="51492" title="Iranian Arabs" label="Iranian Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014472" start="51501" end="51513" title="Ahwazi Arabs" label="Ahwazi Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825939" start="51525" end="51539" title="Banu Ka&amp;#x27;b" label="Banu Ka&amp;#x27;b"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855725" start="51541" end="51551" title="Bani Turuf" label="Bani Turuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774944" start="51560" end="51585" title="Musha&amp;#x27;sha&amp;#x27;iyyah" label="Musha&amp;#x27;sha&amp;#x27;iyyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725862" start="51615" end="51622" title="Khamseh" label="Khamseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004666" start="51633" end="51646" title="Fars province" label="Fars province"/>
<link wikidata="Q476781" start="51655" end="51672" title="Arabs in Khorasan" label="Arabs in Khorasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q116191092" start="51708" end="51737" title="Arab migration to the Maghreb" label="Arab migration to the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="51770" end="51780" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456206" start="51782" end="51793" title="Banu Sulaym" label="Banu Sulaym"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883552" start="51798" end="51803" title="Maqil" label="Maqil"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="51891" end="51901" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="51928" end="51933" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="51951" end="51956" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="51958" end="51965" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="51970" end="51977" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="52014" end="52021" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883541" start="52372" end="52376" title="Banu Bakr" label="Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="52408" end="52412" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882516" start="52416" end="52422" title="Kinana" label="Kinana"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="52444" end="52450" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="52452" end="52456" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="52458" end="52463" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="52465" end="52470" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="52472" end="52481" title="Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="52483" end="52490" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="52492" end="52499" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="52505" end="52510" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777166" start="52514" end="52521" title="Hawazin" label="Hawazin"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="52542" end="52548" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="52550" end="52555" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="52557" end="52564" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="52566" end="52573" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="52575" end="52580" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="52586" end="52590" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633574" start="52594" end="52599" title="Banu Tamim" label="Tamim"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="52620" end="52626" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="52628" end="52632" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="52634" end="52638" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="52640" end="52649" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="52651" end="52658" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="52664" end="52671" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883534" start="52674" end="52677" title="Azd" label="Azd"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="52698" end="52704" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="52706" end="52710" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="52712" end="52718" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="52724" end="52736" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q807005" start="52740" end="52748" title="Ghatafan" label="Ghatafan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="52769" end="52775" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="52784" end="52791" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241922" start="52795" end="52802" title="Madhhij" label="Madhhij"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="52823" end="52829" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="52834" end="52838" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q15402240" start="52842" end="52853" title="Abd al-Qays" label="Abd al-Qays"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="52874" end="52880" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601219" start="52884" end="52891" title="Qays" label="Al Qays"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="52920" end="52926" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857310" start="52930" end="52941" title="Quda&amp;#x27;a" label="Quda&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="52962" end="52968" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="52970" end="52975" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="52981" end="52993" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="53088" end="53100" title="Arab League" label="Arab nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="53136" end="53148" title="CIA Factbook" label="CIA Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="53345" end="53359" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="53379" end="53390" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="53416" end="53433" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="53454" end="53468" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="53477" end="53489" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017280" start="53532" end="53545" title="Arab diaspora" label="Arab diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="53575" end="53579" title="Arab people" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q187668" start="53580" end="53590" title="Emigration" label="immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="53694" end="53705" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="53707" end="53720" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="53722" end="53728" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="53730" end="53743" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="53768" end="53778" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="53780" end="53794" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="53800" end="53809" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="53815" end="53826" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q472311" start="53845" end="53885" title="International Organization for Migration" label="International Organization for Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="54208" end="54218" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="54252" end="54258" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="54260" end="54265" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="54270" end="54277" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="54435" end="54446" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="54530" end="54544" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27407" start="54559" end="54570" title="East Africa" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739014" start="54578" end="54591" title="Swahili coast" label="Swahili coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774" start="54593" end="54601" title="Zanzibar" label="Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4334533" start="54620" end="54625" title="Omanis" label="Omani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859351" start="54655" end="54666" title="Arab Indonesians" label="Indonesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716071" start="54668" end="54678" title="Arab Malaysians" label="Malaysians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783241" start="54684" end="54696" title="Arab Singaporeans" label="Singaporeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120474" start="54717" end="54732" title="Hadhrami people" label="Hadhrami people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517159" start="54772" end="54781" title="Hadramawt" label="Hadramawt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783487" start="54838" end="54860" title="Arabs in Europe" label="Arabs living in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="54885" end="54891" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026372" start="54924" end="54939" title="Arabs in France" label="Arabs in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="54953" end="54960" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q503282" start="54989" end="54996" title="Mashreq" label="Mashreq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="55062" end="55074" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="55081" end="55094" title="French people" label="French people"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="55099" end="55104" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="55152" end="55158" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147847" start="55429" end="55453" title="Arabs in Spain" label="Arab population of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="55502" end="55507" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="55545" end="55572" title="Umayyad conquest of Hispania" label="Muslim conquest of Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="55609" end="55616" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="55719" end="55725" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q559076" start="55852" end="55884" title="refugees of the Syrian civil war" label="refugees of the Syrian civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="55894" end="55905" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="55922" end="55929" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="56000" end="56006" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="56008" end="56015" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="56017" end="56025" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="56027" end="56038" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="56040" end="56055" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="56057" end="56064" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="56069" end="56075" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="56094" end="56100" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q559076" start="56146" end="56161" title="Refugees of the Syrian Civil War" label="Syrian refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q623773" start="56324" end="56353" title="Arabs in Turkey" label="Turkey&amp;#x27;s Arab population"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783282" start="56455" end="56492" title="Arab immigration to the United States" label="Arab immigration to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q787519" start="56653" end="56667" title="Arab Americans" label="Arab Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="56774" end="56785" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="56787" end="56794" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="56800" end="56813" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="56991" end="57002" title="immigration" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783159" start="57164" end="57178" title="Arab Canadians" label="Arab Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="57186" end="57194" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="57293" end="57306" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="57354" end="57364" title="Arab World" label="Arab World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440531" start="57512" end="57521" title="Federal government of Brazil" label="Brazilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300127" start="57573" end="57603" title="Lebanese Brazilians" label="Brazilians of Lebanese descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q100155316" start="57663" end="57691" title="Syrian Brazilians" label="Brazilians of Syrian descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="57731" end="57740" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="57927" end="57935" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="57954" end="57963" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="57982" end="57988" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="58007" end="58012" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="58033" end="58048" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="58063" end="58074" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="58080" end="58088" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119329" start="58120" end="58133" title="Arab Haitians" label="Arab Haitians"/>
<link wikidata="Q34261" start="58179" end="58186" title="Port-au-Prince" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="58391" end="58398" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian"/>
<link wikidata="Q633798" start="58409" end="58415" title="Mughan plain" label="Mughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="58432" end="58442" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q200173" start="58494" end="58508" title="South Caucasus" label="South Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="58550" end="58573" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q763603" start="58630" end="58646" title="Baku Governorate" label="Baku Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="58654" end="58668" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q846157" start="58687" end="58701" title="Shirvani Arabic" label="Arabic dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q8083802" start="58824" end="58833" title="Ərəbqədim" label="Arabgadim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4542649" start="58835" end="58845" title="Ərəbocağı" label="Arabojaghy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5012165" start="58847" end="58859" title="Ərəbyengicə" label="Arab-Yengija"/>
<link wikidata="Q200173" start="58910" end="58924" title="South Caucasus" label="South Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="59013" end="59021" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131416" start="59098" end="59105" title="Derbent" label="Derbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q756921" start="59220" end="59233" title="Turkification" label="Turkicisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q482942" start="59270" end="59275" title="Azerbaijanis" label="Azeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="59417" end="59429" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q50948445" start="59568" end="59589" title="Central Asian Arabic" label="Arabs of Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q483505" start="59698" end="59704" title="Tājik people" label="Tajiks"/>
<link wikidata="Q483047" start="59706" end="59712" title="Uzbeks" label="Uzbeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q305198" start="59776" end="59782" title="Sayyid" label="Sayyid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432691" start="59784" end="59789" title="Khoja (Turkestan)" label="Khoja"/>
<link wikidata="Q96658115" start="59793" end="59801" title="Siddiqui" label="Siddiqui"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088370" start="59873" end="59879" title="Chaush" label="Chaush"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="59887" end="59893" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783135" start="59909" end="59916" title="Arab (Gujarat)" label="Chavuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="59920" end="59927" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120474" start="59969" end="59977" title="Hadhrami people" label="Hadhrami"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165357" start="60137" end="60151" title="Eastern Arabia" label="Eastern Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="60189" end="60199" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82245" start="60343" end="60362" title="Shafiʽi school" label="Shafi&amp;#x27;i madhab"/>
<link wikidata="Q29024993" start="60385" end="60404" title="Islam in South Asia" label="South Asian Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="60420" end="60433" title="Hanafi" label="Hanafi madhab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6429498" start="60476" end="60491" title="Konkani Muslims" label="Konkani Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142402" start="60499" end="60512" title="Konkan" label="Konkan region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595822" start="60518" end="60526" title="Mappilla" label="Mappilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="60530" end="60536" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595692" start="60546" end="60552" title="Labbai" label="Labbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827947" start="60557" end="60565" title="Marakkar" label="Marakkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="60569" end="60579" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="60676" end="60682" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211347" start="60696" end="60709" title="Iraqi Biradari" label="Iraqi biradri"/>
<link wikidata="Q998494" start="60798" end="60814" title="Sri Lankan Moors" label="Sri Lankan Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="60853" end="60862" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="60972" end="60977" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859351" start="61092" end="61108" title="Arab-Indonesians" label="Arab-Indonesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120474" start="61112" end="61119" title="Hadhrami people" label="Hadrami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563891" start="61189" end="61199" title="Afro-Arabs" label="Afro-Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="61232" end="61238" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739014" start="61300" end="61313" title="Swahili coast" label="Swahili Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q87982" start="61321" end="61340" title="African Great Lakes" label="African Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="61444" end="61455" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="61470" end="61488" title="Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="61522" end="61529" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="61557" end="61569" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q795269" start="61640" end="61649" title="Sierra Leone Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="61660" end="61667" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="61673" end="61680" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606511" start="61722" end="61730" title="Lebanese people" label="Lebanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q799892" start="61956" end="61963" title="Baggara" label="Baggara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="61976" end="61980" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="62035" end="62040" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="62063" end="62071" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="62084" end="62089" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q929" start="62111" end="62135" title="Central African Republic" label="Central African Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="62186" end="62191" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="62207" end="62211" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q243551" start="62246" end="62251" title="Ibadi" label="Ibadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="62273" end="62277" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q431164" start="62279" end="62294" title="Arab Christians" label="Arab Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="62312" end="62328" title="Eastern Churches" label="Eastern Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="62341" end="62355" title="Greek Orthodox" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546359" start="62360" end="62374" title="Greek Catholic" label="Greek Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="62406" end="62423" title="Protestant Church" label="Protestant Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="62493" end="62498" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="62503" end="62510" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼís"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637729" start="62566" end="62575" title="Arab Jews" label="Arab Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q97253422" start="62600" end="62626" title="Religion in pre-Islamic Arabia" label="Before the coming of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q289933" start="62701" end="62706" title="Hubal" label="Hubal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895710" start="62708" end="62712" title="Wadd" label="Wadd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183204" start="62714" end="62719" title="Al-lāt" label="Allāt"/>
<link wikidata="Q943459" start="62721" end="62726" title="Manāt" label="Manat"/>
<link wikidata="Q311363" start="62732" end="62736" title="Al-Uzza" label="Uzza"/>
<link wikidata="Q425381" start="62767" end="62772" title="hanif" label="hanif"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="62805" end="62815" title="polytheism" label="polytheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="62828" end="62838" title="monotheism" label="monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q733668" start="62988" end="62997" title="Ghassanid" label="Ghassanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q943191" start="63002" end="63009" title="Lakhmid" label="Lakhmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q289577" start="63029" end="63038" title="Himyarite" label="Himyarite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="63057" end="63064" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q110352001" start="63142" end="63150" title="Kindites" label="Kindites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610620" start="63283" end="63292" title="Islamization" label="Islamized"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="63487" end="63494" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="63508" end="63512" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="63588" end="63595" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="63597" end="63602" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="63604" end="63610" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="63612" end="63624" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="63635" end="63640" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q842" start="63666" end="63670" title="Oman" label="Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q243551" start="63699" end="63704" title="Ibadi" label="Ibadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731064" start="63709" end="63735" title="non-denominational Muslims" label="non-denominational Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q163943" start="63745" end="63750" title="Druze" label="Druze"/>
<link wikidata="Q47855" start="63830" end="63848" title="pre-Islamic Arabia" label="pre-Islamic Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879337" start="63895" end="63909" title="Bahrani people" label="Bahrani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165357" start="63913" end="63927" title="Eastern Arabia" label="Eastern Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071840" start="63933" end="63962" title="Christian community of Najran" label="Christian community of Najran"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63976" end="63981" title="Yemen#Ancient history" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q733668" start="64037" end="64047" title="Ghassanids" label="Ghassanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q943191" start="64049" end="64057" title="Lakhmids" label="Lakhmids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408212" start="64059" end="64066" title="Taghlib" label="Taghlib"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857288" start="64068" end="64078" title="Banu Amela" label="Banu Amela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883539" start="64080" end="64091" title="Banu Judham" label="Banu Judham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818715" start="64093" end="64102" title="Tanukhids" label="Tanukhids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016793" start="64107" end="64111" title="Tayy" label="Tayy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242924" start="64503" end="64526" title="Palestinian Christians" label="Christians in Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="64822" end="64828" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="64835" end="64840" title="North America" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="64845" end="64858" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q322614" start="65046" end="65055" title="Abo of Tiflis" label="Saint Abo"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="65088" end="65095" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="65097" end="65104" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q430776" start="65165" end="65173" title="Nazareth" label="Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="65175" end="65184" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391891" start="65193" end="65210" title="Christian Quarter" label="Christian Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q213274" start="65218" end="65239" title="Old City of Jerusalem" label="Old City of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="65396" end="65410" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="65430" end="65441" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="65468" end="65485" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999793" start="65616" end="65629" title="History of the Arabs" label="their history"/>
<link wikidata="Q900396" start="65748" end="65760" title="ethnogenesis" label="ethnogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="65799" end="65807" title="Language" label="Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="65809" end="65819" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q171141" start="65821" end="65831" title="gastronomy" label="gastronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="65833" end="65836" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="65838" end="65850" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="65852" end="65857" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="65859" end="65871" title="spirituality" label="spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="65873" end="65883" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="65888" end="65897" title="mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="65968" end="65974" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="65980" end="65996" title="Semitic language" label="Semitic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="66004" end="66023" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afro-Asiatic family"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="66167" end="66180" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66234" end="66244" title="Liturgy#Islam" label="liturgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="66270" end="66277" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511187" start="66300" end="66340" title="official languages of the United Nations" label="official languages of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="66360" end="66365" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="66389" end="66394" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654327" start="66428" end="66444" title="Classical Arabic" label="Classical Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="66464" end="66470" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="66508" end="66515" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502723" start="66598" end="66609" title="Tribes of Arabia" label="Arab tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q56467" start="66611" end="66633" title="Modern Standard Arabic" label="Modern Standard Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226977" start="66833" end="66838" title="Lexis (linguistics)" label="lexis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28856" start="66843" end="66853" title="Stylistics (linguistics)" label="stylistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q56467" start="66857" end="66879" title="Modern Standard Arabic" label="Modern Standard Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654327" start="66899" end="66915" title="Classical Arabic" label="Classical Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q97253422" start="67105" end="67121" title="Arabic mythology" label="Arabic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q794547" start="67548" end="67555" title="Bahamut" label="Bahamut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215663" start="67557" end="67563" title="Dandan" label="Dandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561511" start="67565" end="67570" title="Falak (Arabian legend)" label="Falak"/>
<link wikidata="Q208446" start="67572" end="67577" title="Ghoul" label="Ghoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q28169769" start="67579" end="67583" title="Hinn (mythology)" label="Hinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3465" start="67585" end="67589" title="Jinn" label="Jinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088083" start="67591" end="67600" title="Karkadann" label="Karkadann"/>
<link wikidata="Q212403" start="67602" end="67607" title="Marid" label="Marid"/>
<link wikidata="Q289708" start="67609" end="67615" title="Nasnas" label="Nasnas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395423" start="67617" end="67623" title="Qareen" label="Qareen"/>
<link wikidata="Q822321" start="67625" end="67628" title="Roc (mythology)" label="Roc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460353" start="67630" end="67639" title="Shadhavar" label="Shadhavar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983240" start="67641" end="67650" title="Werehyena" label="Werehyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="67713" end="67725" title="polytheistic" label="polytheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3465" start="67809" end="67813" title="Jinn" label="Jinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266031" start="68073" end="68079" title="Islamic view of angels" label="angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q799" start="68098" end="68105" title="Sapience" label="sapient"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095353" start="68119" end="68122" title="God in Islam" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q208446" start="68125" end="68130" title="Ghoul" label="Ghoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q276453" start="68167" end="68174" title="monster" label="monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="68178" end="68189" title="evil spirit" label="evil spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19707" start="68452" end="68458" title="donkey" label="donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="68498" end="68503" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="68514" end="68523" title="Religious text" label="holy book"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="68527" end="68532" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q485732" start="68697" end="68704" title="Quraysh" label="Quraysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="68719" end="68727" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q234262" start="68998" end="69003" title="Surah" label="suwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188219" start="69047" end="69051" title="ayat" label="ayat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="69080" end="69090" title="injunction" label="injunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="69093" end="69102" title="narrative" label="narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250390" start="69105" end="69113" title="homilies" label="homilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q208555" start="69115" end="69122" title="parable" label="parable"/>
<link wikidata="Q220495" start="69335" end="69342" title="An-Nahl" label="An-Nahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q293497" start="69361" end="69369" title="Al-Jahiz" label="Al-Jahiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="69384" end="69389" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q668460" start="69478" end="69492" title="Mu&amp;#x27;tazili" label="Mu&amp;#x27;tazili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866303" start="69648" end="69662" title="Arabic grammar" label="Arabic grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="69664" end="69671" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="69699" end="69707" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984236" start="69940" end="69949" title="Ibn Maḍāʾ" label="Ibn Maḍāʾ"/>
<link wikidata="Q126052735" start="70023" end="70041" title="pre-Islamic poetry" label="pre-Islamic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="70094" end="70105" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="70118" end="70137" title="Golden Age of Islam" label="Golden Age of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051776" start="70139" end="70157" title="Imru&amp;#x27; al-Qais" label="Imru&amp;#x27; al-Qais"/>
<link wikidata="Q605292" start="70222" end="70229" title="Kingdom of Kinda" label="Kindite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292502" start="70320" end="70333" title="Arabic poetry" label="Arabic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476995" start="70341" end="70356" title="Kitab al-Aghani" label="Kitab al-Aghani"/>
<link wikidata="Q335599" start="70366" end="70376" title="Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani" label="Abul-Faraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="70418" end="70429" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q56467" start="70457" end="70472" title="Modern Standard Arabic" label="Literary Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654327" start="70489" end="70505" title="Classical Arabic" label="Classical Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866303" start="70564" end="70582" title="Arabic grammarians" label="Arabic grammarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292502" start="70693" end="70699" title="Arabic poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779981" start="70801" end="70804" title="Saj (literature)" label="saj"/>
<link wikidata="Q281111" start="70838" end="70844" title="ghazal" label="ghazal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="70959" end="70963" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="71011" end="71019" title="Mysticism" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="71024" end="71033" title="Religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580284" start="71047" end="71069" title="Arabic epic literature" label="Arabic epic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q919947" start="71191" end="71197" title="Maqama" label="Maqama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321642" start="71201" end="71213" title="rhymed prose" label="rhymed prose"/>
<link wikidata="Q676" start="71249" end="71254" title="prose" label="prose"/>
<link wikidata="Q919947" start="71298" end="71304" title="Maqama" label="Maqama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309134" start="71499" end="71506" title="Arab culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q36730" start="71572" end="71579" title="Ottoman Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q365585" start="71584" end="71591" title="Persian literature" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335949" start="71662" end="71693" title="National awakenings under the Ottoman Empire" label="resistance against Ottoman rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520921" start="71734" end="71742" title="al-Nahda" label="al-Nahda"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="71780" end="71785" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="71790" end="71797" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q919947" start="72048" end="72054" title="maqama" label="maqama"/>
<link wikidata="Q8258" start="72082" end="72109" title="One Thousand and One Nights" label="One Thousand and One Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292502" start="72241" end="72261" title="modern Arabic poetry" label="modern Arabic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899" start="72297" end="72312" title="Francis Marrash" label="Francis Marrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q401491" start="72314" end="72326" title="Ahmad Shawqi" label="Ahmad Shawqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993475" start="72331" end="72344" title="Hafiz Ibrahim" label="Hafiz Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756530" start="72357" end="72378" title="Badr Shakir al-Sayyab" label="Badr Shakir al-Sayyab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292502" start="72431" end="72444" title="Arabic poetry" label="Arabic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q623970" start="72463" end="72475" title="Arab cuisine" label="Arab cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783279" start="72500" end="72516" title="Khaleeji cuisine" label="Khaleeji cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q765174" start="72518" end="72535" title="Levantine cuisine" label="Levantine cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381737" start="72540" end="72556" title="Maghrebi cuisine" label="Maghrebi cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="72629" end="72636" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="72638" end="72645" title="Iranian peoples" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q489811" start="72651" end="72661" title="Andalusian Spanish" label="Andalusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132624" start="72728" end="72733" title="cumin" label="cumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41611" start="72735" end="72744" title="coriander" label="coriander"/>
<link wikidata="Q28165" start="72746" end="72754" title="cinnamon" label="cinnamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q157649" start="72756" end="72761" title="sumac" label="sumac"/>
<link wikidata="Q148306" start="72763" end="72775" title="za&amp;#x27;atar" label="za&amp;#x27;atar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625808" start="72777" end="72785" title="cardamom" label="cardamom"/>
<link wikidata="Q47859" start="72787" end="72791" title="Mentha" label="mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="72793" end="72800" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763698" start="72802" end="72808" title="sesame" label="sesame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215980" start="72810" end="72815" title="thyme" label="thyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q42562" start="72816" end="72824" title="turmeric" label="turmeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q25284" start="72829" end="72836" title="parsley" label="parsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q219123" start="72902" end="72908" title="Knafeh" label="Knafeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q187495" start="72910" end="72917" title="Baklava" label="Baklava"/>
<link wikidata="Q183599" start="72919" end="72924" title="Halva" label="Halva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571599" start="72930" end="72937" title="Qatayef" label="Qatayef"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150728" start="72939" end="72952" title="Arabic coffee" label="Arabic coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q189594" start="73025" end="73035" title="Arabic art" label="Arabic art"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="73092" end="73099" title="jewelry" label="jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="73101" end="73108" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="73114" end="73126" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905394" start="73210" end="73228" title="Arabic calligraphy" label="Arabic calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29647" start="73277" end="73289" title="Kufic script" label="Kufic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="73310" end="73316" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="73399" end="73407" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="73412" end="73417" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="73756" end="73771" title="Caliphate" label="Arab caliphates"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="73856" end="73863" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q678664" start="73934" end="73951" title="Persian miniature" label="Persian miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q268639" start="73954" end="73971" title="Ottoman miniature" label="Ottoman miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049336" start="73977" end="73993" title="Mughal miniature" label="Mughal miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="74362" end="74369" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q81627" start="74442" end="74458" title="Ismail al-Jazari" label="Ismail al-Jazari"/>
<link wikidata="Q472751" start="74568" end="74583" title="Yahya ibn Mahmud al-Wasiti" label="Yahya Al-Wasiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="74607" end="74614" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q286097" start="74932" end="74950" title="Al-Hariri of Basra" label="Al-Hariri of Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="75114" end="75124" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q186599" start="75213" end="75222" title="Arabesque" label="Arabesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q677655" start="75527" end="75540" title="half-palmette" label="half-palmette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="75771" end="75777" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="75778" end="75797" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135" start="75800" end="75847" title="List of World Heritage Sites in the Arab states" label="List of World Heritage Sites in the Arab states"/>
<link wikidata="Q47855" start="75903" end="75921" title="pre-Islamic Arabia" label="pre-Islamic Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080368" start="75934" end="75956" title="Nabataean architecture" label="Nabataean architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11029653" start="75987" end="76012" title="Nabataean Kingdom" label="kingdom of the Nabataeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="76080" end="76091" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788" start="76360" end="76365" title="Petra" label="Petra"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="76398" end="76404" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="76532" end="76546" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="Arab conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q943191" start="76579" end="76587" title="Lakhmid kingdom" label="Lakhmids"/>
<link wikidata="Q733668" start="76592" end="76602" title="Ghassanids" label="Ghassanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q183562" start="77075" end="77099" title="Umayyad Mosque" label="Great Mosque of Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192963" start="77354" end="77368" title="Al-Aqsa Mosque" label="Al-Aqsa Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="77372" end="77381" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q624044" start="77573" end="77585" title="Arabic music" label="Arabic music"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="78011" end="78028" title="Arabian peninsula" label="Arabian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292502" start="78091" end="78101" title="Arabic poetry" label="Arab poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3465" start="78254" end="78259" title="Genie" label="Jinns"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="78440" end="78446" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q186370" start="78467" end="78477" title="troubadour" label="troubadour"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="78516" end="78522" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="78542" end="78546" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q737520" start="78548" end="78553" title="rebec" label="rebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898734" start="78559" end="78564" title="Naqareh" label="naker"/>
<link wikidata="Q191000" start="78589" end="78592" title="oud" label="oud"/>
<link wikidata="Q623509" start="78594" end="78599" title="Rebab" label="rabab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898734" start="78605" end="78612" title="naqareh" label="naqareh"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="78627" end="78645" title="musical instrument" label="musical instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="78655" end="78670" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="78742" end="78746" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q191000" start="78774" end="78777" title="Oud" label="Oud"/>
<link wikidata="Q737520" start="78789" end="78794" title="rebec" label="rebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="78808" end="78814" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q84309610" start="78831" end="78844" title="Maghreb rebab" label="Maghreb rebab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="78856" end="78862" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q546936" start="78931" end="78934" title="Tar (lute)" label="Tar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898734" start="78936" end="78941" title="Naqareh" label="naker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898734" start="78953" end="78960" title="naqareh" label="naqareh"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408004" start="78968" end="78973" title="adufe" label="adufe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084057" start="78985" end="78992" title="Daf" label="al-duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q313053" start="79000" end="79006" title="alboka" label="alboka"/>
<link wikidata="Q12499833" start="79062" end="79070" title="Nafir (trumpet)" label="al-nafir"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="79116" end="79121" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="79132" end="79141" title="bass drum" label="bass drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035157" start="79209" end="79216" title="Balaban (instrument)" label="balaban"/>
<link wikidata="Q183932" start="79222" end="79230" title="castanet" label="castanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245536" start="79257" end="79274" title="Tuna (music)" label="sonajas de azófar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375096" start="79311" end="79323" title="Bore (wind instruments)" label="conical bore"/>
<link wikidata="Q173453" start="79324" end="79339" title="wind instrument" label="wind instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q189470" start="79390" end="79397" title="fistula" label="fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510738" start="79414" end="79426" title="Organ pipe" label="musical pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q677921" start="79433" end="79438" title="shawm" label="shawm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264870" start="79443" end="79451" title="dulzaina" label="dulzaina"/>
<link wikidata="Q42890140" start="79461" end="79477" title="Reed (instrument)" label="reed instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q230471" start="79505" end="79513" title="Zurna" label="al-zurna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820831" start="79525" end="79530" title="Galician gaita" label="gaita"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320165" start="79546" end="79552" title="Rhaita" label="ghaita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398629" start="79560" end="79567" title="rackett" label="rackett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="79617" end="79622" title="Violin" label="geige"/>
<link wikidata="Q840920" start="79666" end="79673" title="theorbo" label="theorbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110560" start="79795" end="79806" title="Umm Kulthum" label="Umm Kulthum"/>
<link wikidata="Q307786" start="79808" end="79825" title="Abdel Halim Hafez" label="Abdel Halim Hafez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165830" start="79831" end="79837" title="Shadia" label="Shadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467895" start="79859" end="79879" title="Mohammed Abdel Wahab" label="Mohamed Abd al-Wahab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880876" start="79884" end="79896" title="Baligh Hamdi" label="Baligh Hamdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q624081" start="80026" end="80036" title="Arabic pop" label="Arabic pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707595" start="80217" end="80229" title="Lydia Canaan" label="Lydia Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174165" start="80239" end="80246" title="Innovator" label="pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="80293" end="80304" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q97253422" start="80328" end="80343" title="Religion in pre-Islamic Arabia" label="Arab polytheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47855" start="80373" end="80391" title="pre-Islamic Arabia" label="pre-Islamic Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="80393" end="80397" title="Deity" label="Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="80402" end="80409" title="goddess" label="goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q289933" start="80423" end="80428" title="Hubal" label="Hubal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183204" start="80447" end="80453" title="Al-Lat" label="al-Lāt"/>
<link wikidata="Q311363" start="80455" end="80468" title="Al-&amp;#x27;Uzzá" label="Al-&amp;#x27;Uzzá"/>
<link wikidata="Q943459" start="80473" end="80478" title="Manāt" label="Manāt"/>
<link wikidata="Q29466" start="80526" end="80531" title="Kaaba" label="Kaaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="80535" end="80540" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80687" end="80705" title="Religion in pre-Islamic Arabia#Mecca" label="have been proposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="80728" end="80733" title="Allah" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820111" start="80826" end="80831" title="Cult image" label="idols"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="81015" end="81021" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="81058" end="81068" title="polytheism" label="polytheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="81180" end="81187" title="bedouin" label="bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="81252" end="81257" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q182116" start="81336" end="81345" title="fetishism" label="fetishism"/>
<link wikidata="Q263443" start="81347" end="81355" title="totemism" label="totemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q238199" start="81360" end="81382" title="veneration of the dead" label="veneration of the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="81479" end="81492" title="Philosophy" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376141" start="81613" end="81621" title="Pantheon (religion)" label="pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="81693" end="81698" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q472669" start="81851" end="81860" title="&amp;#x27;Amm" label="&amp;#x27;Amm"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087459" start="81862" end="81871" title="A&amp;#x27;ra" label="A&amp;#x27;ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q47818" start="81873" end="81878" title="Abgal (god)" label="Abgal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81880" end="81885" title="Allah#Pre-Islamic Arabians" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6183204" start="81887" end="81893" title="Al-Lat" label="Al-Lat"/>
<link wikidata="Q47552" start="81895" end="81902" title="Al-Qaum" label="Al-Qaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q599103" start="81904" end="81911" title="Almaqah" label="Almaqah"/>
<link wikidata="Q18237641" start="81913" end="81918" title="Anbay" label="Anbay"/>
<link wikidata="Q755753" start="81920" end="81926" title="ʿAṯtar" label="ʿAṯtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866211" start="81928" end="81935" title="Basamum" label="Basamum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316154" start="81937" end="81950" title="Demolition of Dhul Khalasa" label="Dhu l-Khalasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267598" start="81952" end="81959" title="Dushara" label="Dushara"/>
<link wikidata="Q23721069" start="81961" end="81967" title="Haukim" label="Haukim"/>
<link wikidata="Q289933" start="81969" end="81974" title="Hubal" label="Hubal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15859059" start="81976" end="81996" title="Isāf and Nā&amp;#x27;ila" label="Isāf and Nā&amp;#x27;ila"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476320" start="81998" end="82003" title="Manaf (deity)" label="Manaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q943459" start="82005" end="82010" title="Manāt" label="Manāt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316164" start="82012" end="82016" title="Nasr (deity)" label="Nasr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240726" start="82018" end="82022" title="Nuha (deity)" label="Nuha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273063" start="82024" end="82029" title="Quzah" label="Quzah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553515" start="82031" end="82035" title="Ruda (deity)" label="Ruda"/>
<link wikidata="Q30602350" start="82037" end="82046" title="Sa&amp;#x27;d (deity)" label="Sa&amp;#x27;d"/>
<link wikidata="Q50571209" start="82048" end="82060" title="Shams (goddess)" label="Shams, Samas"/>
<link wikidata="Q217420" start="82062" end="82065" title="Sin (mythology)" label="Syn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316160" start="82067" end="82077" title="Suwa&amp;#x27;" label="Suwa&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808152" start="82079" end="82090" title="Ta&amp;#x27;lab" label="Ta&amp;#x27;lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777249" start="82092" end="82102" title="Theandrios" label="Theandrios"/>
<link wikidata="Q311363" start="82104" end="82117" title="al-&amp;#x27;Uzzá" label="al-&amp;#x27;Uzzá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895710" start="82119" end="82123" title="Wadd" label="Wadd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666548" start="82125" end="82135" title="Ya&amp;#x27;uq" label="Ya&amp;#x27;uq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724362" start="82137" end="82144" title="Yaghūth" label="Yaghūth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938454" start="82146" end="82151" title="Yatha" label="Yatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q394251" start="82153" end="82160" title="Aglibol" label="Aglibol"/>
<link wikidata="Q130274" start="82162" end="82169" title="Astarte" label="Astarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q221735" start="82171" end="82180" title="Atargatis" label="Atargatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737631" start="82182" end="82192" title="Baalshamin" label="Baalshamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894617" start="82194" end="82197" title="Bel (mythology)" label="Bēl"/>
<link wikidata="Q188931" start="82199" end="82202" title="Bes" label="Bes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316633" start="82204" end="82212" title="El (deity)" label="Ēl, Ilāh"/>
<link wikidata="Q272523" start="82214" end="82227" title="Inanna" label="Inanna/Ishtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302646" start="82229" end="82237" title="Malakbel" label="Malakbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q392239" start="82239" end="82249" title="Nabu" label="Nabū, Nebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q468912" start="82251" end="82257" title="Nergal" label="Nergal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243867" start="82259" end="82267" title="Yarhibol" label="Yarhibol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874323" start="82419" end="82429" title="Avicennism" label="Avicennism"/>
<link wikidata="Q790625" start="82434" end="82443" title="Averroism" label="Averroism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="82524" end="82532" title="al-Kindi" label="al-Kindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="82551" end="82563" title="Neo-Platonic" label="Neo-Platonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="82577" end="82590" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="82595" end="82604" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q186234" start="82618" end="82622" title="Kufa" label="Kufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="82627" end="82634" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="82647" end="82651" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833785" start="82683" end="82698" title="Abbasid Caliphs" label="Abbasid Caliphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="82712" end="82717" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="82733" end="82746" title="philosophical" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="82758" end="82764" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="82846" end="82857" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="82862" end="82867" title="ethic" label="ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="82872" end="82882" title="mathematic" label="mathematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128406" start="82888" end="82900" title="pharmacology" label="pharmacology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="82915" end="82928" title="Philosophy" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="82947" end="82958" title="Theology" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="82990" end="82993" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="82999" end="83003" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q214267" start="83008" end="83017" title="Prophecy" label="prophetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="83114" end="83127" title="Scholasticism" label="Scholasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q263307" start="83169" end="83184" title="Aristotelianism" label="Aristotelianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="83189" end="83201" title="Neoplatonism" label="Neoplatonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="83238" end="83243" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q160460" start="83288" end="83297" title="al-Farabi" label="al-Farabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="83302" end="83310" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="83366" end="83372" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="83377" end="83382" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="83489" end="83505" title="Moses Maimonides" label="Moses Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="83510" end="83521" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="83602" end="83613" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115173" start="83644" end="83708" title="Islamic world contributions to Medieval Europe" label="source of knowledge that later spread throughout Medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="83806" end="83812" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="83889" end="83901" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="83940" end="83948" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="84202" end="84214" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="84218" end="84230" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="84296" end="84306" title="al-Andalus" label="al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="84440" end="84447" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="84489" end="84502" title="Muslim world" label="Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="84561" end="84571" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q369560" start="84798" end="84816" title="Sack of Baghdad" label="sacking of Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092093" start="84824" end="84831" title="Mongol invasions" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="85000" end="85005" title="ulama" label="ulama"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="85069" end="85075" title="Sharia" label="Sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267533" start="85267" end="85278" title="Mathematics in medieval Islam" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255366" start="85280" end="85289" title="Astronomy in medieval Islam" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q624029" start="85295" end="85303" title="Medicine in medieval Islam" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189695" start="85351" end="85358" title="Physics in medieval Islam" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119147" start="85360" end="85381" title="Alchemy and chemistry in medieval Islam" label="alchemy and chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174339" start="85383" end="85392" title="Cosmology in medieval Islam" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098111" start="85394" end="85407" title="Medieval Islamic ophthalmology" label="ophthalmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142012" start="85409" end="85434" title="Geography and cartography in medieval Islam" label="geography and cartography"/>
<link wikidata="Q932233" start="85436" end="85445" title="Sociology in medieval Islam" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256409" start="85451" end="85461" title="Psychology in medieval Islam" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079" start="85463" end="85473" title="Al-Battani" label="Al-Battani"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="85529" end="85547" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267533" start="85833" end="85844" title="Islamic mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084" start="85878" end="85893" title="Trigonometry" label="trigonometrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q311495" start="85909" end="85919" title="Al-Zahrawi" label="Al-Zahrawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="85969" end="85980" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724312" start="86010" end="86022" title="Al-Tasrif" label="De chirurgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="86236" end="86243" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="86288" end="86296" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="86446" end="86463" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q167852" start="86467" end="86483" title="Jābir ibn Hayyān" label="Jābir ibn Hayyān"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="86513" end="86523" title="cryptology" label="cryptology"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="86528" end="86541" title="cryptanalysis" label="cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="86545" end="86553" title="al-Kindi" label="al-Kindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q134787" start="86574" end="86591" title="analytic geometry" label="analytic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104" start="86595" end="86609" title="Ibn al-Haytham" label="Ibn al-Haytham"/>
<link wikidata="Q494603" start="86709" end="86730" title="pulmonary circulation" label="pulmonary circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q319146" start="86734" end="86746" title="Ibn al-Nafis" label="Ibn al-Nafis"/>
<link wikidata="Q500869" start="86769" end="86778" title="itch mite" label="itch mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q470914" start="86791" end="86799" title="Ibn Zuhr" label="Ibn Zuhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q607728" start="86818" end="86836" title="irrational numbers" label="irrational numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q335103" start="86864" end="86873" title="Abū Kāmil" label="Abū Kāmil"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="86907" end="86924" title="decimal fractions" label="decimal fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383111" start="86928" end="86939" title="Abu&amp;#x27;l-Hasan al-Uqlidisi" label="al-Uqlidisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29961325" start="86964" end="86979" title="Arabic numerals" label="Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893386" start="86993" end="87012" title="History of mathematical notation" label="algebraic symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="87020" end="87027" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q965294" start="87033" end="87046" title="Thabit number" label="Thabit number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87051" end="87065" title="Amicable numbers#Thābit ibn Qurra theorem" label="Thābit theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q250568" start="87069" end="87085" title="Thābit ibn Qurra" label="Thābit ibn Qurra"/>
<link wikidata="Q273008" start="87116" end="87140" title="List of trigonometric identities" label="trigonometric identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q459921" start="87144" end="87153" title="Ibn Yunus" label="Ibn Yunus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079" start="87158" end="87168" title="al-Battani" label="al-Battani"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="87174" end="87192" title="mathematical proof" label="mathematical proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q213603" start="87197" end="87216" title="Ceva&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Ceva&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231534" start="87220" end="87227" title="Yusuf al-Mu&amp;#x27;taman ibn Hud" label="Ibn Hűd"/>
<link wikidata="Q255849" start="87250" end="87260" title="equatorium" label="equatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11133" start="87264" end="87274" title="al-Zarqali" label="al-Zarqali"/>
<link wikidata="Q343546" start="87297" end="87314" title="Reaction (physics)" label="physical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11362" start="87318" end="87326" title="Avempace" label="Avempace"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="87368" end="87374" title="plants" label="plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q335145" start="87378" end="87391" title="Ibn al-Baitar" label="Ibn al-Baitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477405" start="87396" end="87424" title="Arab Agricultural Revolution" label="Arab Agricultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089336" start="87434" end="87450" title="Tabula Rogeriana" label="Tabula Rogeriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q173441" start="87513" end="87522" title="al-Idrisi" label="al-Idrisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q378014" start="87605" end="87634" title="University of Al Quaraouiyine" label="University of Al Quaraouiyine"/>
<link wikidata="Q173959" start="87636" end="87655" title="Al Azhar University" label="Al Azhar University"/>
<link wikidata="Q428136" start="87661" end="87682" title="University of Ez-Zitouna" label="Al Zaytuna University"/>
<link wikidata="Q182363" start="87740" end="87755" title="Fatima al-Fihri" label="Fatima al Fihri"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="87813" end="87816" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="87877" end="87883" title="Academic degree" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="87943" end="87949" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="87954" end="87976" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030234" start="88059" end="88075" title="Influence of Arabic on other languages" label="Arabic loanwords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226611" start="88156" end="88178" title="List of Arabic star names" label="traditional star names"/>
<link wikidata="Q88540091" start="88187" end="88196" title="Aldebaran" label="Aldebaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="88357" end="88369" title="Ottoman rule" label="Ottoman rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q106624" start="88509" end="88521" title="Ahmed Zewail" label="Ahmed Zewail"/>
<link wikidata="Q135171" start="88526" end="88537" title="Elias Corey" label="Elias Corey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="88539" end="88550" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q335003" start="88553" end="88568" title="Michael DeBakey" label="Michael DeBakey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836923" start="88573" end="88585" title="Alim Louis Benabid" label="Alim Benabid"/>
<link wikidata="Q921415" start="88587" end="88599" title="Lasker Award" label="Lasker Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q743252" start="88602" end="88615" title="Omar M. Yaghi" label="Omar M. Yaghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q739936" start="88617" end="88627" title="Wolf Prize" label="Wolf Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633764" start="88630" end="88641" title="Huda Zoghbi" label="Huda Zoghbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q584250" start="88643" end="88653" title="Shaw Prize" label="Shaw Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q47780" start="88656" end="88666" title="Zaha Hadid" label="Zaha Hadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q133160" start="88668" end="88682" title="Pritzker Prize" label="Pritzker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q208356" start="88689" end="88703" title="Michael Atiyah" label="Michael Atiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="88710" end="88722" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188184" start="88727" end="88737" title="Abel Prize" label="Abel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279515" start="88740" end="88753" title="Rachid Yazami" label="Rachid Yazami"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="88789" end="88808" title="lithium-ion battery" label="lithium-ion battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q92879" start="88814" end="88825" title="Tony Fadell" label="Tony Fadell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9479" start="88866" end="88870" title="iPod" label="iPod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="88879" end="88885" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292502" start="89311" end="89324" title="Arabic poetry" label="Arabic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363789" start="89392" end="89411" title="Historiography of early Islam" label="early Arabic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="89533" end="89551" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="89594" end="89601" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117254" start="90187" end="90208" title="Women in the Arab world" label="women in Arab society"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="90838" end="90845" title="Textile" label="fabrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18281" start="90860" end="90870" title="embroidery" label="embroidery"/>
<link wikidata="Q305718" start="90906" end="90911" title="Abaya" label="Abaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q378648" start="90916" end="90921" title="Thawb" label="Thobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="90969" end="90973" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q14298" start="90975" end="90980" title="satin" label="satin"/>
<link wikidata="Q649022" start="90982" end="90989" title="brocade" label="brocade"/>
<link wikidata="Q456638" start="91131" end="91140" title="Elie Saab" label="Elie Saab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088769" start="91142" end="91154" title="Zuhair Murad" label="Zuhair Murad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117064" start="91160" end="91169" title="Reem Acra" label="Reem Acra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083958" start="91466" end="91473" title="pattern" label="pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q656831" start="91476" end="91487" title="Arab calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186599" start="91720" end="91729" title="arabesque" label="arabesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072659" start="91909" end="91923" title="Arabic wedding" label="Arabic wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="92052" end="92059" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="92197" end="92205" title="Marriage" label="marrying"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309134" start="92242" end="92254" title="Arab culture" label="Arab culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q774347" start="92322" end="92336" title="consanguineous" label="consanguineous"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="92423" end="92428" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q31485" start="92459" end="92473" title="Cousin marriage" label="marry a cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="92492" end="92498" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="92622" end="92634" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="92694" end="92700" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="92721" end="92729" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q774347" start="92743" end="92758" title="blood relatives" label="blood relatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="92782" end="92790" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q180465" start="92799" end="92821" title="Rightly Guided Caliphs" label="Rightly Guided Caliphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="92873" end="92878" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="92887" end="92892" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="92987" end="92997" title="phenomenon" label="phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q431164" start="93138" end="93153" title="Arab Christians" label="Christian Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783216" start="93157" end="93169" title="Arab Muslims" label="Muslim Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q774347" start="93203" end="93216" title="consanguinity" label="consanguinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057805" start="93569" end="93588" title="Northeast Africa" label="northeastern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="93669" end="93686" title="Nile" label="Nile river valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="93694" end="93699" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="93704" end="93715" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q966735" start="93745" end="93758" title="Cline (biology)" label="genetic cline"/>
<link wikidata="Q116191092" start="93796" end="93841" title="Arab migrations to the Maghreb" label="Arab expansion and immigration to the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="93922" end="93926" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="94125" end="94148" title="Out of Africa migration" label="Out of Africa migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q624115" start="94272" end="94282" title="Arab Union" label="Arab Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="94285" end="94295" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561842" start="94298" end="94321" title="List of Arab companies" label="Lists of Arab companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012628" start="94324" end="94343" title="North African Arabs" label="North African Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133555" start="94699" end="94713" title="Kees Versteegh" label="Kees Versteegh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2186" wikidata="Q104840543" url="?curid=2186" title="Armadillo">
<text>Armadillos () are New World placental mammals in the order Cingulata. They form part of the superorder Xenarthra, along with the anteaters and sloths. 21 extant species of armadillo have been described, some of which are distinguished by the number of bands on their armor. All species are native to the Americas, where they inhabit a variety of environments. 
Living armadillos are characterized by a leathery armor shell and long, sharp claws for digging. They have short legs, but can move quite quickly. The average length of an armadillo is about , including its tail. The giant armadillo grows up to and weighs up to , while the pink fairy armadillo has a length of only . When threatened by a predator, &quot;Tolypeutes&quot; species frequently roll up into a ball; they are the only species of armadillo capable of this.

Recent genetic research has shown that the megafaunal glyptodonts (up to tall with maximum body masses of around 2 tonnes), which became extinct around 12,000 years ago are true armadillos more closely related to all other living armadillos than to &quot;Dasypus&quot; (the long-nosed or naked-tailed armadillos). Armadillos are currently classified into two families, Dasypodidae, with &quot;Dasypus&quot; as the only living genus, and Chlamyphoridae, which contains all other living armadillos as well as the glyptodonts.

==Etymology==
The word means in Spanish; it is derived from , with the diminutive suffix attached. While the phrase &quot;little armored one&quot; would translate to normally, the suffix can be used in place of when the diminutive is used in an approximative tense. The Aztecs called them , Nahuatl for : and . The Portuguese word for is which is derived from the Tupi language and ; and used in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay; similar names are also found in other, especially European, languages.

Other various vernacular names given are:

* (from ) in Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia and Peru;
* (from Nahuatl) in Costa Rica, El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua;
* in Argentina and Uruguay;
* in Argentina, Chile, Colombia and Uruguay;
* in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Paraguay;
* in Colombia and Venezuela
* in Tolima, Caldas and Antioquia, Colombia;
* in Caribbean Colombia;
* in southeast Mexico;
* in the state of Veracruz, Mexico;
* in Perú. 
==Classification==

Family Dasypodidae
* Subfamily Dasypodinae
** Genus &quot;Dasypus&quot; 
***Nine-banded armadillo or long-nosed armadillo, &quot;Dasypus novemcinctus&quot;
***Seven-banded armadillo, &quot;Dasypus septemcinctus&quot;
***Southern long-nosed armadillo, &quot;Dasypus hybridus&quot;
***Llanos long-nosed armadillo, &quot;Dasypus sabanicola&quot;
***Greater long-nosed armadillo, &quot;Dasypus kappleri&quot;
***Hairy long-nosed armadillo, &quot;Dasypus pilosus&quot;
***Yepes&#x27;s mulita, &quot;Dasypus yepesi&quot;
***†Beautiful armadillo, &quot;Dasypus bellus&quot;
***†&quot;Dasypus neogaeus&quot;
** Genus †&quot;Stegotherium&quot;

Family Chlamyphoridae
* Subfamily Chlamyphorinae
** Genus &quot;Calyptophractus&quot;
*** Greater fairy armadillo, &quot;Calyptophractus retusus&quot;
** Genus &quot;Chlamyphorus&quot;
***Pink fairy armadillo, &quot;Chlamyphorus truncatus&quot;
* Subfamily Euphractinae
** Genus &quot;Chaetophractus&quot; 
***Screaming hairy armadillo, &quot;Chaetophractus vellerosus&quot;
***Big hairy armadillo, &quot;Chaetophractus villosus&quot;
***Andean hairy armadillo, &quot;Chaetophractus nationi&quot;
**Genus †&quot;Macroeuphractus&quot;
**Genus †&quot;Paleuphractus&quot;
**Genus †&quot;Proeuphractus&quot;
**Genus †&quot;Doellotatus&quot;
**Genus †&quot;Peltephilus&quot;
*** †Horned armadillo, &quot;Peltephilus ferox&quot;
** Genus &quot;Euphractus&quot;
***Six-banded armadillo, &quot;Euphractus sexcinctus&quot;
** Genus &quot;Zaedyus&quot;
***Pichi, &quot;Zaedyus pichiy&quot;
* Subfamily Tolypeutinae
** Genus †&quot;Kuntinaru&quot;
** Genus &quot;Cabassous&quot; 
***Northern naked-tailed armadillo, &quot;Cabassous centralis&quot;
***Chacoan naked-tailed armadillo, &quot;Cabassous chacoensis&quot;
***Southern naked-tailed armadillo, &quot;Cabassous unicinctus&quot;
***Greater naked-tailed armadillo, &quot;Cabassous tatouay&quot;
** Genus &quot;Priodontes&quot;
***Giant armadillo, &quot;Priodontes maximus&quot;
** Genus &quot;Tolypeutes&quot;
***Southern three-banded armadillo, &quot;Tolypeutes matacus&quot;
***Brazilian three-banded armadillo, &quot;Tolypeutes tricinctus&quot;

† indicates extinct taxon

==Phylogeny==
Below is a recent simplified phylogeny of the xenarthran families, which includes armadillos. The dagger symbol, &quot;†&quot;, denotes extinct groups.
==Evolution==
Recent genetic research suggests that an extinct group of giant armored mammals, the glyptodonts, should be included within the lineage of armadillos, having diverged some 35 million years ago, more recently than previously assumed.

==Distribution==
Like all of the Xenarthra lineages, armadillos originated in South America. Due to the continent&#x27;s former isolation, they were confined there for most of the Cenozoic. The recent formation of the Isthmus of Panama allowed a few members of the family to migrate northward into southern North America by the early Pleistocene, as part of the Great American Interchange. (Some of their much larger cingulate relatives, the pampatheres and chlamyphorid glyptodonts, made the same journey.)

Today, all extant armadillo species are still present in South America. They are particularly diverse in Paraguay (where 11 species exist) and surrounding areas. Many species are endangered. Some, including four species of &quot;Dasypus&quot;, are widely distributed over the Americas, whereas others, such as Yepes&#x27;s mulita, are restricted to small ranges. Two species, the northern naked-tailed armadillo and nine-banded armadillo, are found in Central America; the latter has also reached the United States, primarily in the south-central states (notably Texas), but with a range that extends as far east as North Carolina and Florida, and as far north as southern Nebraska and southern Indiana. Their range has consistently expanded in North America over the last century due to a lack of natural predators. Armadillos are increasingly documented in southern Illinois and are tracking northwards due to climate change.

==Characteristics ==
===Size===
The smallest species of armadillo, the pink fairy armadillo, weighs around and is in total length. The largest species, the giant armadillo, can weigh up to , and can be long.

===Diet and predation===
The diets of different armadillo species vary, but consist mainly of insects, grubs, and other invertebrates. Some species, however, feed almost entirely on ants and termites.

They are prolific diggers. Many species use their sharp claws to dig for food, such as grubs, and to dig dens. The nine-banded armadillo prefers to build burrows in moist soil near the creeks, streams, and arroyos around which it lives and feeds.

Armadillos have very poor eyesight, and use their keen sense of smell to hunt for food. They use their claws not only for digging and finding food but also for digging burrows for their dwellings, each of which is a single corridor the width of the animal&#x27;s body. They have five clawed toes on their hind feet, and three to five toes with heavy digging claws on their fore feet. Armadillos have numerous cheek teeth which are not divided into premolars and molars, but usually have no incisors or canines. The dentition of the nine-banded armadillo is P 7/7, M 1/1 = 32.

===Body temperature===
In common with other xenarthrans, armadillos, in general, have low body temperatures of and low basal metabolic rates (40–60% of that expected in placental mammals of their mass). This is particularly true of types that specialize in using termites as their primary food source (for example, &quot;Priodontes&quot; and &quot;Tolypeutes&quot;).

===Skin===
The armor is formed by plates of dermal bone covered in relatively small overlapping epidermal scales called &quot;scutes&quot; which are composed of keratin. The skin of an armadillo can glow under ultraviolet light.
Most species have rigid shields over the shoulders and hips, with a number of bands separated by flexible skin covering the back and flanks. Additional armor covers the top of the head, the upper parts of the limbs, and the tail. The underside of the animal is never armored and is simply covered with soft skin and fur. This armor-like skin appears to be an important defense for many armadillos, although most escape predators by fleeing (often into thorny patches, from which their armor protects them) or digging to safety. Only the South American three-banded armadillos (&quot;Tolypeutes&quot;) rely heavily on their armor for protection.

===Defensive behavior===
When threatened by a predator, &quot;Tolypeutes&quot; species frequently roll up into a ball. Other armadillo species cannot roll up because they have too many plates. When surprised, the North American nine-banded armadillo tends to jump straight in the air, which can lead to a fatal collision with the undercarriage or fenders of passing vehicles.

===Movement===
Armadillos have short legs, but can move quite quickly. The nine-banded armadillo is noted for its movement through water, which is accomplished via two different methods: it can walk underwater for short distances, holding its breath for as long as six minutes; or, to cross larger bodies of water, it can increase its buoyancy by swallowing air to inflate its stomach and intestines.

===Reproduction===
Gestation lasts from 60 to 120 days, depending on species, although the nine-banded armadillo also exhibits delayed implantation, so the young are not typically born for eight months after mating. Most members of the genus &quot;Dasypus&quot; give birth to four monozygotic young (that is, identical quadruplets), but other species may have typical litter sizes that range from one to eight. The young are born with soft, leathery skin which hardens within a few weeks. They reach sexual maturity in three to twelve months, depending on the species. Armadillos are solitary animals that do not share their burrows with other adults.

==Armadillos and humans==

=== Science and education ===
Armadillos are often used in the study of leprosy, since they, along with mangabey monkeys, rabbits, and mice (on their footpads), are among the few known species that can contract the disease systemically. They are particularly susceptible due to their unusually low body temperature, which is hospitable to the leprosy bacterium, &quot;Mycobacterium leprae&quot;. (The leprosy bacterium is difficult to culture and armadillos have a body temperature of , similar to human skin.) Humans can acquire a leprosy infection from armadillos by handling them or consuming armadillo meat. Armadillos are a presumed vector and natural reservoir for the disease in Texas, Louisiana and Florida. Prior to the arrival of Europeans in the late 15th century, leprosy was unknown in the New World. Given that armadillos are native to the New World, at some point they must have acquired the disease from old-world humans.

The armadillo is also a natural reservoir for Chagas disease.

The nine-banded armadillo also serves science through its unusual reproductive system, in which four genetically identical offspring are born, the result of one original egg. Because they are always genetically identical, the group of four young provides a good subject for scientific, behavioral, or medical tests that need consistent biological and genetic makeup in the test subjects. This is the only reliable manifestation of polyembryony in the class Mammalia, and exists only within the genus &quot;Dasypus&quot; and not in all armadillos, as is commonly believed. Other species that display this trait include parasitoid wasps, certain flatworms, and various aquatic invertebrates.

Even though they have a leathery, tough shell, armadillos, (mainly &quot;Dasypus&quot;) are common roadkill due to their habit of jumping 3–4 ft vertically when startled, which puts them into collision with the underside of vehicles. Wildlife enthusiasts are using the northward march of the armadillo as an opportunity to educate others about the animals, which can be a burrowing nuisance to property owners and managers.

=== Culture ===

Armadillo shells have traditionally been used to make the back of the &quot;charango&quot;, an Andean lute instrument.

In certain parts of Central and South America, armadillo meat is eaten; it is a popular ingredient in Oaxaca, Mexico. During the Great Depression, Americans were known to eat armadillo, known begrudgingly as &quot;Hoover hogs&quot;, a nod to the belief that President Herbert Hoover was responsible for the economic despair facing the nation at that time.

A whimsical account of &quot;The Beginning of the Armadillos&quot; is one of the chapters of Rudyard Kipling&#x27;s &quot;Just So Stories&quot; 1902 children&#x27;s book. The vocal and piano duo Flanders and Swann recorded a humorous song called &quot;The Armadillo&quot;.

Shel Silverstein wrote a two-line poem called &quot;Instructions&quot; on how to bathe an armadillo in his collection &quot;A Light in the Attic&quot;. The reference was &quot;use one bar of soap, a whole lot of hope, and 72 pads of Brillo.&quot;

== See also ==
* Armadillo shoe
* Echidnas, a type of monotreme with a defensive keratin body covering
* Hedgehogs, another mammal group with defensive keratin body coverings
* Pangolins, another mammal group with defensive keratin body coverings 
* Porcupines, another mammal group with defensive keratin body coverings

== References ==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==

* &quot;Armadillo online&quot; website hosted by zoologist Dr. Joshua Nixon
* Photographs of armadillo rolling into a ball</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q104840543" start="0" end="10" title="Armadillo" label="Armadillos"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="18" end="27" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q25833" start="28" end="37" title="placental" label="placental"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="38" end="44" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="53" end="58" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242326" start="59" end="68" title="Cingulata" label="Cingulata"/>
<link wikidata="Q173612" start="103" end="112" title="Xenarthra" label="Xenarthra"/>
<link wikidata="Q972452" start="129" end="137" title="anteater" label="anteater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274076" start="143" end="148" title="sloth" label="sloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="161" end="168" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="304" end="312" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q377804" start="411" end="416" title="armour (anatomy)" label="armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q755719" start="578" end="593" title="giant armadillo" label="giant armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q846337" start="635" end="655" title="pink fairy armadillo" label="pink fairy armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080942" start="716" end="726" title="Tolypeutes" label="Tolypeutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="873" end="882" title="megafauna" label="megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q23015579" start="884" end="894" title="glyptodont" label="glyptodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q902499" start="1085" end="1092" title="Dasypus" label="Dasypus"/>
<link wikidata="Q47867" start="1199" end="1210" title="Dasypodidae" label="Dasypodidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q22924208" start="1267" end="1281" title="Chlamyphoridae" label="Chlamyphoridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="1625" end="1631" title="Aztecs" label="Aztecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="1646" end="1653" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1670" end="1680" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q56944" start="1719" end="1732" title="Tupi language" label="Tupi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="1983" end="1990" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q234501" start="2204" end="2210" title="Tolima Department" label="Tolima"/>
<link wikidata="Q230607" start="2212" end="2218" title="Caldas Department" label="Caldas"/>
<link wikidata="Q123304" start="2223" end="2232" title="Antioquia Department" label="Antioquia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="2310" end="2318" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q902499" start="2367" end="2378" title="Dasypus" label="Dasypodidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q902499" start="2391" end="2402" title="Dasypus" label="Dasypodinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q902499" start="2418" end="2425" title="Dasypus" label="Dasypus"/>
<link wikidata="Q649549" start="2436" end="2457" title="Nine-banded armadillo" label="Nine-banded armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761577" start="2519" end="2541" title="Seven-banded armadillo" label="Seven-banded armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767476" start="2580" end="2609" title="Southern long-nosed armadillo" label="Southern long-nosed armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761916" start="2643" end="2670" title="Llanos long-nosed armadillo" label="Llanos long-nosed armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764523" start="2706" end="2734" title="Greater long-nosed armadillo" label="Greater long-nosed armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q743510" start="2768" end="2794" title="Hairy long-nosed armadillo" label="Hairy long-nosed armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769112" start="2827" end="2846" title="Yepes&amp;#x27;s mulita" label="Yepes&amp;#x27;s mulita"/>
<link wikidata="Q902492" start="2906" end="2920" title="Dasypus bellus" label="Dasypus bellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q112958075" start="2937" end="2953" title="Dasypus neogaeus" label="Dasypus neogaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606718" start="2976" end="2988" title="Stegotherium" label="Stegotherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q22924208" start="3003" end="3017" title="Chlamyphoridae" label="Chlamyphoridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809771" start="3030" end="3044" title="Chlamyphorinae" label="Chlamyphorinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q968416" start="3060" end="3075" title="Calyptophractus" label="Calyptophractus"/>
<link wikidata="Q968416" start="3086" end="3109" title="Greater fairy armadillo" label="Greater fairy armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q846337" start="3162" end="3174" title="Chlamyphorus" label="Chlamyphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q846337" start="3184" end="3204" title="Pink fairy armadillo" label="Pink fairy armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q241430" start="3253" end="3265" title="Euphractinae" label="Euphractinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q611493" start="3281" end="3295" title="Chaetophractus" label="Chaetophractus"/>
<link wikidata="Q940471" start="3306" end="3331" title="Screaming hairy armadillo" label="Screaming hairy armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042139" start="3374" end="3393" title="Big hairy armadillo" label="Big hairy armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761878" start="3434" end="3456" title="Andean hairy armadillo" label="Andean hairy armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220739" start="3508" end="3523" title="Macroeuphractus" label="Macroeuphractus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3545" end="3558" title="Paleuphractus" label="Paleuphractus"/>
<link wikidata="Q63522093" start="3580" end="3593" title="Proeuphractus" label="Proeuphractus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3615" end="3626" title="Doellotatus" label="Doellotatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q846386" start="3648" end="3659" title="Peltephilus" label="Peltephilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q902876" start="3734" end="3744" title="Euphractus" label="Euphractus"/>
<link wikidata="Q902876" start="3754" end="3774" title="Six-banded armadillo" label="Six-banded armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q244174" start="3825" end="3832" title="Zaedyus" label="Zaedyus"/>
<link wikidata="Q244174" start="3842" end="3847" title="Pichi" label="Pichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q911964" start="3888" end="3900" title="Tolypeutinae" label="Tolypeutinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122057" start="3917" end="3926" title="Kuntinaru" label="Kuntinaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q856879" start="3948" end="3957" title="Cabassous" label="Cabassous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769136" start="3968" end="3999" title="Northern naked-tailed armadillo" label="Northern naked-tailed armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764906" start="4036" end="4066" title="Chacoan naked-tailed armadillo" label="Chacoan naked-tailed armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768774" start="4104" end="4135" title="Southern naked-tailed armadillo" label="Southern naked-tailed armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762962" start="4173" end="4203" title="Greater naked-tailed armadillo" label="Greater naked-tailed armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q755719" start="4250" end="4260" title="Priodontes" label="Priodontes"/>
<link wikidata="Q755719" start="4270" end="4285" title="Giant armadillo" label="Giant armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080942" start="4333" end="4343" title="Tolypeutes" label="Tolypeutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q75070" start="4353" end="4384" title="Southern three-banded armadillo" label="Southern three-banded armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q111846" start="4420" end="4452" title="Brazilian three-banded armadillo" label="Brazilian three-banded armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23015579" start="4781" end="4791" title="glyptodont" label="glyptodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="5008" end="5021" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q102416" start="5110" end="5118" title="Cenozoic" label="Cenozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="5148" end="5165" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="5237" end="5250" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="5264" end="5275" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q278170" start="5292" end="5318" title="Great American Interchange" label="Great American Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242326" start="5347" end="5356" title="Cingulata" label="cingulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q630420" start="5372" end="5382" title="pampathere" label="pampathere"/>
<link wikidata="Q23015579" start="5401" end="5411" title="glyptodont" label="glyptodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="5544" end="5552" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q902499" start="5668" end="5675" title="Dasypus" label="Dasypus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769112" start="5749" end="5768" title="Yepes&amp;#x27;s mulita" label="Yepes&amp;#x27;s mulita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769136" start="5819" end="5850" title="northern naked-tailed armadillo" label="northern naked-tailed armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q649549" start="5855" end="5876" title="nine-banded armadillo" label="nine-banded armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="6055" end="6069" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="6074" end="6081" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="6112" end="6120" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="6134" end="6141" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="6307" end="6315" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="6351" end="6365" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q846337" start="6439" end="6459" title="pink fairy armadillo" label="pink fairy armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q755719" start="6524" end="6539" title="giant armadillo" label="giant armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="6671" end="6677" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="6697" end="6709" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="6866" end="6871" title="Larva" label="grubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q649549" start="6894" end="6915" title="nine-banded armadillo" label="nine-banded armadillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q373315" start="6985" end="6992" title="Arroyo (watercourse)" label="arroyos"/>
<link wikidata="Q839483" start="7475" end="7483" title="premolar" label="premolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="7489" end="7494" title="molar (tooth)" label="molar"/>
<link wikidata="Q273543" start="7517" end="7524" title="incisor" label="incisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19625" start="7529" end="7535" title="canine (tooth)" label="canine"/>
<link wikidata="Q641973" start="7542" end="7551" title="dentition" label="dentition"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="7694" end="7710" title="Thermoregulation" label="body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q623293" start="7723" end="7743" title="basal metabolic rate" label="basal metabolic rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q755719" start="7925" end="7935" title="Priodontes" label="Priodontes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080942" start="7952" end="7962" title="Tolypeutes" label="Tolypeutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25114760" start="8006" end="8012" title="plate (anatomy)" label="plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250516" start="8016" end="8027" title="dermal bone" label="dermal bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365510" start="8098" end="8103" title="scute" label="scute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080942" start="8784" end="8794" title="Tolypeutes" label="Tolypeutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="8893" end="8901" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="9645" end="9654" title="Gestation" label="Gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456044" start="9753" end="9773" title="delayed implantation" label="delayed implantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q902499" start="9874" end="9881" title="Dasypus" label="Dasypus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159979" start="9907" end="9918" title="monozygotic" label="monozygotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="10378" end="10385" title="leprosy" label="leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q467524" start="10410" end="10418" title="mangabey" label="mangabey"/>
<link wikidata="Q155891" start="10674" end="10694" title="Mycobacterium leprae" label="Mycobacterium leprae"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994" start="10944" end="10950" title="Vector (epidemiology)" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361531" start="10955" end="10972" title="natural reservoir" label="natural reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="11035" end="11080" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="arrival of Europeans in the late 15th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361531" start="11269" end="11286" title="natural reservoir" label="natural reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q649558" start="11291" end="11305" title="Chagas disease" label="Chagas disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q928363" start="11739" end="11751" title="polyembryony" label="polyembryony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="11765" end="11773" title="Mammalia" label="Mammalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324130" start="12098" end="12106" title="roadkill" label="roadkill"/>
<link wikidata="Q468776" start="12517" end="12525" title="charango" label="charango"/>
<link wikidata="Q492096" start="12536" end="12542" title="Andean music" label="Andean"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="12543" end="12547" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="12581" end="12588" title="Central America" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="12593" end="12606" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="12663" end="12677" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca, Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="12690" end="12706" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="12829" end="12843" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="13011" end="13026" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247723" start="13040" end="13055" title="Just So Stories" label="Just So Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q860556" start="13113" end="13131" title="Flanders and Swann" label="Flanders and Swann"/>
<link wikidata="Q361257" start="13192" end="13208" title="Shel Silverstein" label="Shel Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968075" start="13425" end="13431" title="Brillo" label="Brillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q97369670" start="13457" end="13471" title="Armadillo shoe" label="Armadillo shoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21824" start="13474" end="13481" title="Echidna" label="Echidna"/>
<link wikidata="Q21790" start="13494" end="13503" title="monotreme" label="monotreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120" start="13545" end="13553" title="Hedgehog" label="Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191516" start="13617" end="13625" title="Pangolin" label="Pangolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223829" start="13690" end="13699" title="Porcupine" label="Porcupine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2187" wikidata="Q4117862" url="?curid=2187" title="Antisemitism in the Arab world">
<text>Antisemitism (prejudice against and hatred of Jews) has increased greatly in the Arab world since the beginning of the 20th century, for several reasons: the dissolution and breakdown of the Ottoman Empire and traditional Islamic society; European influence, brought about by Western imperialism and Arab Christians; Nazi propaganda and relations between Nazi Germany and the Arab world; resentment over Jewish nationalism; the rise of Arab nationalism; and the widespread proliferation of anti-Jewish and anti-Zionist conspiracy theories.

Traditionally, Jews in the Muslim world were considered to be People of the Book and were subjected to &quot;dhimmi&quot; status. They were afforded relative security against persecution, provided they did not contest the varying inferior social and legal status imposed on them under Islamic rule.

While there were antisemitic incidents before the 20th century, during this time antisemitism in the Arab world increased greatly. During the 1930s and the 1940s several Jewish communities in the Arab world suffered from pogroms. The status of Jews in Arab countries deteriorated further at the onset of the Arab–Israeli conflict. After the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, the Palestinian exodus, the creation of the State of Israel and Israeli victories during the wars of 1956 and 1967 were a severe humiliation to Israel&#x27;s opponents—primarily Egypt, Syria, and Iraq. However, by the mid-1970s the vast majority of Jews had left Arab and Muslim countries, moving primarily to Israel, France, and the United States. The reasons for the exodus are varied and disputed.

By the 1980s, according to historian Bernard Lewis, the volume of antisemitic literature published in the Arab world, and the authority of its sponsors, seemed to suggest that classical antisemitism had become an essential part of Arab intellectual life, considerably more than in late 19th- and early 20th-century France and to a degree that has been compared to Nazi Germany. The rise of political Islam during the 1980s and afterwards provided a new mutation of Islamic antisemitism, giving the hatred of Jews a religious component.

In their 2008 report on contemporary Arab-Muslim antisemitism, the Israeli Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center dates the beginning of this phenomenon to the spread of classic European Christian antisemitism into the Arab world starting in the late 19th century. In 2014, the Anti-Defamation League published a global survey of worldwide antisemitic attitudes, reporting that in the Middle East, 74% of adults agreed with a majority of the survey&#x27;s eleven antisemitic propositions, including that &quot;Jews have too much power in international financial markets&quot; and that &quot;Jews are responsible for most of the world&#x27;s wars.&quot;

==Medieval times==
Jews, along with Christians, Sabians, and Zoroastrians living under early and medieval Muslim rule were known as &quot;People of the Book&quot; to Muslims and subjected to the status of &quot;dhimmi&quot; (&quot;protected&quot; minority) in the lands conquered by Muslim Arabs, a status generally applied to Non-Muslim minorities that was later also extended to other Non-Muslims like Sikhs, Hindus, Jains, and Buddhists. Jews were generally seen as a religious group (not a separate race), thus being a part of the &quot;Arab family&quot;.

&quot;Dhimmi&quot; were subjected to a number of restrictions, the application and severity of which varied with time and place. Restrictions included residency in segregated quarters, obligation to wear distinctive clothing, public subservience to Muslims, prohibitions against proselytizing and against marrying Muslim women, and limited access to the legal system (the testimony of a Jew did not count if contradicted by that of a Muslim). &quot;Dhimmi&quot; had to pay a special poll tax (the &quot;jizya&quot;), which exempted them from military service, and also from payment of the &quot;zakat&quot; alms tax required of Muslims. In return, &quot;dhimmi&quot; were granted limited rights, including a degree of tolerance, community autonomy in personal matters, and protection from being killed outright. Jewish communities, like Christian ones, were typically constituted as semi-autonomous entities managed by their own laws and leadership, who carried the responsibility for the community towards the Muslim rulers.

The situation of Jews was comparatively better than their European counterparts, though they still suffered persecution. Between the years of death of Idris I of Morocco in 793 and beginning of Almohad rule in 1130, Jews mostly led a peaceful existence in North Africa. The Almohads started forcing Jews and Christians to convert to Islam or be killed after conquering the region. There were also numerous massacres at other times in Morocco, Libya, and Algeria.

The situation where Jews both enjoyed cultural and economic prosperity at times, but were widely persecuted at other times, was summarised by G. E. Von Grunebaum:

It would not be difficult to put together the names of a very sizable number of Jewish subjects or citizens of the Islamic area who have attained to high rank, to power, to great financial influence, to significant and recognized intellectual attainment; and the same could be done for Christians. But it would again not be difficult to compile a lengthy list of persecutions, arbitrary confiscations, attempted forced conversions, or pogroms.
==Views in modernity==
Some scholars hold that Arab antisemitism in the modern world arose in the nineteenth century, against the backdrop of conflicting Jewish and Arab nationalism, and was imported into the Arab world primarily by nationalistically minded Christian Arabs (and only subsequently was it &quot;Islamized&quot;), Mark Cohen states. According to Bernard Lewis:
===19th century===

The Damascus affair was an accusation of ritual murder and a blood libel against Jews in Damascus in 1840. On February 5, 1840, Franciscan Capuchin friar Father Thomas and his Greek servant were reported missing, never to be seen again. The Turkish governor and the French consul Ratti-Menton believed accusations of ritual murder and blood libel, as the alleged murder occurred before the Jewish Passover. An investigation was staged, and Solomon Negrin, a Jewish barber, confessed under torture and accused other Jews. Two other Jews died under torture, and one (Moses Abulafia) converted to Islam to escape torture. More arrests and atrocities followed, culminating in 63 Jewish children being held hostage and mob attacks on Jewish communities throughout the Middle East. International outrage led to Ibrahim Pasha in Egypt ordering an investigation. Negotiations in Alexandria eventually secured the unconditional release and recognition of innocence of the nine prisoners still remaining alive (out of thirteen). Later in Constantinople, Moses Montefiore (leader of the British Jewish community) persuaded Sultan Abdülmecid I to issue a firman (edict) intended to halt the spread of blood libel accusations in the Ottoman Empire:
... and for the love we bear to our subjects, we cannot permit the Jewish nation, whose innocence for the crime alleged against them is evident, to be worried and tormented as a consequence of accusations which have not the least foundation in truth...
Nevertheless, the blood libel spread through the Middle East and North Africa: Aleppo (1810, 1850, 1875), Damascus (1840, 1848, 1890), Safi, Morocco in 1863, Beirut (1862, 1874), Dayr al-Qamar (1847), Jerusalem (1847), Cairo (1844, 1890, 1901–02), Mansura (1877), Alexandria (1870, 1882, 1901–02), Port Said (1903, 1908), and Damanhur (1871, 1873, 1877, 1892).

The Dreyfus affair of the late 19th century had consequences in the Arab world. Passionate outbursts of antisemitism in France were echoed in areas of French influence, especially Maronite Lebanon. The Muslim Arab press, however, was sympathetic to the falsely accused Captain Dreyfus, and criticized the persecution of Jews in France.

===20th century===


==== Pre-state antisemitism ====
While Arab antisemitism has increased in the wake of the Arab–Israeli conflict, there were pogroms against Jews prior to the establishment of the State of Israel in May 1948, including Nazi-inspired pogroms in Algeria in the 1930s, and attacks on the Jews of Iraq and Libya in the 1940s. In 1941, 180 Jews were murdered and 700 were injured in the anti-Jewish riots known as &quot;the Farhud&quot;. Four hundred Jews were injured in violent demonstrations in Egypt in 1945 and Jewish property was vandalized and looted. In Libya, 130 Jews were killed and 266 injured. In December 1947, 13 Jews were killed in Damascus, including 8 children, and 26 were injured. In Aleppo, rioting resulted in dozens of Jewish casualties, damage to 150 Jewish homes, and the torching of 5 schools and 10 synagogues. In Yemen, 97 Jews were murdered and 120 injured.

==== Speculated causes ====
Antisemitism in the Arab world increased in the 20th century, as resentment against Jewish immigration and Zionist activities in Palestine Mandate grew. Around this time, the fabricated antisemitic text &quot;The Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot; started to become available in Palestine. A translation of the text in Arabic was done by an Arab Christian in Cairo in 1927 or 1928, this time as a published book. In March 1921, Musa Khazem El Husseini, Mayor of Jerusalem, told Winston Churchill &quot;The Jews have been amongst the most active advocates of destruction in many lands. ... It is well known that the disintegration of Russia was wholly or in great part brought about by the Jews, and a large proportion of the defeat of Germany and Austria must also be put at their door.&quot;

Matthias Küntzel has suggested that the decisive transfer of Jewish conspiracy theory took place between 1937 and 1945 under the impact of Nazi propaganda targeted at the Arab world. According to Kuntzel, the Nazi Arabic radio service had a staff of 80 and broadcast every day in Arabic, stressing the similarities between Islam and Nazism and supported by the activities of the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, Amin al-Husseini (who broadcast pro-Nazi propaganda from Berlin). Alongside al-Husseini&#x27;s collaboration with the Nazis, cooperative political and military relationships between the Arab world and the Axis powers (Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy) were founded on shared antisemitic scorn and hostilities toward common enemies: the United Kingdom, France, and Zionism. The Nazi regime also provided funding to the Egyptian Moslem Brotherhood, which began calling for boycotts of Jewish businesses in 1936.
Bernard Lewis also describes Nazi influence in the Arab world, including its impact on Michel Aflaq, the principal founder of Ba&#x27;athist thought (which later dominated Syria and Iraq). After the promulgation of the Nuremberg Laws, Hitler received telegrams of congratulation from all over the Arab and Muslim world, especially from Morocco and Palestine, where the Nazi propaganda had been most active... Before long political parties of the Nazi and Fascist type began to appear, complete with paramilitary youth organizations, colored shirts, strict discipline and more or less charismatic leaders. 
George Gruen attributes the increased animosity towards Jews in the Arab world to the defeat and breakdown of the Ottoman Empire and traditional Islamic society; domination by Western colonial powers under which Jews gained a disproportionately large role in the commercial, professional, and administrative life of the region; the rise of Arab nationalism, whose proponents sought the wealth and positions of local Jews through government channels; resentment over Jewish nationalism and the Zionist movement; and the readiness of unpopular Arab regimes to scapegoat local Jews for political purposes.

After the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, the Palestinian exodus, the creation of the state of Israel, and the independence of Arab countries from European control, conditions for Jews in the Arab world deteriorated. Over the next few decades, almost all would flee the Arab world, some willingly, and some under threat (see Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries). In 1945 there were between 758,000 and 866,000 Jews (see table below) living in communities throughout the Arab world. Today, there are fewer than 8,000. In some Arab states, such as Libya (which was once around 3% Jewish), the Jewish community no longer exists; in other Arab countries, only a few hundred Jews remain.

Harvard University Professor Ruth R. Wisse claims that &quot;anti-Semitism / Zionism has been the cornerstone of pan-Arab politics since the Second World War&quot; and that it is the &quot;strongest actual and potential source of unity&quot; in the Arab world. This is because Jews and Israel function as substitutes for Western values that challenge the hegemony of religious and political power in the Middle East. Antisemitism is also malleable enough that it can unite right-wing and left-wing groups within the Arab world.

Robert Bernstein, founder of Human Rights Watch, says that antisemitism is &quot;deeply ingrained and institutionalized&quot; in &quot;Arab nations in modern times&quot;.

===Contemporary attitudes===

====Israeli Arabs====

In 2003, Israeli-Arab Raed Salah, the leader of the northern branch of the Islamic Movement in Israel published the following poem in the Islamic Movement&#x27;s periodical:

You Jews are criminal bombers of mosques,
Slaughterers of pregnant women and babies.
Robbers and germs in all times,
The Creator sentenced you to be loser monkeys,
Victory belongs to Muslims, from the Nile to the Euphrates.
During a speech in 2007, Salah accused Jews of using children&#x27;s blood to bake bread. &quot;We have never allowed ourselves to knead [the dough for] the bread that breaks the fast in the holy month of Ramadan with children&#x27;s blood,&quot; he said. &quot;Whoever wants a more thorough explanation, let him ask what used to happen to some children in Europe, whose blood was mixed in with the dough of the [Jewish] holy bread.&quot;

Kamal Khatib, deputy leader of the northern branch of the Islamic movement, referred in one of his speeches to the Jews as &quot;fleas&quot;.

Of all groups surveyed, a 2010 Pew Research global poll found that Israeli Arabs have the lowest rate of anti-Jewish attitudes in the Middle East.

====Egypt====

Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood leader Mohammed Mahdi Akef has denounced what he called &quot;the myth of the Holocaust&quot; in defending Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad&#x27;s denial of it.

The Egyptian government-run newspaper, &quot;Al Akhbar&quot;, on April 29, 2002, published an editorial denying the Holocaust as a fraud. The next paragraph decries the failure of the Holocaust to eliminate all of the Jews:
With regard to the fraud of the Holocaust. ... Many French studies have proven that this is no more than a fabrication, a lie, and a fraud!! That is, it is a &#x27;scenario&#x27; the plot of which was carefully tailored, using several faked photos completely unconnected to the truth. Yes, it is a film, no more and no less. Hitler himself, whom they accuse of Nazism, is in my eyes no more than a modest &#x27;pupil&#x27; in the world of murder and bloodshed. He is completely innocent of the charge of frying them in the hell of his false Holocaust!!

The entire matter, as many French and British scientists and researchers have proven, is nothing more than a huge Israeli plot aimed at extorting the German government in particular and the European countries in general. But I, personally and in light of this imaginary tale, complain to Hitler, even saying to him from the bottom of my heart, &#x27;If only you had done it, brother, if only it had really happened, so that the world could sigh in relief [without] their evil and sin.&#x27;

In an article in October 2000 columnist Adel Hammoda alleged in the state-owned Egyptian newspaper &quot;al-Ahram&quot; that Jews made Matza from the blood of (non-Jewish) children. Mohammed Salmawy, editor of &quot;Al-Ahram Hebdo&quot;, &quot;defended the use of old European myths like the blood libel&quot; in his newspapers.

In August 2010, Saudi columnist Iman Al-Quwaifli sharply criticized the &quot;phenomenon of sympathy for Adolf Hitler and for Nazism in the Arab world&quot;, specifically citing the words of Hussam Fawzi Jabar, an Islamic cleric who justified Hitler&#x27;s actions against the Jews in an Egyptian talk show one month earlier.

In an October 2012 sermon broadcast on Egyptian Channel 1 (which was attended by Egyptian President Muhammad Morsi) Futouh Abd Al-Nabi Mansour, the Head of Religious Endowment of the Matrouh Governorate, prayed (as translated by MEMRI):

In 2001–2002, Arab Radio and Television produced a 30-part television miniseries entitled &quot;Horseman Without a Horse&quot;, starring prominent Egyptian actor Mohamed Sobhi, which contains dramatizations of &quot;The Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot;. The United States and Israel criticized Egypt for airing the program, which includes racist falsehoods that have a history of being used &quot;as a pretext for persecuting Jews&quot;.

====Jordan====

Jordan does not allow entry to Jews with visible signs of Judaism or even with personal religious items in their possession. The Jordanian ambassador to Israel replied to a complaint by a religious Jew denied entry that security concerns required that travelers entering the Hashemite Kingdom not do so with prayer shawls (Tallit) and phylacteries (Tefillin). Jordanian authorities state that the policy is in order to ensure the Jewish tourists&#x27; safety.

In July 2009, six Breslov Hasidim were deported after attempting entry into Jordan in order to visit the tomb of Aaron / Sheikh Harun on Mount Hor, near Petra, because of an alert from the Ministry of Tourism. The group had taken a ferry from Sinai, Egypt because they understood that Jordanian authorities were making it hard for visible Jews to enter from Israel. The Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs is aware of the issue.

====Saudi Arabia====
Hostility toward Jews is common in Saudi Arabian media, religious sermons, school curriculum, and official government policy.

Indoctrination against Jews is a part of school curriculum in Saudi Arabia. Children are advised not to befriend Jews, are given false information about them (such as the claim that Jews worship the Devil), and are encouraged to engage in &quot;jihad&quot; against Jews.

Conspiracy theories about Jews are widely disseminated in Saudi Arabian state-controlled media.

According to the U.S. State Department, religious freedom &quot;does not exist&quot; in Saudi Arabia, and therefore, Jews may not freely practice their religion.

====Syria====
On March 2, 1974, the bodies of four Syrian Jewish women were discovered by border police in a cave in the Zabdani Mountains northwest of Damascus. Fara Zeibak 24, her sisters Lulu Zeibak 23, Mazal Zeibak 22 and their cousin Eva Saad 18, had contracted with a band of smugglers to flee Syria to Lebanon and eventually to Israel. The girls&#x27; bodies were found raped, murdered and mutilated. The police also found the remains of two Jewish boys, Natan Shaya 18 and Kassem Abadi 20, victims of an earlier massacre. Syrian authorities deposited the bodies of all six in sacks before the homes of their parents in the Jewish ghetto in Damascus.

In 1984 Syrian Defense Minister Mustafa Tlass published a book called &quot;The Matzah of Zion&quot;, which claimed that Jews had killed Christian children in Damascus to make Matzas (see Damascus affair). His book inspired the Egyptian TV series &quot;Horseman Without a Horse&quot; (see ) and a spinoff, &quot;The Diaspora&quot;, which led to Hezbollah&#x27;s al-Manar being banned in Europe for broadcasting it.

Former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke visited Syria in November 2005 and made a speech that was broadcast live on Syrian television.

====Tunisia====
The history of the Jews in Tunisia goes back to Roman times. Before 1948, the Jewish population of Tunisia reached a peak of 110,000. Today it has a Jewish community of less than 2,000 people. Antisemitism in Vichy-era Tunisia was deeply intertwined with colonial politics and Mediterranean rivalries. Following France&#x27;s 1940 defeat, the Vichy government implemented antisemitic laws in Tunisia, targeting the region’s diverse Jewish community of Tunisian, French, and Italian nationals. These laws, aimed at economic aryanization and exclusion of Jews from public life, were also tools for consolidating French colonial authority. However, enforcement was inconsistent, as colonial officials sought to avoid destabilising the economy or provoking intervention from Fascist Italy, which used its Jewish population to maintain influence. Rather than reflecting ethical restraint, this caution highlighted the tension between antisemitic ideology and pragmatic efforts to safeguard French control amid geopolitical competition and wartime pressures.

For a personal account of the discrimination and physical attacks experienced by Jews in Tunisia the Jewish-Arab anti-colonialist writer Albert Memmi wrote:
At each crisis, with every incident of the slightest importance, the mob would go wild, setting fire to Jewish shops. This even happened during the Yom Kippur War. Tunisia&#x27;s President, Habib Bourguiba, has in all probability never been hostile to the Jews, but there was always that notorious &quot;delay&quot;, which meant that the police arrived on the scene only after the shops had been pillaged and burnt. Is it any wonder that the exodus to France and Israel continued and even increased?
On November 30, 2012, prominent Tunisian imam Sheikh Ahmad Al-Suhayli of Radès, told his followers during a live broadcast on Hannibal TV that &quot;God wants to destroy this [Tunisian] sprinkling of Jews and is sterilizing the wombs of Jewish women.&quot; This was the fourth time incitement against Jews has been reported in the public sphere since the overthrow of Tunisian President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali in 2011, thus prompting Jewish community leaders to demand security protection from the Tunisian government. Al-Suhayli subsequently posted a video on the Internet in which he claimed that his statements had been misinterpreted.

On January 18, 2021, Tunisian president Kais Saied was caught on video telling a crowd that &quot;We know very well who the people are who are controlling the country today. It is the Jews who are doing the stealing, and we need to put an end to it.&quot; Saied&#x27;s office responded that the president&#x27;s words had been misheard and that he meant to say something else instead of Jews. Two days later, Saied publicly apologized for his statements, holding a phone call with Djerba&#x27;s chief rabbi, Haim Bitan in which he expressed regret for his statements.

The El Ghriba Synagogue in Djerba has twice been the target of terrorist atrocities: in 2002 an al-Qaeda suicide bomber killed 20 and injured dozens more, while in 2023 a lone gunman killed two worshippers and two police and injured several others.

====Palestinian territories====
Hamas, an offshoot of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood, has a foundational statement of principles, or &quot;covenant&quot; that claims that the French revolution, the Russian revolution, colonialism and both world wars were created by the Zionists. It also claims the Freemasons and Rotary clubs are Zionist fronts and refers to the Protocols of the Elders of Zion.
Claims that Jews and Freemasons were behind the French Revolution originated in Germany in the mid-19th century.

Mahmoud Abbas, leader of the PLO, published a Ph.D. thesis (at Moscow University) in 1982, called &quot;The Secret Connection between the Nazis and the Leaders of the Zionist Movement&quot;.
His doctoral thesis later became a book, &quot;The Other Side: the Secret Relationship Between Nazism and Zionism&quot;, which, following his appointment as Palestinian Prime Minister in 2003, was heavily criticized as an example of Holocaust denial. In his book, Abbas wrote:

It seems that the interest of the Zionist movement, however, is to inflate this figure [of Holocaust deaths] so that their gains will be greater. This led them to emphasize this figure [six million] in order to gain the solidarity of international public opinion with Zionism. Many scholars have debated the figure of six million and reached stunning conclusions—fixing the number of Jewish victims at only a few hundred thousand.
====Lebanon====
Hezbollah&#x27;s Al-Manar TV channel has often been accused of airing antisemitic broadcasts, blaming the Jews for a Zionist conspiracy against the Arab world, and often airing excerpts from the &quot;Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot;,

Al-Manar recently aired a drama series, called &quot;The Diaspora&quot;, which is based on historical antisemitic allegations. BBC reporters who watched the series said that: Correspondents who have viewed &quot;The Diaspora&quot; note that it quotes extensively from the &quot;Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot;, a notorious 19th-century publication used by the Nazis among others to fuel race hatred. 

In another incident, an Al-Manar commentator recently referred to &quot;Zionist attempts to transmit AIDS to Arab countries&quot;. Al-Manar officials deny broadcasting antisemitic incitement and state that their position is anti-Israeli, not antisemitic. However, Hezbollah has directed strong rhetoric both against Israel and Jews, and it has cooperated in publishing and distributing outright antisemitic literature. The government of Lebanon has not criticized continued broadcast of antisemitic material on television.

Due to protests by the CRIF umbrella group of French Jews regarding allegations of antisemitic content, French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin called for a ban on Al-Manar broadcasting in France on December 2, 2004, just two weeks after al-Manar was authorised to continue broadcasting in Europe by France&#x27;s media watchdog agency. On December 13, 2004, France&#x27;s highest administrative court banned Hizbullah&#x27;s Al-Manar TV station on the grounds that it consistently incites racial hatred and antisemitism.

====Yemen====
The 1940s and the establishment of Israel saw rapid emigration of Jews out of Yemen, in the wake of anti-Jewish riots and massacres. By the late 1990s, only several hundred remained, mainly in a northwestern mountainous region named Sa&#x27;ada and town of Raida. Houthi members put up notes on the Jews&#x27; doors, accusing them of corrupting Muslim morals. Eventually, the Houthi leaders sent threatening messages to the Jewish community: &quot;We warn you to leave the area immediately... We give you a period of 10 days, or you will regret it.&quot;

On 28 March 2021, 13 Jews were forced by the Houthis to leave Yemen, leaving four elderly Jews the only Jews still in Yemen.

====Opinion polling====
In 2008, a Pew Research Center survey found that negative views concerning Jews were most common in the three predominantly Arab nations polled, with 97% of Lebanese having unfavorable opinion of Jews, 95% in Egypt, and 96% in Jordan.

== See also ==
* Contemporary imprints of &quot;The Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot;
* Covenant of Umar I
* Dhimmi
* Islam and antisemitism
* Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim lands
* Jizya
* Mellah
* Pact of Umar II
* Qutbism
* Racism in the Arab world

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* Bostom, Andrew G. &quot;The Legacy of Islamic Antisemitism: From Sacred texts to Solemn History&quot;. Prometheus Books. 2008. 
* Gerber, Jane S. (1986). &quot;Anti-Semitism and the Muslim World&quot;. In &quot;History and Hate: The Dimensions of Anti-Semitism&quot;, ed. David Berger. Jewish Publications Society. 
* Levy, Richard S., ed. &quot;Antisemitism: A historical encyclopedia of prejudice and persecution&quot; (Vol. 1. ABC-CLIO, 2005) pp 30–33.
* Lewis, Bernard (1984). &quot;The Jews of Islam&quot;. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
* Lewis, Bernard (1999). &quot;Semites and anti-Semites&quot;. 

* Laqueur, Walter. &quot;The Changing Face of Antisemitism: From Ancient Times To The Present Day&quot;. Oxford University Press. 2006. 
* Poliakov, Leon (1997). &quot;Anti-Semitism&quot;. &quot;Encyclopaedia Judaica&quot; (CD-ROM Edition Version 1.0). Ed. Cecil Roth. Keter Publishing House. 
* Segev, Tom. &quot;One Palestine, Complete: Jews and Arabs Under the British Mandate&quot;. Trans. Haim Watzman. New York: Henry Holt and Company, 2001.
* 
* Wistrich, Robert S. &quot;Hitler&#x27;s Apocalypse: Jews and the Nazi Legacy&quot;. Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson. 1985. 
* Wistrich, Robert S. &quot;A Lethal Obsession: Anti-Semitism from Antiquity to the Global Jihad&quot;. Random House. 2010. 

==External links==

* Arab Anti-Semitism in 1998/99 – summary of Arab antisemitism, by the University of Tel Aviv
* S.RES.366 Urging the Government of Egypt and other Arab governments not to allow their government-controlled television stations to broadcast any program that lends legitimacy to the Protocols of the Elders of Zion, and for other purposes. (Passed/agreed to in Senate on November 20, 2002).
* MEMRI Organization that monitors Middle-Eastern media for antisemitism. See MEMRI.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="0" end="12" title="Antisemitism" label="Antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="46" end="50" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="81" end="91" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837704" start="158" end="169" title="Dissolution of the Ottoman Empire" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145246" start="174" end="205" title="Partition of the Ottoman Empire" label="breakdown of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="276" end="283" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="284" end="295" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q431164" start="300" end="315" title="Arab Christians" label="Arab Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="317" end="332" title="Nazi propaganda" label="Nazi propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395224" start="337" end="386" title="relations between Nazi Germany and the Arab world" label="relations between Nazi Germany and the Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="404" end="422" title="Zionism" label="Jewish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="436" end="452" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="490" end="501" title="Antisemitism" label="anti-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q584548" start="506" end="518" title="Anti-Zionism" label="anti-Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001833" start="519" end="538" title="Conspiracy theories in the Arab world" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916490" start="556" end="580" title="History of the Jews under Muslim rule" label="Jews in the Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q216565" start="603" end="621" title="People of the Book" label="People of the Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q273603" start="650" end="656" title="dhimmi" label="dhimmi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="716" end="727" title="Persecution of Jews#Middle East and Islamic antisemitism" label="persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="942" end="952" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="1062" end="1068" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="1149" end="1170" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="1182" end="1203" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220089" start="1209" end="1227" title="1948 Palestinian exodus" label="Palestinian exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="1233" end="1264" title="Israeli Declaration of Independence" label="creation of the State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="1269" end="1275" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1306" end="1310" title="Suez Crisis#Invasion" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="1315" end="1319" title="Six-Day War" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1383" end="1388" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="1390" end="1395" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="1401" end="1405" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q276172" start="1433" end="1493" title="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries" label="the vast majority of Jews had left Arab and Muslim countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1523" end="1529" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1539" end="1552" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q501880" start="1644" end="1657" title="Bernard Lewis" label="Bernard Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1971" end="1983" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q30970737" start="1997" end="2012" title="political Islam" label="political Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816573" start="2072" end="2092" title="Antisemitism in Islam" label="Islamic antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q84003" start="2219" end="2264" title="Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center" label="Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526690" start="2338" end="2360" title="Christian antisemitism" label="Christian antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="2429" end="2451" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="2841" end="2851" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144747" start="2853" end="2860" title="Sabians" label="Sabians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="2866" end="2878" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q642379" start="2892" end="2922" title="History of Islam" label="early and medieval Muslim rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q216565" start="2943" end="2961" title="People of the Book" label="People of the Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q273603" start="3016" end="3022" title="dhimmi" label="dhimmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="3069" end="3100" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="lands conquered by Muslim Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="3209" end="3214" title="Sikhs" label="Sikhs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="3216" end="3222" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="3224" end="3229" title="Jainism" label="Jains"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="3235" end="3244" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="3530" end="3549" title="Racial segregation" label="segregated quarters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3551" end="3590" title="Jewish religious clothing#Historical background" label="obligation to wear distinctive clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q461786" start="3869" end="3874" title="jizya" label="jizya"/>
<link wikidata="Q124058" start="3961" end="3966" title="zakat" label="zakat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4084" end="4093" title="Toleration#Islam" label="tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q438601" start="4544" end="4562" title="Idris I of Morocco" label="Idris I of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="4649" end="4661" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="4827" end="4834" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="4836" end="4841" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="4847" end="4854" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q501880" start="5825" end="5838" title="Bernard Lewis" label="Bernard Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158270" start="5864" end="5879" title="Damascus affair" label="Damascus affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="5901" end="5914" title="ritual murder" label="ritual murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="5921" end="5932" title="blood libel" label="blood libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="5949" end="5957" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="5988" end="5998" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124862" start="5999" end="6013" title="Capuchin friar" label="Capuchin friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="6101" end="6108" title="Turkey" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6140" end="6152" title="Ratti-Menton" label="Ratti-Menton"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="6257" end="6265" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q10896978" start="6333" end="6356" title="Forced confession" label="confessed under torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="6454" end="6459" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q192620" start="6562" end="6569" title="hostage" label="hostage"/>
<link wikidata="Q311789" start="6665" end="6678" title="Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt" label="Ibrahim Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="6731" end="6741" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="6888" end="6902" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q733118" start="6904" end="6920" title="Moses Montefiore" label="Moses Montefiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q174772" start="6979" end="6991" title="Abdülmecid I" label="Abdülmecid I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130651" start="7003" end="7009" title="firman (decree)" label="firman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="7080" end="7094" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="7367" end="7378" title="blood libel" label="blood libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158270" start="7465" end="7469" title="Damascus affair" label="1840"/>
<link wikidata="Q132132620" start="7484" end="7497" title="Safi Affair" label="Safi, Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q173457" start="7715" end="7729" title="Dreyfus affair" label="Dreyfus affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988656" start="7891" end="7899" title="Maronite" label="Maronite"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="7900" end="7907" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8669" start="8159" end="8180" title="Arab–Israeli conflict" label="Arab–Israeli conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="8193" end="8199" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="8227" end="8275" title="Israeli Declaration of Independence" label="establishment of the State of Israel in May 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="8287" end="8291" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="8312" end="8319" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="8361" end="8365" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="8370" end="8375" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352263" start="8487" end="8493" title="Farhud" label="Farhud"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="8999" end="9009" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="9063" end="9081" title="Aliyah" label="Jewish immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="9086" end="9093" title="Zionism" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="9108" end="9125" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Palestine Mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839017" start="9154" end="9181" title="Antisemitic canard" label="fabricated antisemitic text"/>
<link wikidata="Q26193" start="9188" end="9223" title="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="9341" end="9346" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="9460" end="9477" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q95568" start="9776" end="9792" title="Matthias Küntzel" label="Matthias Küntzel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9837" end="9861" title="List of conspiracy theories#Antisemitism" label="Jewish conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774336" start="10155" end="10179" title="Grand Mufti of Jerusalem" label="Grand Mufti of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q164745" start="10181" end="10197" title="Amin al-Husseini" label="Amin al-Husseini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342294" start="10276" end="10304" title="Collaboration with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy" label="collaboration with the Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="10386" end="10397" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="10399" end="10411" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="10416" end="10429" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10515" end="10529" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="10531" end="10537" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="10543" end="10550" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q133207" start="10606" end="10624" title="Moslem Brotherhood" label="Moslem Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q355416" start="10776" end="10788" title="Michel Aflaq" label="Michel Aflaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582421" start="10815" end="10837" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athism" label="Ba&amp;#x27;athist thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="11363" end="11373" title="Arab world" label="Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837704" start="11381" end="11423" title="Dissolution of the Ottoman Empire" label="defeat and breakdown of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="11440" end="11455" title="Muslim world" label="Islamic society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245246" start="11471" end="11494" title="European colonialism" label="Western colonial powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q114213" start="11635" end="11651" title="Arab nationalism" label="Arab nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="11761" end="11779" title="Zionism" label="Jewish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589178" start="11842" end="11848" title="regime" label="regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912143" start="11853" end="11862" title="Scapegoating" label="scapegoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="11909" end="11930" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220089" start="11936" end="11954" title="1948 Palestinian exodus" label="Palestinian exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="11985" end="11991" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q276172" start="12215" end="12259" title="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries" label="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="12445" end="12450" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177747" start="12612" end="12625" title="Ruth R. Wisse" label="Ruth R. Wisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q149547" start="13112" end="13128" title="Robert L. Bernstein" label="Robert Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="13141" end="13159" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891378" start="13359" end="13369" title="Raed Salah" label="Raed Salah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891362" start="13412" end="13438" title="Islamic Movement in Israel" label="Islamic Movement in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="13783" end="13824" title="blood libel" label="using children&amp;#x27;s blood to bake bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q133207" start="14491" end="14509" title="Muslim Brotherhood" label="Muslim Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918522" start="14517" end="14536" title="Mohammed Mahdi Akef" label="Mohammed Mahdi Akef"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="14584" end="14597" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q34448" start="14635" end="14654" title="Mahmoud Ahmadinejad" label="Mahmoud Ahmadinejad"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="14662" end="14668" title="Holocaust denial" label="denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="14681" end="14686" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120266" start="14722" end="14731" title="Al Akhbar (Egypt)" label="Al Akhbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="14789" end="14802" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15987" end="15999" title="Adel Hammoda" label="Adel Hammoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q286468" start="16052" end="16060" title="al-Ahram" label="al-Ahram"/>
<link wikidata="Q211361" start="16082" end="16087" title="Matza" label="Matza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829199" start="16163" end="16177" title="Al-Ahram Hebdo" label="Al-Ahram Hebdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="16239" end="16250" title="blood libel against Jews" label="blood libel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16309" end="16325" title="Iman Al-Quwaifli" label="Iman Al-Quwaifli"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="16382" end="16394" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q959279" start="16643" end="16661" title="ERTU" label="Egyptian Channel 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631" start="16704" end="16718" title="Muhammad Morsi" label="Muhammad Morsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30682" start="16787" end="16806" title="Matrouh Governorate" label="Matrouh Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541141" start="16833" end="16838" title="MEMRI" label="MEMRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859338" start="16856" end="16881" title="Arab Radio and Television Network" label="Arab Radio and Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164796" start="17004" end="17017" title="Mohamed Sobhi (actor)" label="Mohamed Sobhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q26193" start="17058" end="17093" title="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="17302" end="17308" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212950" start="17625" end="17631" title="Tallit" label="Tallit"/>
<link wikidata="Q48296" start="17651" end="17659" title="Tefillin" label="Tefillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915139" start="17781" end="17788" title="Breslov (Hasidic dynasty)" label="Breslov"/>
<link wikidata="Q171201" start="17789" end="17796" title="Hasidic Judaism" label="Hasidim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915115" start="17900" end="17909" title="Mount Hor" label="Mount Hor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788" start="17916" end="17921" title="Petra" label="Petra"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="17995" end="18000" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="18006" end="18011" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431423" start="18133" end="18168" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Israel)" label="Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840268" start="18924" end="18937" title="Syrian Jews" label="Syrian Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q403707" start="19564" end="19577" title="Mustafa Tlass" label="Mustafa Tlass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158270" start="19720" end="19735" title="Damascus affair" label="Damascus affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117862" start="19785" end="19809" title="Horseman Without a Horse" label="Horseman Without a Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="19877" end="19886" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="19955" end="19967" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q163042" start="19975" end="19985" title="David Duke" label="David Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916034" start="20102" end="20132" title="history of the Jews in Tunisia" label="history of the Jews in Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q733225" start="21289" end="21301" title="Albert Memmi" label="Albert Memmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27062" start="21882" end="21887" title="Radès" label="Radès"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745141" start="21935" end="21946" title="Hannibal TV" label="Hannibal TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q204487" start="22196" end="22219" title="Zine El Abidine Ben Ali" label="Zine El Abidine Ben Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q16120878" start="22490" end="22500" title="Kais Saied" label="Kais Saied"/>
<link wikidata="Q188938" start="22931" end="22937" title="Djerba" label="Djerba"/>
<link wikidata="Q108569921" start="22958" end="22968" title="Haim Bitan" label="Haim Bitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311734" start="23023" end="23042" title="El Ghriba Synagogue" label="El Ghriba Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q188938" start="23046" end="23052" title="Djerba" label="Djerba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869975" start="23112" end="23138" title="Ghriba synagogue bombing" label="an al-Qaeda suicide bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q118255771" start="23188" end="23201" title="2023 Djerba shooting" label="a lone gunman"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="23301" end="23306" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q133207" start="23336" end="23354" title="Muslim Brotherhood" label="Muslim Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="23569" end="23578" title="Freemason" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q109179" start="23584" end="23595" title="Rotary club" label="Rotary club"/>
<link wikidata="Q26193" start="23634" end="23665" title="Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="Protocols of the Elders of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q127998" start="23781" end="23794" title="Mahmoud Abbas" label="Mahmoud Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="23810" end="23813" title="PLO" label="PLO"/>
<link wikidata="" start="24019" end="24085" title="The Other Side: the Secret Relationship Between Nazism and Zionism" label="The Other Side: the Secret Relationship Between Nazism and Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="24205" end="24221" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="24697" end="24706" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q286478" start="24714" end="24722" title="Al-Manar" label="Al-Manar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001833" start="24822" end="24855" title="conspiracy theories in the Arab world" label="conspiracy against the Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q286478" start="24938" end="24946" title="Al-Manar" label="Al-Manar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="25447" end="25451" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920390" start="25893" end="25897" title="Conseil Représentatif des Institutions juives de France" label="CRIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q63263" start="25996" end="26016" title="Jean-Pierre Raffarin" label="Jean-Pierre Raffarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q223732" start="26428" end="26451" title="Declaration of Israel" label="establishment of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q991395" start="26643" end="26654" title="Sa&amp;#x27;ada" label="Sa&amp;#x27;ada"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26667" end="26672" title="Raida (town)" label="Raida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042087" start="26674" end="26680" title="Houthi" label="Houthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="27127" end="27146" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165029" start="27369" end="27441" title="Contemporary imprints of The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="Contemporary imprints of &amp;quot;The Protocols of the Elders of Zion&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001895" start="27444" end="27462" title="Covenant of Umar I" label="Covenant of Umar I"/>
<link wikidata="Q273603" start="27465" end="27471" title="Dhimmi" label="Dhimmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816573" start="27474" end="27496" title="Islam and antisemitism" label="Islam and antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q276172" start="27499" end="27539" title="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim lands" label="Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q461786" start="27542" end="27547" title="Jizya" label="Jizya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331767" start="27550" end="27556" title="Mellah" label="Mellah"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001895" start="27559" end="27574" title="Pact of Umar II" label="Pact of Umar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q632691" start="27577" end="27584" title="Qutbism" label="Qutbism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279752" start="27587" end="27611" title="Racism in the Arab world" label="Racism in the Arab world"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757040" start="27657" end="27674" title="Andrew G. Bostom" label="Bostom, Andrew G."/>
<link wikidata="Q6152275" start="27787" end="27802" title="Jane Gerber" label="Gerber, Jane S."/>
<link wikidata="Q501880" start="28115" end="28129" title="Bernard Lewis" label="Lewis, Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q213692" start="28276" end="28291" title="Walter Laqueur" label="Laqueur, Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q701745" start="28413" end="28427" title="Leon Poliakov" label="Poliakov, Leon"/>
<link wikidata="Q846103" start="28469" end="28490" title="Encyclopaedia Judaica" label="Encyclopaedia Judaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052358" start="28531" end="28541" title="Cecil Roth" label="Cecil Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393067" start="28570" end="28580" title="Tom Segev" label="Segev, Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349524" start="28727" end="28746" title="Robert S. Wistrich" label="Wistrich, Robert S."/>
<link wikidata="Q7349524" start="28847" end="28866" title="Robert S. Wistrich" label="Wistrich, Robert S."/>
<link wikidata="Q319239" start="29062" end="29084" title="University of Tel Aviv" label="University of Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="29122" end="29127" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q26193" start="29270" end="29301" title="Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="Protocols of the Elders of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541141" start="29456" end="29461" title="MEMRI" label="MEMRI"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2192" wikidata="Q2778" url="?curid=2192" title="August 11">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
*3114 BC – The Mesoamerican Long Count calendar, used by several pre-Columbian Mesoamerican civilizations, notably the Maya, begins.
*2492 BC – Traditional date of the defeat of Bel by Hayk, progenitor and founder of the Armenian nation.
*106 – The south-western part of Dacia (modern Romania) becomes a Roman province: Roman Dacia.
*117 – Hadrian is proclaimed Roman emperor, two days after Trajan&#x27;s death.
* 355 – Claudius Silvanus, accused of treason, proclaims himself Roman Emperor against Constantius II.
* 490 – Battle of Adda: The Goths under Theodoric the Great and his ally Alaric II defeat the forces of Odoacer on the Adda River, near Milan.
* 923 – The Qarmatians of Bahrayn capture and pillage the city of Basra.
*1315 – The Great Famine of Europe becomes so dire that even the king of England has difficulties buying bread for himself and his entourage.
*1332 – Wars of Scottish Independence: Battle of Dupplin Moor: Scots under Domhnall II, Earl of Mar are routed by Edward Balliol.
*1473 – The Battle of Otlukbeli: Mehmed the Conqueror of the Ottoman Empire decisively defeats Uzun Hassan of Aq Qoyunlu.
*1492 – Rodrigo de Borja is elected as Head of the Catholic Church, taking the name Pope Alexander VI.
===1601–1900===
*1675 – Franco-Dutch War: Forces of the Holy Roman Empire defeat the French in the Battle of Konzer Brücke.
*1685 – Morean War: The 49-day Siege of Coron ends with the surrender and massacre of its garrison by the Venetians.
*1786 – Captain Francis Light establishes the British colony of Penang in Malaysia.
*1804 – Francis II assumes the title of first Emperor of Austria.
*1812 – Peninsular War: French troops engage British-Portuguese forces in the Battle of Majadahonda.
*1813 – In Colombia, Juan del Corral declares the independence of Antioquia.
*1858 – The Eiger in the Bernese Alps is ascended for the first time by Charles Barrington accompanied by Christian Almer and Peter Bohren.
*1871 – An explosion of guncotton occurs in Stowmarket, England, killing 28.
*1898 – Spanish–American War: American troops enter the city of Mayagüez, Puerto Rico.

===1901–present===
*1918 – World War I: The Battle of Amiens ends.
*1919 – Germany&#x27;s Weimar Constitution is signed into law.
*1920 – The 1920 Cork hunger strike begins which eventually results in the deaths of three Irish Republicans including the Lord Mayor of Cork Terence MacSwiney.
* 1920 – The Latvian–Soviet Peace Treaty, which relinquished Russia&#x27;s authority and pretenses to Latvia, is signed, ending the Latvian War of Independence.
*1929 – Babe Ruth becomes the first baseball player to hit 500 home runs in his career with a home run at League Park in Cleveland, Ohio.
*1934 – The first civilian prisoners arrive at the Federal prison on Alcatraz Island.
*1942 – Actress Hedy Lamarr and composer George Antheil receive a patent for a Frequency-hopping spread spectrum communication system that later became the basis for modern technologies in wireless telephones, two-way radio communications, and Wi-Fi.
*1945 – Poles in Kraków engage in a pogrom against Jews in the city, killing one and wounding five.
*1952 – Hussein bin Talal is proclaimed King of Jordan.
*1959 – Sheremetyevo International Airport, the second-largest airport in Russia, opens.
*1960 – Chad declares independence from France.
*1961 – The former Portuguese territories in India of Dadra and Nagar Haveli are merged to create the Union Territory Dadra and Nagar Haveli.
*1962 – Vostok 3 launches from the Baikonur Cosmodrome and cosmonaut Andrian Nikolayev becomes the first person to float in microgravity.
*1965 – Race riots (the Watts Riots) begin in the Watts area of Los Angeles, California.
*1969 – The Apollo 11 astronauts are released from a three-week quarantine following their liftoff from the Moon.
*1972 – Vietnam War: The last United States ground combat unit leaves South Vietnam.
*1973 – At the 1520 Sedgwick Avenue apartment building in The Bronx, New York, DJ Kool Herc hosts a house party widely considered to mark the birthplace of hip hop culture and music. DJ Kool Herc demonstrates a new technique of beat juggling and Coke La Rock performs a new style of vocal performance called rapping.
*1975 – East Timor: Governor Mário Lemos Pires of Portuguese Timor abandons the capital Dili, following a coup by the Timorese Democratic Union (UDT) and the outbreak of civil war between UDT and Fretilin.
*1979 – Two Aeroflot Tupolev Tu-134s collide over the Ukrainian city of Dniprodzerzhynsk and crash, killing all 178 aboard both airliners.
*1982 – A bomb explodes on Pan Am Flight 830, en route from Tokyo, Japan to Honolulu, Hawaii, killing one passenger and injuring 15 others.
*1984 – &quot;We begin bombing in five minutes&quot;: United States President Ronald Reagan, while running for re-election, jokes while preparing to make his weekly Saturday address on National Public Radio.
*1988 – A meeting between Sayyed Imam Al-Sharif, Osama bin Laden, Abdullah Yusuf Azzam, and leaders of Egyptian Islamic Jihad in Afghanistan culminates in the formation of Al-Qaeda.
*1991 – Nickelodeon&#x27;s first line of “Nicktoons” (Doug, Rugrats &amp; Ren &amp; Stimpy) premiere on the channel.
*1992 – The Mall of America in Bloomington, Minnesota opens. At the time the largest shopping mall in the United States.
*2000 – An air rage incident occurs on board Southwest Airlines Flight 1763 when 19-year-old Jonathan Burton attempts to storm the cockpit, but he is subdued by other passengers and dies from his injuries.
*2003 – NATO takes over command of the peacekeeping force in Afghanistan, marking its first major operation outside Europe in its 54-year-history.
* 2003 – Jemaah Islamiyah leader Riduan Isamuddin, better known as Hambali, is arrested in Bangkok, Thailand.
*2006 – The oil tanker MT &quot;Solar 1&quot; sinks off the coast of Guimaras and Negros Islands in the Philippines, causing the country&#x27;s worst oil spill.
*2012 – At least 306 people are killed and 3,000 others injured in a pair of earthquakes near Tabriz, Iran.
*2017 – At least 41 people are killed and another 179 injured after two passenger trains collide in Alexandria, Egypt.
*2023 – Luna 25 launches from the Vostochny Cosmodrome.

==Births==
===Pre-1600===
*1086 – Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor (d. 1125)
*1384 – Yolande of Aragon (d. 1442)
*1472 – Nikolaus von Schönberg, Catholic cardinal (d. 1537)
*1510 – Margaret Paleologa, Sovereign Marchioness of Montferrat (d. 1566)
===1601–1900===
*1673 – Richard Mead, English physician and astrologer (d. 1754)
*1718 – Frederick Haldimand, Swiss-English general and politician, 22nd Governor of Quebec (d. 1791)
*1722 – Richard Brocklesby, English physician (d. 1797)
*1748 – Joseph Schuster, German composer (d. 1812)
*1778 – Friedrich Ludwig Jahn, Prussian gymnast, educator, and politician (d. 1852)
*1794 – James B. Longacre, American engraver (d. 1869)
*1807 – David Rice Atchison, American general, lawyer, and politician (d. 1886)
*1808 – William W. Chapman, American lawyer and politician (d. 1892)
*1816 – Frederick Innes, Scottish-Australian politician, 9th Premier of Tasmania (d. 1882)
*1833 – Robert G. Ingersoll, American soldier, lawyer, and politician (d. 1899)
* 1833 – Kido Takayoshi, Japanese samurai and politician (d. 1877)
*1836 – Warren Brown, American historian and politician (d. 1919)
*1837 – Marie François Sadi Carnot, French engineer and politician, 4th President of the French Republic (d. 1894)
*1855 – John Hodges, Australian cricketer (d. 1933)
*1858 – Christiaan Eijkman, Dutch physician and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1930)
*1860 – Ottó Bláthy, Hungarian engineer and chess player (d. 1939)
*1870 – Tom Richardson, English cricketer (d. 1912)
*1874 – Princess Louise Charlotte of Saxe-Altenburg (d. 1953)
*1877 – Adolph M. Christianson, American lawyer and judge (d. 1954)
*1878 – Oliver W. F. Lodge, English poet and author (d. 1955)
*1881 – Aleksander Aberg, Estonian wrestler (d. 1920)
*1884 – Hermann Wlach, Austrian-Swiss actor (d. 1962)
*1885 – Stephen Butterworth, English physicist and engineer (d. 1958)
*1891 – Stancho Belkovski, Bulgarian architect and educator (d. 1962)
* 1891 – Edgar Zilsel, Austrian historian and philosopher of science, linked to the Vienna Circle (d. 1944)
*1892 – Hugh MacDiarmid, Scottish poet and linguist (d. 1978)
* 1892 – Eiji Yoshikawa, Japanese author (d. 1962)
*1897 – Enid Blyton, English author, poet, and educator (d. 1968)
* 1897 – Louise Bogan, American poet and critic (d. 1970)
*1898 – Peter Mohr Dam, Faroese educator and politician, 3rd Prime Minister of the Faroe Islands (d. 1968)
*1900 – Charley Paddock, American sprinter (d. 1943)
* 1900 – Philip Phillips, American archaeologist and scholar (d. 1994)
===1901–present===
*1902 – Alfredo Binda, Italian cyclist (d. 1986)
* 1902 – Lloyd Nolan, American actor (d. 1985)
* 1902 – Christian de Castries, French general (d. 1991) 
*1905 – Erwin Chargaff, Austrian-American biochemist and academic (d. 2002)
* 1905 – Ernst Jaakson, Estonian diplomat (d. 1998)
*1907 – Ted a&#x27;Beckett, Australian cricketer and lawyer (d. 1989)
*1908 – Don Freeman, American author and illustrator (d. 1978)
* 1908 – Torgny T:son Segerstedt, Swedish sociologist and philosopher (d. 1999)
*1909 – Yūji Koseki, Japanese composer (d. 1989)
* 1909 – Uku Masing, Estonian philosopher and theologian (d. 1985)
*1911 – Thanom Kittikachorn, Thai field marshal and politician, 10th Prime Minister of Thailand (d. 2004)
*1912 – Eva Ahnert-Rohlfs, German astronomer and academic (d. 1954)
* 1912 – Raphael Blau, American screenwriter and producer (d. 1996)
*1913 – Paul Dupuis, Canadian actor (d. 1976)
* 1913 – Bob Scheffing, American baseball player and manager (d. 1985)
* 1913 – Angus Wilson, English author and academic (d. 1991)
*1915 – Morris Weiss, American author and illustrator (d. 2014)
*1916 – Johnny Claes, English-Belgian race car driver and trumpet player (d. 1956)
*1919 – Luis Olmo, Puerto Rican-American baseball player and manager (d. 2017)
*1920 – Mike Douglas, American singer and talk show host (d. 2006)
* 1920 – Chuck Rayner, Canadian ice hockey player (d. 2002)
*1921 – Alex Haley, American historian and author (d. 1992)
*1922 – John &quot;Mule&quot; Miles, American baseball player (d. 2013)
*1923 – Stan Chambers, American journalist and actor (d. 2015)
*1925 – Floyd Curry, Canadian ice hockey player and manager (d. 2006)
* 1925 – Arlene Dahl, American actress, businesswoman and writer (d. 2021) 
*1926 – Aaron Klug, Lithuanian-English chemist and biophysicist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2018)
*1927 – Raymond Leppard, English harpsichord player and conductor (d. 2019)
* 1927 – Stuart Rosenberg, American director and producer (d. 2007)
*1932 – Fernando Arrabal, Spanish actor, director, and playwright
* 1932 – Izzy Asper, Canadian lawyer, businessman, and politician, founded Canwest (d. 2003)
* 1932 – Geoffrey Cass, English businessman
* 1932 – Peter Eisenman, American architect, designed the City of Culture of Galicia
* 1932 – John Gorrie, English director and screenwriter
*1933 – Jerry Falwell, American minister and television host (d. 2007)
* 1933 – Jerzy Grotowski, Polish director and producer (d. 1999)
* 1933 – Tamás Vásáry, Hungarian pianist and conductor
*1934 – Bob Hepple, South African lawyer and academic (d. 2015)
*1936 – Andre Dubus, American short story writer, essayist, and memoirist (d. 1999)
* 1936 – Bill Monbouquette, American baseball player and coach (d. 2015)
* 1936 – Jonathan Spence, English-American historian and academic (d. 2021)
*1937 – Anna Massey, English actress (d. 2011)
* 1937 – Patrick Joseph McGovern, American businessman, founded International Data Group (d. 2014)
*1939 – James Mancham, first President of Seychelles (d. 2017)
* 1939 – Ronnie Dawson, American singer and guitarist (d. 2003)
*1940 – Glenys Page, New Zealand cricketer (d. 2012)
*1941 – John Ellison, American-Canadian musician and songwriter 
*1942 – Mike Hugg, English drummer and keyboard player 
* 1942 – Otis Taylor, American football player (d. 2023)
*1943 – Jim Kale, Canadian bass player 
* 1943 – Pervez Musharraf, Pakistani general and politician, 10th President of Pakistan (d. 2023)
* 1943 – Denis Payton, English saxophonist (d. 2006)
*1944 – Martin Linton, Swedish-English journalist and politician
* 1944 – Frederick W. Smith, American businessman, founded FedEx
* 1944 – Ian McDiarmid, Scottish actor
*1946 – John Conlee, American singer-songwriter
* 1946 – Marilyn vos Savant, American journalist and author
*1947 – Theo de Jong, Dutch footballer, coach, and manager
* 1947 – Georgios Karatzaferis, Greek journalist and politician
* 1947 – Wilma van den Berg, Dutch sprinter
*1948 – Don Boyd, Scottish director, producer, and screenwriter
*1949 – Eric Carmen, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2024)
* 1949 – Tim Hutchinson, American lawyer and politician
* 1949 – Ian Charleson, Scottish-English actor and singer (d. 1990)
*1950 – Erik Brann, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2003)
* 1950 – Gennadiy Nikonov, Russian engineer, designed the AN-94 rifle (d. 2003)
* 1950 – Steve Wozniak, American computer scientist and programmer, co-founded Apple Inc.
*1952 – Reid Blackburn, American photographer (d. 1980)
* 1952 – Bob Mothersbaugh, American singer, guitarist, and producer 
*1953 – Hulk Hogan, American wrestler 
* 1953 – Wijda Mazereeuw, Dutch swimmer
*1954 – Bryan Bassett, American guitarist 
* 1954 – Vance Heafner, American golfer and coach (d. 2012)
* 1954 – Joe Jackson, English singer-songwriter and musician
* 1954 – Tarmo Rüütli, Estonian footballer, coach, and manager
* 1954 – Yashpal Sharma, Indian cricketer and umpire (d. 2021)
*1955 – Marc Bureau, Canadian politician, 16th Mayor of Gatineau
* 1955 – Sylvia Hermon, Northern Irish academic and politician
*1956 – Pierre-Louis Lions, French mathematician and academic
*1957 – Ian Stuart Donaldson, English singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 1993)
*1957 – Masayoshi Son, Japanese technology entrepreneur and investor
*1958 – Steven Pokere, New Zealand rugby player
* 1958 – Jah Wobble, English singer-songwriter and bass player 
*1959 – Gustavo Cerati, Argentinian singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer (d. 2014)
* 1959 – Yoshiaki Murakami, Japanese businessman
* 1959 – Taraki Sivaram, Sri Lankan journalist and author (d. 2005)
* 1959 – Richard Scudamore, English businessman
* 1959 – László Szlávics, Jr., Hungarian sculptor
*1961 – David Brooks, American journalist and author
* 1961 – Craig Ehlo, American basketball player and coach
* 1961 – Suniel Shetty, Indian actor and film producer
*1962 – Brian Azzarello, American author
* 1962 – Charles Cecil, English video game designer and co-founded Revolution Software
* 1962 – John Micklethwait, English journalist and author
* 1962 – Rob Minkoff, American director and producer
*1963 – Hiromi Makihara, Japanese baseball player
*1964 – Jim Lee, South Korean-American author and illustrator 
* 1964 – Grant Waite, New Zealand golfer
*1965 – Marc Bergevin, Canadian ice hockey player and manager
* 1965 – Embeth Davidtz, American actress
* 1965 – Viola Davis, American actress 
*1966 – Nigel Martyn, English footballer and coach
* 1966 – Juan María Solare, Argentinian pianist and composer
*1967 – Massimiliano Allegri, Italian footballer and manager
* 1967 – Enrique Bunbury, Spanish singer-songwriter and guitarist 
* 1967 – Joe Rogan, American actor, comedian, and television host
* 1967 – Petter Wettre, Norwegian saxophonist and composer
*1968 – Anna Gunn, American actress
* 1968 – Sophie Okonedo, British actress
* 1968 – Charlie Sexton, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
*1970 – Dirk Hannemann, German footballer and manager
* 1970 – Gianluca Pessotto, Italian footballer 
*1971 – Alejandra Barros, Mexican actress and screenwriter
* 1971 – Tommy Mooney, English footballer
*1973 – Kristin Armstrong, American cyclist
*1974 – Marie-France Dubreuil, Canadian figure skater
* 1974 – Hadiqa Kiani, Pakistani singer, songwriter and philanthropist 
* 1974 – Audrey Mestre, French biologist and diver (d. 2002)
* 1974 – Carolyn Murphy, American model and actress
*1975 – Chris Cummings, Canadian singer-songwriter
*1976 – Iván Córdoba, Colombian footballer and manager
* 1976 – Bubba Crosby, American baseball player
* 1976 – Will Friedle, American actor and screenwriter
* 1976 – Ben Gibbard, American singer-songwriter and guitarist 
* 1976 – Ľubomír Višňovský, Slovak ice hockey player
*1977 – Gemma Hayes, Irish singer-songwriter
* 1977 – Dênio Martins, Brazilian footballer
*1978 – Spyros Gogolos, Greek footballer
* 1978 – Charlotte Leslie, British politician
* 1978 – Lillian Nakate, Ugandan politician
* 1978 – Isy Suttie, English comedian, musician, actress, and writer
*1979 – Walter Ayoví, Ecuadorian footballer
*1980 – Daniel Lloyd, English cyclist and sportscaster
* 1980 – Lee Suggs, American football player
*1981 – Daniel Poohl, Swedish journalist
*1982 – Andy Lee, American football player
*1983 – Chris Hemsworth, Australian actor
* 1983 – Luke Lewis, Australian rugby league player
* 1983 – Pavel 183, Russian painter (d. 2013)
*1984 – Mojtaba Abedini, Iranian Olympic fencer
* 1984 – Melky Cabrera, Dominican baseball player
* 1984 – Lucas di Grassi, Brazilian race car driver
*1985 – Jacqueline Fernandez, Bahraini–Sri Lankan actress
* 1985 – Asher Roth, American rapper
*1986 – Mokhtar Benmoussa, Algerian footballer
* 1986 – Hélène Defrance, French sailor
* 1986 – Pablo Sandoval, Venezuelan baseball player
*1987 – Dany N&#x27;Guessan, French footballer
* 1987 – Drew Storen, American baseball player
*1988 – Rabeh Al-Hussaini, Filipino basketball player
* 1988 – Patty Mills, Australian basketball player
* 1988 – Mustafa Pektemek, Turkish footballer
*1989 – Junior Heffernan, Irish cyclist and triathlete (d. 2013)
* 1989 – Sebastian Huke, German footballer
*1990 – Lenka Juríková, Slovak tennis player
*1991 – Cristian Tello, Spanish footballer
*1992 – Tomi Lahren, American conservative political commentator
*1993 – Alyson Stoner, American actor, singer, and dancer
*1994 – Storm Sanders, Australian tennis player
* 1994 – Anton Cooper, New Zealand cross-country cyclist
* 1994 – Joseph Barbato, French footballer
* 1994 – Song I-han, South Korean singer
* 1995 – Brad Binder, South African motorcycle racer
*1997 – Sarah Clelland, Scottish footballer
*1999 – Gregoria Mariska Tunjung, Indonesian badminton player
* 1999 – Changbin, South Korean rapper
*2001 – Moyuka Uchijima, Japanese tennis player
*2002 – Marvin Harrison Jr., American football player
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 223 – Jia Xu, Chinese politician and strategist (b. 147)
* 353 – Magnentius, Roman usurper (b. 303)
* 449 – Archbishop Flavian of Constantinople
* 632 – Rusticula, abbess of Arles
* 919 – Dhuka al-Rumi, Abbasid governor of Egypt
* 979 – Gero, Count of Alsleben
* 991 – Byrhtnoth, English soldier (b. 956)
*1044 – Sokkate, king of the Pagan dynasty of Burma (b. 1001)
*1204 – Guttorm of Norway (b. 1199)
*1253 – Clare of Assisi, Italian follower of Francis of Assisi (b. 1194)
*1259 – Möngke Khan, Mongolian emperor (b. 1208)
*1268 – Agnes of Faucigny, Dame ruler of Faucigny, Countess consort of Savoy 
*1332 – Domhnall II, Earl of Mar
* 1332 – Robert II Keith, Marischal of Scotland
* 1332 – Thomas Randolph, 2nd Earl of Moray
* 1332 – Murdoch III, Earl of Menteith
* 1332 – Robert Bruce, Lord of Liddesdale
*1456 – John Hunyadi, Hungarian general and politician (b. 1387)
*1464 – Nicholas of Cusa, German cardinal and mystic (b. 1401)
*1465 – Kettil Karlsson, regent of Sweden and Bishop of Linköping (b. 1433)
*1486 – William Waynflete, English Lord Chancellor and bishop of Winchester (b. c. 1398)
*1494 – Hans Memling, German-Belgian painter (b. 1430)
*1519 – Johann Tetzel, German preacher (b. 1465)
*1556 – John Bell, English bishop
*1563 – Bartolomé de Escobedo, Spanish composer and educator (b. 1500)
*1578 – Pedro Nunes, Portuguese mathematician and academic (b. 1502)
*1596 – Hamnet Shakespeare, son of William Shakespeare (b. 1585)
===1601–1900===
*1614 – Lavinia Fontana, Italian painter (b. 1552)
*1656 – Ottavio Piccolomini, Austrian-Italian field marshal (b. 1599)
*1725 – Prince Vittorio Amedeo Theodore of Savoy (b. 1723)
*1774 – Charles-François Tiphaigne de la Roche, French physician and author (b. 1722)
*1813 – Henry James Pye, English poet and politician (b. 1745)
*1851 – Lorenz Oken, German botanist, biologist, and ornithologist (b. 1779)
*1854 – Macedonio Melloni, Italian physicist and academic (b. 1798)
*1868 – Halfdan Kjerulf, Norwegian pianist and composer (b. 1815)
*1886 – Lydia Koidula, Estonian poet and playwright (b. 1843)
*1890 – John Henry Newman, English cardinal and theologian (b. 1801)
*1892 – Enrico Betti, Italian mathematician and academic (b. 1813)
===1901–present===
*1903 – Eugenio María de Hostos, Puerto Rican-American sociologist, philosopher, and lawyer (b. 1839)
*1908 – Khudiram Bose, Indian Bengali revolutionary (b. 1889)
*1919 – Andrew Carnegie, Scottish-American businessman and philanthropist, founded the Carnegie Steel Company and Carnegie Hall (b. 1835)
*1921 – Mary Sumner, English philanthropist, founded the Mothers&#x27; Union (b. 1828)
*1936 – Blas Infante, Spanish historian and politician (b. 1885)
*1937 – Edith Wharton, American novelist and short story writer (b. 1862)
*1939 – Jean Bugatti, German-Italian engineer (b. 1909)
* 1939 – Siegfried Flesch, Austrian fencer (b. 1872)
*1945 – Stefan Jaracz, Polish actor and theater producer (b. 1883) 
*1953 – Tazio Nuvolari, Italian race car driver and motorcycle racer (b. 1892)
*1956 – Jackson Pollock, American painter (b. 1912)
*1961 – Antanas Škėma, Lithuanian-American author, playwright, actor, and director (b. 1910)
*1963 – Otto Wahle, Austrian-American swimmer and coach (b. 1879)
*1965 – Bill Woodfull, Australian cricketer and educator (b. 1897)
*1969 – Miriam Licette, English soprano and educator (b. 1885)
*1972 – Max Theiler, South African-American virologist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1899)
*1974 – Vicente Emilio Sojo, Venezuelan conductor and composer (b. 1887)
*1977 – Frederic Calland Williams, British co-inventor of the Williams-Kilborn tube, used for memory in early computer systems (b. 1911)
*1978 – Berta Ruck, Indian-born Welsh romance novelist (b. 1878)
*1979 – J. G. Farrell, English author (b. 1935)
*1980 – Paul Robert, French lexicographer and publisher (b. 1910)
*1982 – Tom Drake, American actor and singer (b. 1918)
*1984 – Alfred A. Knopf Sr., American publisher, founded Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. (b. 1892)
* 1984 – Paul Felix Schmidt, Estonian–American chemist and chess player (b. 1916)
*1986 – János Drapál, Hungarian motorcycle racer (b. 1948)
*1988 – Anne Ramsey, American actress (b. 1929)
*1989 – John Meillon, Australian actor (b. 1934)
*1991 – J. D. McDuffie, American race car driver (b. 1938)
*1994 – Peter Cushing, English actor (b. 1913)
*1995 – Phil Harris, American singer-songwriter and actor (b. 1904)
*1996 – Rafael Kubelík, Czech conductor and composer (b. 1914)
* 1996 – Ambrosio Padilla, Filipino basketball player and politician (b. 1910)
*2000 – Jean Papineau-Couture, Canadian composer and academic (b. 1916)
*2001 – Percy Stallard, English cyclist and coach (b. 1909)
*2002 – Galen Rowell, American photographer and mountaineer (b. 1940)
*2003 – Armand Borel, Swiss-American mathematician and academic (b. 1923)
* 2003 – Herb Brooks, American ice hockey player and coach (b. 1937)
*2006 – Mike Douglas, American singer and talk show host (b. 1920)
*2008 – George Furth, American actor and playwright (b. 1932)
* 2008 – Dursun Karataş, founding leader of the Revolutionary People&#x27;s Liberation Party–Front (DHKP-C) in Turkey (b. 1952)
*2009 – Eunice Kennedy Shriver, American activist, founded the Special Olympics (b. 1921)
*2010 – James Mourilyan Tanner, British paediatric endocrinologist (b. 1920)
*2012 – Red Bastien, American wrestler, trainer, and promoter (b. 1931)
* 2012 – Michael Dokes, American boxer (b. 1958)
* 2012 – Lucy Gallardo, Argentinian-Mexican actress and screenwriter (b. 1929)
*2013 – Raymond Delisle, French cyclist (b. 1943)
* 2013 – Zafar Futehally, Indian ornithologist and author (b. 1919)
* 2013 – David Howard, English ballet dancer and educator (b. 1937)
*2014 – Vladimir Beara, Croatian footballer and manager (b. 1928)
* 2014 – Raymond Gravel, Canadian priest and politician (b. 1952)
* 2014 – Kika Szaszkiewiczowa, Polish author and blogger (b. 1917)
* 2014 – Robin Williams, American actor and comedian (b. 1951)
*2015 – Serge Collot, French viola player and educator (b. 1923)
* 2015 – Harald Nielsen, Danish footballer and manager (b. 1941)
* 2015 – Richard Oriani, Salvadoran-American metallurgist and engineer (b. 1920)
*2017 – Yisrael Kristal, Polish-Israeli supercentenarian; oldest living Holocaust survivor and one of the ten oldest men ever (b. 1903)
* 2017 – Segun Bucknor, Nigerian musician and journalist (b. 1946)
*2018 – V S Naipaul, British writer, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1932)
*2019 – Sergio Obeso Rivera, Mexican Roman Catholic cardinal (b. 1931)
*2020 – Trini Lopez, American singer and guitarist (b. 1937)
* 2020 – Sumner Redstone, American billionaire businessman (b. 1923)
*2022 – Anne Heche, American actress (b. 1969)
* 2022 – Hanae Mori, Japanese fashion designer (b. 1926)
*2023 – Mike Ahern, Australian politician, 32nd Premier of Queensland (b. 1942)
*2024 – Ángel Salazar, Cuban-American comedian and actor (b. 1956)
*2024 – Noël Treanor, Irish Roman Catholic prelate (b. 1950)
==Holidays and observances==
* Christian Feast Day:
** Athracht
** Clare of Assisi
** Gaugericus
** John Henry Newman (Church of England)
** Philomena
** Susanna
** Taurinus of Évreux
** Tiburtius and Chromatius
** August 11 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
* Flag Day (Pakistan)
* Independence Day, celebrates the independence of Chad from France in 1960.
* Mountain Day (Japan)

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225179" start="27" end="34" title="32nd century BC" label="3114 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q767358" start="41" end="73" title="Mesoamerican Long Count calendar" label="Mesoamerican Long Count calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="91" end="104" title="Pre-Columbian era" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="105" end="116" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="145" end="149" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q191744" start="160" end="167" title="25th century BC" label="2492 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894617" start="204" end="207" title="Bel (mythology)" label="Bel"/>
<link wikidata="Q785620" start="211" end="215" title="Hayk" label="Hayk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="247" end="255" title="Armenians" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30941" start="265" end="268" title="AD 106" label="106"/>
<link wikidata="Q173082" start="297" end="302" title="Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="311" end="318" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="330" end="344" title="Roman province" label="Roman province"/>
<link wikidata="Q971609" start="346" end="357" title="Roman Dacia" label="Roman Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24444" start="360" end="363" title="AD 117" label="117"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="366" end="373" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="388" end="401" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="418" end="424" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33588" start="441" end="444" title="355" label="355"/>
<link wikidata="Q187489" start="447" end="464" title="Claudius Silvanus" label="Claudius Silvanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="504" end="517" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46418" start="526" end="540" title="Constantius II" label="Constantius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q31879" start="544" end="547" title="490" label="490"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="570" end="575" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="582" end="601" title="Theodoric the Great" label="Theodoric the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q110884" start="615" end="624" title="Alaric II" label="Alaric II"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="646" end="653" title="Odoacer" label="Odoacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q63109" start="661" end="671" title="Adda River, Italy" label="Adda River"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="678" end="683" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30108" start="687" end="690" title="923" label="923"/>
<link wikidata="Q138803" start="697" end="707" title="Qarmatians" label="Qarmatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165357" start="711" end="718" title="Bahrayn (historical region)" label="Bahrayn"/>
<link wikidata="Q111868130" start="719" end="738" title="Sack of Basra (923)" label="capture and pillage"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="751" end="756" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742" start="759" end="763" title="1315" label="1315"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988505" start="770" end="792" title="Great Famine of 1315–1317" label="Great Famine of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6001" start="901" end="905" title="1332" label="1332"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368240" start="908" end="937" title="Wars of Scottish Independence" label="Wars of Scottish Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q281648" start="939" end="961" title="Battle of Dupplin Moor" label="Battle of Dupplin Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237391" start="975" end="999" title="Domhnall II, Earl of Mar" label="Domhnall II, Earl of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q471796" start="1014" end="1028" title="Edward Balliol" label="Edward Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594" start="1031" end="1035" title="1473" label="1473"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007212" start="1042" end="1061" title="Battle of Otlukbeli" label="Battle of Otlukbeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="1063" end="1083" title="Mehmed the Conqueror" label="Mehmed the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1091" end="1105" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q374468" start="1125" end="1136" title="Uzun Hassan" label="Uzun Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q555994" start="1140" end="1150" title="Aq Qoyunlu" label="Aq Qoyunlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679" start="1153" end="1157" title="1492" label="1492"/>
<link wikidata="Q108316" start="1236" end="1253" title="Pope Alexander VI" label="Pope Alexander VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624" start="1272" end="1276" title="1675" label="1675"/>
<link wikidata="Q646322" start="1279" end="1295" title="Franco-Dutch War" label="Franco-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1311" end="1328" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1340" end="1346" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q542191" start="1354" end="1377" title="Battle of Konzer Brücke" label="Battle of Konzer Brücke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660" start="1380" end="1384" title="1685" label="1685"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309409" start="1387" end="1397" title="Morean War" label="Morean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q126902909" start="1410" end="1424" title="Siege of Coron (1685)" label="Siege of Coron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760" start="1497" end="1501" title="1786" label="1786"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481747" start="1512" end="1525" title="Francis Light" label="Francis Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="1560" end="1566" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1570" end="1578" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894" start="1581" end="1585" title="1804" label="1804"/>
<link wikidata="Q130834" start="1588" end="1598" title="Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Francis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q166877" start="1626" end="1644" title="Emperor of Austria" label="Emperor of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933" start="1647" end="1651" title="1812" label="1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="1654" end="1668" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1691" end="1698" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="1699" end="1709" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871641" start="1724" end="1745" title="Battle of Majadahonda" label="Battle of Majadahonda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937" start="1748" end="1752" title="1813" label="1813"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="1758" end="1766" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q123304" start="1813" end="1822" title="Antioquia Department" label="Antioquia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684" start="1825" end="1829" title="1858" label="1858"/>
<link wikidata="Q4425" start="1836" end="1841" title="Eiger" label="Eiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q327221" start="1849" end="1861" title="Bernese Alps" label="Bernese Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063669" start="1896" end="1914" title="Charles Barrington (mountaineer)" label="Charles Barrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q123762" start="1930" end="1945" title="Christian Almer" label="Christian Almer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074013" start="1950" end="1962" title="Peter Bohren" label="Peter Bohren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746" start="1965" end="1969" title="1871" label="1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q17045412" start="1975" end="2018" title="Stowmarket Guncotton Explosion" label="explosion of guncotton occurs in Stowmarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848" start="2042" end="2046" title="1898" label="1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="2049" end="2069" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q632727" start="2105" end="2126" title="Mayagüez, Puerto Rico" label="Mayagüez, Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="2149" end="2153" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2156" end="2167" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q911448" start="2173" end="2189" title="Battle of Amiens (1918)" label="Battle of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="2197" end="2201" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q156003" start="2219" end="2238" title="Weimar Constitution" label="Weimar Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="2260" end="2264" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q110128800" start="2271" end="2294" title="1920 Cork hunger strike" label="1920 Cork hunger strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="2350" end="2367" title="Irish republicanism" label="Irish Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398423" start="2401" end="2418" title="Terence MacSwiney" label="Terence MacSwiney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377536" start="2433" end="2460" title="Latvian–Soviet Peace Treaty" label="Latvian–Soviet Peace Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="2481" end="2487" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="2522" end="2528" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q543042" start="2552" end="2579" title="Latvian War of Independence" label="Latvian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="2582" end="2586" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="2589" end="2598" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="2617" end="2625" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851515" start="2640" end="2643" title="500 home run club" label="500"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="2644" end="2652" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q870897" start="2687" end="2698" title="League Park" label="League Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="2702" end="2717" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="2720" end="2724" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142661" start="2770" end="2784" title="Alcatraz Federal Penitentiary" label="Federal prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q131354" start="2788" end="2803" title="Alcatraz Island" label="Alcatraz Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="2806" end="2810" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q49034" start="2821" end="2832" title="Hedy Lamarr" label="Hedy Lamarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q137739" start="2846" end="2860" title="George Antheil" label="George Antheil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136013" start="2884" end="2917" title="Frequency-hopping spread spectrum" label="Frequency-hopping spread spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="3049" end="3054" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="3057" end="3061" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="3073" end="3079" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814824" start="3090" end="3098" title="Kraków pogrom" label="a pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="3157" end="3161" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q146906" start="3164" end="3181" title="Hussein of Jordan" label="Hussein bin Talal"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="3204" end="3210" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="3213" end="3217" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q192733" start="3220" end="3254" title="Sheremetyevo International Airport" label="Sheremetyevo International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="3302" end="3306" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="3309" end="3313" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="3350" end="3354" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3394" end="3399" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760659" start="3403" end="3408" title="Dadra DNH" label="Dadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4253766" start="3413" end="3425" title="Nagar Haveli DNH" label="Nagar Haveli"/>
<link wikidata="Q467745" start="3451" end="3466" title="Union Territory" label="Union Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q46107" start="3467" end="3489" title="Dadra and Nagar Haveli" label="Dadra and Nagar Haveli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="3492" end="3496" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878176" start="3499" end="3507" title="Vostok 3" label="Vostok 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q177477" start="3526" end="3545" title="Baikonur Cosmodrome" label="Baikonur Cosmodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q312474" start="3560" end="3577" title="Andrian Nikolayev" label="Andrian Nikolayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299309" start="3615" end="3627" title="Micro-g environment" label="microgravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="3630" end="3634" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q377682" start="3653" end="3664" title="Watts Riots" label="Watts Riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687279" start="3679" end="3684" title="Watts, Los Angeles" label="Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="3693" end="3716" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="3719" end="3723" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="3730" end="3739" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q182899" start="3782" end="3792" title="quarantine" label="quarantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="3833" end="3837" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="3840" end="3851" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="3902" end="3915" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="3918" end="3922" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550268" start="3932" end="3952" title="1520 Sedgwick Avenue" label="1520 Sedgwick Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="3975" end="3984" title="The Bronx" label="The Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q458787" start="3996" end="4008" title="DJ Kool Herc" label="DJ Kool Herc"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="4073" end="4080" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876977" start="4145" end="4158" title="beat juggling" label="beat juggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088952" start="4163" end="4175" title="Coke La Rock" label="Coke La Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="4225" end="4232" title="rapping" label="rapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="4235" end="4239" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="4242" end="4252" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388489" start="4263" end="4280" title="Mário Lemos Pires" label="Mário Lemos Pires"/>
<link wikidata="Q142965" start="4284" end="4300" title="Portuguese Timor" label="Portuguese Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9310" start="4322" end="4326" title="Dili" label="Dili"/>
<link wikidata="Q948124" start="4352" end="4377" title="Timorese Democratic Union" label="Timorese Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q935996" start="4430" end="4438" title="Fretilin" label="Fretilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="4441" end="4445" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q58707" start="4452" end="4460" title="Aeroflot" label="Aeroflot"/>
<link wikidata="Q159067" start="4461" end="4475" title="Tupolev Tu-134" label="Tupolev Tu-134"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375128" start="4477" end="4484" title="1979 Dniprodzerzhynsk mid-air collision" label="collide"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="4494" end="4503" title="Ukraine" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q156719" start="4512" end="4528" title="Kamianske" label="Dniprodzerzhynsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="4580" end="4584" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129575" start="4606" end="4623" title="Pan Am Flight 830" label="Pan Am Flight 830"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="4639" end="4651" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="4655" end="4671" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu, Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="4720" end="4724" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380261" start="4733" end="4765" title="We begin bombing in five minutes" label="We begin bombing in five minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="4773" end="4796" title="President of the United States" label="United States President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="4797" end="4810" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="4904" end="4925" title="NPR" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="4928" end="4932" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474755" start="4953" end="4974" title="Sayyed Imam Al-Sharif" label="Sayyed Imam Al-Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="4976" end="4991" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q307613" start="4993" end="5013" title="Abdullah Yusuf Azzam" label="Abdullah Yusuf Azzam"/>
<link wikidata="Q310214" start="5030" end="5052" title="Egyptian Islamic Jihad" label="Egyptian Islamic Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="5056" end="5067" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="5099" end="5107" title="Al-Qaeda" label="Al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="5110" end="5114" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q154958" start="5117" end="5128" title="Nickelodeon" label="Nickelodeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117110" start="5151" end="5160" title="Nicktoons" label="Nicktoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251705" start="5163" end="5167" title="Doug (TV series)" label="Doug"/>
<link wikidata="Q304290" start="5169" end="5176" title="Rugrats" label="Rugrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361124" start="5183" end="5199" title="The Ren &amp;amp; Stimpy Show" label="Ren &amp;amp; Stimpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="5227" end="5231" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q659219" start="5238" end="5253" title="Mall of America" label="Mall of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="5348" end="5352" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698365" start="5358" end="5366" title="air rage" label="air rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571208" start="5392" end="5422" title="Southwest Airlines Flight 1763" label="Southwest Airlines Flight 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="5554" end="5558" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="5561" end="5565" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="5592" end="5610" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="peacekeeping force"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="5614" end="5625" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="5669" end="5675" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q506245" start="5709" end="5725" title="Jemaah Islamiyah" label="Jemaah Islamiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126352" start="5733" end="5749" title="Riduan Isamuddin" label="Riduan Isamuddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="5791" end="5798" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="5800" end="5808" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="5811" end="5815" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="5822" end="5832" title="oil tanker" label="oil tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q13810" start="5879" end="5887" title="Guimaras" label="Guimaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q212777" start="5892" end="5898" title="Negros (island)" label="Negros"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="5914" end="5925" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298348" start="5954" end="5969" title="Guimaras oil spill" label="worst oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="5972" end="5976" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066174" start="6038" end="6059" title="2012 East Azerbaijan earthquakes" label="a pair of earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q80053" start="6065" end="6077" title="Tabriz" label="Tabriz, Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="6080" end="6084" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q36111293" start="6168" end="6175" title="Alexandria train collision" label="collide"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="6179" end="6189" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="6191" end="6196" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q49622" start="6199" end="6203" title="2023" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042357" start="6206" end="6213" title="Luna 25" label="Luna 25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166191" start="6232" end="6252" title="Vostochny Cosmodrome" label="Vostochny Cosmodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q19460" start="6282" end="6286" title="1086" label="1086"/>
<link wikidata="Q151707" start="6289" end="6316" title="Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347" start="6328" end="6332" title="1384" label="1384"/>
<link wikidata="Q235174" start="6335" end="6352" title="Yolande of Aragon" label="Yolande of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589" start="6364" end="6368" title="1472" label="1472"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361165" start="6371" end="6393" title="Nikolaus von Schönberg" label="Nikolaus von Schönberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6182" start="6424" end="6428" title="1510" label="1510"/>
<link wikidata="Q891777" start="6431" end="6449" title="Margaret Paleologa" label="Margaret Paleologa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617" start="6514" end="6518" title="1673" label="1673"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888733" start="6521" end="6533" title="Richard Mead" label="Richard Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899" start="6579" end="6583" title="1718" label="1718"/>
<link wikidata="Q116367" start="6586" end="6605" title="Frederick Haldimand" label="Frederick Haldimand"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982387" start="6650" end="6668" title="Governor of Quebec" label="Governor of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918" start="6680" end="6684" title="1722" label="1722"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324354" start="6687" end="6705" title="Richard Brocklesby" label="Richard Brocklesby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600" start="6736" end="6740" title="1748" label="1748"/>
<link wikidata="Q551505" start="6743" end="6758" title="Joseph Schuster (composer)" label="Joseph Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713" start="6787" end="6791" title="1778" label="1778"/>
<link wikidata="Q77098" start="6794" end="6815" title="Friedrich Ludwig Jahn" label="Friedrich Ludwig Jahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811" start="6871" end="6875" title="1794" label="1794"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806459" start="6878" end="6895" title="James B. Longacre" label="James B. Longacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909" start="6926" end="6930" title="1807" label="1807"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176322" start="6933" end="6952" title="David Rice Atchison" label="David Rice Atchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914" start="7006" end="7010" title="1808" label="1808"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415304" start="7013" end="7031" title="William W. Chapman" label="William W. Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953" start="7075" end="7079" title="1816" label="1816"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498094" start="7082" end="7097" title="Frederick Innes" label="Frederick Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527933" start="7135" end="7154" title="Premier of Tasmania" label="Premier of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587" start="7166" end="7170" title="1833" label="1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q469882" start="7173" end="7192" title="Robert G. Ingersoll" label="Robert G. Ingersoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q696402" start="7254" end="7268" title="Kido Takayoshi" label="Kido Takayoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601" start="7313" end="7317" title="1836" label="1836"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970078" start="7320" end="7332" title="Warren Brown (politician)" label="Warren Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608" start="7379" end="7383" title="1837" label="1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q215778" start="7386" end="7412" title="Marie François Sadi Carnot" label="Marie François Sadi Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="7450" end="7482" title="President of the French Republic" label="President of the French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673" start="7494" end="7498" title="1855" label="1855"/>
<link wikidata="Q13639661" start="7501" end="7512" title="John Hodges (cricketer)" label="John Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684" start="7546" end="7550" title="1858" label="1858"/>
<link wikidata="Q107609" start="7553" end="7571" title="Christiaan Eijkman" label="Christiaan Eijkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="7603" end="7614" title="Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691" start="7635" end="7639" title="1860" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q384387" start="7642" end="7653" title="Ottó Bláthy" label="Ottó Bláthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741" start="7702" end="7706" title="1870" label="1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526303" start="7709" end="7723" title="Tom Richardson (cricketer)" label="Tom Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761" start="7754" end="7758" title="1874" label="1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q658061" start="7761" end="7804" title="Princess Louise Charlotte of Saxe-Altenburg" label="Princess Louise Charlotte of Saxe-Altenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773" start="7816" end="7820" title="1877" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684375" start="7823" end="7845" title="Adolph M. Christianson" label="Adolph M. Christianson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776" start="7884" end="7888" title="1878" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087913" start="7891" end="7909" title="Oliver W. F. Lodge" label="Oliver W. F. Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808" start="7946" end="7950" title="1881" label="1881"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714915" start="7953" end="7969" title="Aleksander Aberg" label="Aleksander Aberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819" start="8000" end="8004" title="1884" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q87394" start="8007" end="8020" title="Hermann Wlach" label="Hermann Wlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821" start="8054" end="8058" title="1885" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q248229" start="8061" end="8080" title="Stephen Butterworth" label="Stephen Butterworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="8124" end="8128" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598026" start="8131" end="8148" title="Stancho Belkovski" label="Stancho Belkovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q85508" start="8202" end="8214" title="Edgar Zilsel" label="Edgar Zilsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839" start="8302" end="8306" title="1892" label="1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q981981" start="8309" end="8324" title="Hugh MacDiarmid" label="Hugh MacDiarmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q221957" start="8372" end="8386" title="Eiji Yoshikawa" label="Eiji Yoshikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847" start="8415" end="8419" title="1897" label="1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q192069" start="8422" end="8433" title="Enid Blyton" label="Enid Blyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q516180" start="8489" end="8501" title="Louise Bogan" label="Louise Bogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848" start="8539" end="8543" title="1898" label="1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q74077" start="8546" end="8560" title="Peter Mohr Dam" label="Peter Mohr Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000921" start="8599" end="8634" title="Prime Minister of the Faroe Islands" label="Prime Minister of the Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="8646" end="8650" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q347256" start="8653" end="8668" title="Charley Paddock" label="Charley Paddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184211" start="8707" end="8722" title="Philip Phillips (archaeologist)" label="Philip Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="8789" end="8793" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q318051" start="8796" end="8809" title="Alfredo Binda" label="Alfredo Binda"/>
<link wikidata="Q280666" start="8846" end="8857" title="Lloyd Nolan" label="Lloyd Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q710667" start="8893" end="8914" title="Christian de Castries" label="Christian de Castries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047" start="8943" end="8947" title="1905" label="1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q455944" start="8950" end="8964" title="Erwin Chargaff" label="Erwin Chargaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358852" start="9027" end="9040" title="Ernst Jaakson" label="Ernst Jaakson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048" start="9071" end="9075" title="1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q738312" start="9078" end="9096" title="Ted a&amp;#x27;Beckett" label="Ted a&amp;#x27;Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="9141" end="9145" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292635" start="9148" end="9159" title="Don Freeman" label="Don Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9212" end="9235" title="Torgny T:son Segerstedt" label="Torgny T:son Segerstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="9284" end="9288" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574303" start="9291" end="9302" title="Yūji Koseki" label="Yūji Koseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q594450" start="9341" end="9351" title="Uku Masing" label="Uku Masing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076" start="9400" end="9404" title="1911" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q439990" start="9407" end="9426" title="Thanom Kittikachorn" label="Thanom Kittikachorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12376089" start="9468" end="9494" title="Prime Minister of Thailand" label="Prime Minister of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="9506" end="9510" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q77747" start="9513" end="9530" title="Eva Ahnert-Rohlfs" label="Eva Ahnert-Rohlfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293941" start="9582" end="9594" title="Raphael Blau" label="Raphael Blau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="9642" end="9646" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371137" start="9649" end="9660" title="Paul Dupuis" label="Paul Dupuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16011363" start="9696" end="9709" title="Bob Scheffing" label="Bob Scheffing"/>
<link wikidata="Q287460" start="9767" end="9779" title="Angus Wilson" label="Angus Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="9820" end="9824" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q81879" start="9827" end="9839" title="Morris Weiss" label="Morris Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="9884" end="9888" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q171889" start="9891" end="9903" title="Johnny Claes" label="Johnny Claes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="9967" end="9971" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q6700944" start="9974" end="9983" title="Luis Olmo" label="Luis Olmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="10046" end="10050" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386707" start="10053" end="10065" title="Mike Douglas" label="Mike Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q730897" start="10121" end="10133" title="Chuck Rayner" label="Chuck Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="10173" end="10177" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q296069" start="10180" end="10190" title="Alex Haley" label="Alex Haley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="10233" end="10237" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217403" start="10240" end="10267" title="John &amp;quot;Mule&amp;quot; Miles" label="John &amp;quot;Mule&amp;quot; Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="10305" end="10309" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597585" start="10312" end="10325" title="Stan Chambers" label="Stan Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="10368" end="10372" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q949053" start="10375" end="10386" title="Floyd Curry" label="Floyd Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q447879" start="10446" end="10457" title="Arlene Dahl" label="Arlene Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="10514" end="10518" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q190626" start="10521" end="10531" title="Aaron Klug" label="Aaron Klug"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="10578" end="10589" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="10610" end="10614" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q720702" start="10617" end="10632" title="Raymond Leppard" label="Raymond Leppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q81982" start="10642" end="10653" title="harpsichord" label="harpsichord"/>
<link wikidata="Q966078" start="10694" end="10710" title="Stuart Rosenberg" label="Stuart Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="10754" end="10758" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q309768" start="10761" end="10777" title="Fernando Arrabal" label="Fernando Arrabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155643" start="10828" end="10838" title="Izzy Asper" label="Izzy Asper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031818" start="10894" end="10901" title="Canwest" label="Canwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534502" start="10921" end="10934" title="Geoffrey Cass" label="Geoffrey Cass"/>
<link wikidata="Q317164" start="10965" end="10979" title="Peter Eisenman" label="Peter Eisenman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290192" start="11014" end="11040" title="City of Culture of Galicia" label="City of Culture of Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181616" start="11050" end="11061" title="John Gorrie (director)" label="John Gorrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="11098" end="11102" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q313896" start="11105" end="11118" title="Jerry Falwell" label="Jerry Falwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q332618" start="11177" end="11192" title="Jerzy Grotowski" label="Jerzy Grotowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q961302" start="11242" end="11254" title="Tamás Vásáry" label="Tamás Vásáry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="11289" end="11293" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932765" start="11296" end="11306" title="Bob Hepple" label="Bob Hepple"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="11353" end="11357" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q493118" start="11360" end="11371" title="Andre Dubus" label="Andre Dubus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910219" start="11445" end="11462" title="Bill Monbouquette" label="Bill Monbouquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q932820" start="11518" end="11533" title="Jonathan Spence" label="Jonathan Spence"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="11586" end="11590" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q270049" start="11593" end="11604" title="Anna Massey" label="Anna Massey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821884" start="11641" end="11664" title="Patrick Joseph McGovern" label="Patrick Joseph McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360149" start="11696" end="11720" title="International Data Group" label="International Data Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="11732" end="11736" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q362948" start="11739" end="11752" title="James Mancham" label="James Mancham"/>
<link wikidata="Q378039" start="11760" end="11783" title="President of Seychelles" label="President of Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166000" start="11803" end="11816" title="Ronnie Dawson (musician)" label="Ronnie Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="11859" end="11863" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q28131438" start="11866" end="11877" title="Glenys Page" label="Glenys Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="11912" end="11916" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231684" start="11919" end="11931" title="John Ellison" label="John Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="11977" end="11981" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847343" start="11984" end="11993" title="Mike Hugg" label="Mike Hugg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108832" start="12041" end="12052" title="Otis Taylor (American football)" label="Otis Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="12090" end="12094" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024743" start="12097" end="12105" title="Jim Kale" label="Jim Kale"/>
<link wikidata="Q40495" start="12138" end="12154" title="Pervez Musharraf" label="Pervez Musharraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q473984" start="12195" end="12216" title="President of Pakistan" label="President of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141454" start="12236" end="12248" title="Denis Payton" label="Denis Payton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="12281" end="12285" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245634" start="12288" end="12301" title="Martin Linton" label="Martin Linton"/>
<link wikidata="Q324086" start="12354" end="12372" title="Frederick W. Smith" label="Frederick W. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q459477" start="12404" end="12409" title="FedEx" label="FedEx"/>
<link wikidata="Q315495" start="12419" end="12432" title="Ian McDiarmid" label="Ian McDiarmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="12450" end="12454" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112038" start="12457" end="12468" title="John Conlee" label="John Conlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q234122" start="12506" end="12524" title="Marilyn vos Savant" label="Marilyn vos Savant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="12558" end="12562" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192044" start="12565" end="12577" title="Theo de Jong" label="Theo de Jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q738466" start="12625" end="12646" title="Georgios Karatzaferis" label="Georgios Karatzaferis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211607" start="12689" end="12707" title="Wilma van den Berg" label="Wilma van den Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="12725" end="12729" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292304" start="12732" end="12740" title="Don Boyd" label="Don Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="12789" end="12793" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q437551" start="12796" end="12807" title="Eric Carmen" label="Eric Carmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q454439" start="12869" end="12883" title="Tim Hutchinson" label="Tim Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q981993" start="12925" end="12938" title="Ian Charleson" label="Ian Charleson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="12985" end="12989" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153562" start="12992" end="13002" title="Erik Brann" label="Erik Brann"/>
<link wikidata="Q834038" start="13064" end="13080" title="Gennadiy Nikonov" label="Gennadiy Nikonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q295513" start="13113" end="13124" title="AN-94" label="AN-94 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q483382" start="13144" end="13157" title="Steve Wozniak" label="Steve Wozniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="13214" end="13224" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="13226" end="13230" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068540" start="13233" end="13247" title="Reid Blackburn" label="Reid Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933461" start="13290" end="13306" title="Bob Mothersbaugh" label="Bob Mothersbaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="13351" end="13355" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="13358" end="13368" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804541" start="13398" end="13413" title="Wijda Mazereeuw" label="Wijda Mazereeuw"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="13430" end="13434" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979976" start="13437" end="13450" title="Bryan Bassett" label="Bryan Bassett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914034" start="13481" end="13494" title="Vance Heafner" label="Vance Heafner"/>
<link wikidata="Q962103" start="13541" end="13552" title="Joe Jackson (musician)" label="Joe Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579433" start="13602" end="13614" title="Tarmo Rüütli" label="Tarmo Rüütli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527549" start="13665" end="13679" title="Yashpal Sharma (cricketer)" label="Yashpal Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="13720" end="13724" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287862" start="13727" end="13738" title="Marc Bureau (politician)" label="Marc Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q56071331" start="13766" end="13783" title="Mayor of Gatineau" label="Mayor of Gatineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q676383" start="13793" end="13806" title="Sylvia Hermon" label="Sylvia Hermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="13848" end="13852" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q334030" start="13855" end="13873" title="Pierre-Louis Lions" label="Pierre-Louis Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="13910" end="13914" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q185468" start="13917" end="13937" title="Ian Stuart Donaldson" label="Ian Stuart Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q717038" start="13997" end="14010" title="Masayoshi Son" label="Masayoshi Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="14059" end="14063" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499261" start="14066" end="14079" title="Steven Pokere" label="Steven Pokere"/>
<link wikidata="Q287933" start="14115" end="14125" title="Jah Wobble" label="Jah Wobble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="14171" end="14175" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q533284" start="14178" end="14192" title="Gustavo Cerati" label="Gustavo Cerati"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055978" start="14268" end="14285" title="Yoshiaki Murakami" label="Yoshiaki Murakami"/>
<link wikidata="Q771588" start="14317" end="14331" title="Taraki Sivaram" label="Taraki Sivaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328944" start="14385" end="14402" title="Richard Scudamore" label="Richard Scudamore"/>
<link wikidata="Q772951" start="14433" end="14453" title="László Szlávics, Jr." label="László Szlávics, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="14475" end="14479" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q938475" start="14482" end="14494" title="David Brooks (journalist)" label="David Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520223" start="14536" end="14546" title="Craig Ehlo" label="Craig Ehlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q983043" start="14594" end="14607" title="Suniel Shetty" label="Suniel Shetty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="14641" end="14645" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q849595" start="14648" end="14663" title="Brian Azzarello" label="Brian Azzarello"/>
<link wikidata="Q983594" start="14690" end="14703" title="Charles Cecil" label="Charles Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060066" start="14748" end="14767" title="Revolution Software" label="Revolution Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248692" start="14777" end="14794" title="John Micklethwait" label="John Micklethwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151111" start="14835" end="14846" title="Rob Minkoff" label="Rob Minkoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="14880" end="14884" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q208921" start="14887" end="14902" title="Hiromi Makihara" label="Hiromi Makihara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="14930" end="14934" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q357776" start="14937" end="14944" title="Jim Lee" label="Jim Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596573" start="15001" end="15012" title="Grant Waite" label="Grant Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="15034" end="15038" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q980115" start="15041" end="15054" title="Marc Bergevin" label="Marc Bergevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q260622" start="15104" end="15118" title="Embeth Davidtz" label="Embeth Davidtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q229181" start="15146" end="15157" title="Viola Davis" label="Viola Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="15178" end="15182" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q291022" start="15185" end="15197" title="Nigel Martyn" label="Nigel Martyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q566338" start="15237" end="15254" title="Juan María Solare" label="Juan María Solare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="15290" end="15294" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q354529" start="15297" end="15317" title="Massimiliano Allegri" label="Massimiliano Allegri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344002" start="15359" end="15374" title="Enrique Bunbury" label="Enrique Bunbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718421" start="15426" end="15435" title="Joe Rogan" label="Joe Rogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q434361" start="15492" end="15505" title="Petter Wettre" label="Petter Wettre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="15543" end="15547" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q271050" start="15550" end="15559" title="Anna Gunn" label="Anna Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q238864" start="15587" end="15601" title="Sophie Okonedo" label="Sophie Okonedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q933169" start="15628" end="15642" title="Charlie Sexton" label="Charlie Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="15686" end="15690" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227870" start="15693" end="15707" title="Dirk Hannemann" label="Dirk Hannemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q319543" start="15748" end="15765" title="Gianluca Pessotto" label="Gianluca Pessotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="15788" end="15792" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299691" start="15795" end="15811" title="Alejandra Barros" label="Alejandra Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q10543" start="15855" end="15867" title="Tommy Mooney" label="Tommy Mooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="15889" end="15893" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q236193" start="15896" end="15913" title="Kristin Armstrong" label="Kristin Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="15933" end="15937" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q446162" start="15940" end="15961" title="Marie-France Dubreuil" label="Marie-France Dubreuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696243" start="15995" end="16007" title="Hadiqa Kiani" label="Hadiqa Kiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q469836" start="16067" end="16080" title="Audrey Mestre" label="Audrey Mestre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557751" start="16128" end="16142" title="Carolyn Murphy" label="Carolyn Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="16172" end="16176" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106321" start="16179" end="16193" title="Chris Cummings" label="Chris Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="16223" end="16227" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q231348" start="16230" end="16242" title="Iván Córdoba" label="Iván Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982155" start="16286" end="16298" title="Bubba Crosby" label="Bubba Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056174" start="16334" end="16346" title="Will Friedle" label="Will Friedle"/>
<link wikidata="Q816502" start="16389" end="16400" title="Ben Gibbard" label="Ben Gibbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q345018" start="16453" end="16470" title="Ľubomír Višňovský" label="Ľubomír Višňovský"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="16498" end="16502" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q273220" start="16505" end="16516" title="Gemma Hayes" label="Gemma Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320295" start="16551" end="16564" title="Dênio Martins" label="Dênio Martins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="16588" end="16592" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581796" start="16595" end="16609" title="Spyros Gogolos" label="Spyros Gogolos"/>
<link wikidata="Q749793" start="16637" end="16653" title="Charlotte Leslie" label="Charlotte Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q44231567" start="16683" end="16697" title="Lillian Nakate" label="Lillian Nakate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089554" start="16727" end="16737" title="Isy Suttie" label="Isy Suttie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="16788" end="16792" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562953" start="16795" end="16807" title="Walter Ayoví" label="Walter Ayoví"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="16832" end="16836" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161597" start="16839" end="16851" title="Daniel Lloyd (cyclist)" label="Daniel Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515177" start="16895" end="16904" title="Lee Suggs" label="Lee Suggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="16932" end="16936" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162191" start="16939" end="16951" title="Daniel Poohl" label="Daniel Poohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="16973" end="16977" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085910" start="16980" end="16988" title="Andy Lee (American football)" label="Andy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="17016" end="17020" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q54314" start="17023" end="17038" title="Chris Hemsworth" label="Chris Hemsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267093" start="17066" end="17076" title="Luke Lewis" label="Luke Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155556" start="17118" end="17127" title="Pavel 183" label="Pavel 183"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="17156" end="17160" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442652" start="17163" end="17178" title="Mojtaba Abedini" label="Mojtaba Abedini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733440" start="17212" end="17225" title="Melky Cabrera" label="Melky Cabrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q172783" start="17262" end="17277" title="Lucas di Grassi" label="Lucas di Grassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="17306" end="17310" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312801" start="17313" end="17333" title="Jacqueline Fernandez" label="Jacqueline Fernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q469756" start="17372" end="17382" title="Asher Roth" label="Asher Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="17401" end="17405" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823256" start="17408" end="17425" title="Mokhtar Benmoussa" label="Mokhtar Benmoussa"/>
<link wikidata="Q23796166" start="17456" end="17471" title="Hélène Defrance" label="Hélène Defrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190237" start="17496" end="17510" title="Pablo Sandoval" label="Pablo Sandoval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="17540" end="17544" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081418" start="17547" end="17566" title="Dany N&amp;#x27;Guessan" label="Dany N&amp;#x27;Guessan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087986" start="17595" end="17606" title="Drew Storen" label="Drew Storen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="17634" end="17638" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278666" start="17641" end="17658" title="Rabeh Al-Hussaini" label="Rabeh Al-Hussaini"/>
<link wikidata="Q952921" start="17696" end="17707" title="Patty Mills" label="Patty Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q977098" start="17747" end="17763" title="Mustafa Pektemek" label="Mustafa Pektemek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="17785" end="17789" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993072" start="17792" end="17808" title="Junior Heffernan" label="Junior Heffernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561681" start="17858" end="17872" title="Sebastian Huke" label="Sebastian Huke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="17893" end="17897" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522678" start="17900" end="17914" title="Lenka Juríková" label="Lenka Juríková"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="17938" end="17942" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q54055" start="17945" end="17959" title="Cristian Tello" label="Cristian Tello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="17981" end="17985" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711172" start="17988" end="17999" title="Tomi Lahren" label="Tomi Lahren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="18046" end="18050" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q229263" start="18053" end="18066" title="Alyson Stoner" label="Alyson Stoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="18104" end="18108" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620174" start="18111" end="18124" title="Storm Sanders" label="Storm Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775714" start="18160" end="18172" title="Anton Cooper" label="Anton Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q27873" start="18217" end="18231" title="Joseph Barbato" label="Joseph Barbato"/>
<link wikidata="Q110115403" start="18260" end="18270" title="Song I-han" label="Song I-han"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="18294" end="18298" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643470" start="18301" end="18312" title="Brad Binder" label="Brad Binder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="18346" end="18350" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q23771970" start="18353" end="18367" title="Sarah Clelland" label="Sarah Clelland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="18390" end="18394" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q20852575" start="18397" end="18421" title="Gregoria Mariska Tunjung" label="Gregoria Mariska Tunjung"/>
<link wikidata="Q61100669" start="18460" end="18468" title="Changbin (rapper)" label="Changbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="18491" end="18495" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q56651209" start="18498" end="18513" title="Moyuka Uchijima" label="Moyuka Uchijima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="18539" end="18543" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q112063616" start="18546" end="18565" title="Marvin Harrison Jr." label="Marvin Harrison Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q31243" start="18620" end="18623" title="223" label="223"/>
<link wikidata="Q559700" start="18626" end="18632" title="Jia Xu" label="Jia Xu"/>
<link wikidata="Q32275" start="18679" end="18682" title="353" label="353"/>
<link wikidata="Q212876" start="18685" end="18695" title="Magnentius" label="Magnentius"/>
<link wikidata="Q32330" start="18722" end="18725" title="449" label="449"/>
<link wikidata="Q509569" start="18728" end="18764" title="Archbishop Flavian of Constantinople" label="Archbishop Flavian of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q23887" start="18767" end="18770" title="632" label="632"/>
<link wikidata="Q11946423" start="18773" end="18782" title="Rusticula" label="Rusticula"/>
<link wikidata="Q23787" start="18802" end="18805" title="919" label="919"/>
<link wikidata="Q19664085" start="18808" end="18821" title="Dhuka al-Rumi" label="Dhuka al-Rumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23784" start="18851" end="18854" title="979" label="979"/>
<link wikidata="Q24971249" start="18857" end="18880" title="Gero, Count of Alsleben" label="Gero, Count of Alsleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q24097" start="18883" end="18886" title="991" label="991"/>
<link wikidata="Q583761" start="18889" end="18898" title="Byrhtnoth" label="Byrhtnoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19349" start="18926" end="18930" title="1044" label="1044"/>
<link wikidata="Q10976993" start="18933" end="18940" title="Sokkate" label="Sokkate"/>
<link wikidata="Q888574" start="18954" end="18967" title="Pagan dynasty" label="Pagan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228" start="18988" end="18992" title="1204" label="1204"/>
<link wikidata="Q455378" start="18995" end="19012" title="Guttorm of Norway" label="Guttorm of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498" start="19024" end="19028" title="1253" label="1253"/>
<link wikidata="Q191107" start="19031" end="19046" title="Clare of Assisi" label="Clare of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q676555" start="19068" end="19085" title="Francis of Assisi" label="Francis of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507" start="19097" end="19101" title="1259" label="1259"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521" start="19104" end="19115" title="Möngke Khan" label="Möngke Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520" start="19146" end="19150" title="1268" label="1268"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693147" start="19153" end="19170" title="Agnes of Faucigny" label="Agnes of Faucigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q6001" start="19224" end="19228" title="1332" label="1332"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237391" start="19231" end="19255" title="Domhnall II, Earl of Mar" label="Domhnall II, Earl of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345780" start="19265" end="19303" title="Robert II Keith, Marischal of Scotland" label="Robert II Keith, Marischal of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426674" start="19313" end="19347" title="Thomas Randolph, 2nd Earl of Moray" label="Thomas Randolph, 2nd Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933197" start="19357" end="19386" title="Murdoch III, Earl of Menteith" label="Murdoch III, Earl of Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342440" start="19396" end="19408" title="Robert Bruce (bastard)" label="Robert Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517" start="19430" end="19434" title="1456" label="1456"/>
<link wikidata="Q242688" start="19437" end="19449" title="John Hunyadi" label="John Hunyadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552" start="19495" end="19499" title="1464" label="1464"/>
<link wikidata="Q154751" start="19502" end="19518" title="Nicholas of Cusa" label="Nicholas of Cusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556" start="19558" end="19562" title="1465" label="1465"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415965" start="19565" end="19580" title="Kettil Karlsson (Vasa)" label="Kettil Karlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646" start="19634" end="19638" title="1486" label="1486"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581024" start="19641" end="19658" title="William Waynflete" label="William Waynflete"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693" start="19723" end="19727" title="1494" label="1494"/>
<link wikidata="Q106851" start="19730" end="19742" title="Hans Memling" label="Hans Memling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6278" start="19778" end="19782" title="1519" label="1519"/>
<link wikidata="Q76873" start="19785" end="19798" title="Johann Tetzel" label="Johann Tetzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590" start="19827" end="19831" title="1556" label="1556"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205408" start="19834" end="19843" title="John Bell (bishop of Worcester)" label="John Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629" start="19861" end="19865" title="1563" label="1563"/>
<link wikidata="Q769837" start="19868" end="19889" title="Bartolomé de Escobedo" label="Bartolomé de Escobedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707" start="19932" end="19936" title="1578" label="1578"/>
<link wikidata="Q435718" start="19939" end="19950" title="Pedro Nunes" label="Pedro Nunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785" start="20001" end="20005" title="1596" label="1596"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312807" start="20008" end="20026" title="Hamnet Shakespeare" label="Hamnet Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781" start="20082" end="20086" title="1614" label="1614"/>
<link wikidata="Q236050" start="20089" end="20104" title="Lavinia Fontana" label="Lavinia Fontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982" start="20133" end="20137" title="1656" label="1656"/>
<link wikidata="Q697963" start="20140" end="20159" title="Ottavio Piccolomini" label="Ottavio Piccolomini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932" start="20203" end="20207" title="1725" label="1725"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859619" start="20210" end="20250" title="Prince Vittorio Amedeo Theodore of Savoy" label="Prince Vittorio Amedeo Theodore of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697" start="20262" end="20266" title="1774" label="1774"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958070" start="20269" end="20307" title="Charles-François Tiphaigne de la Roche" label="Charles-François Tiphaigne de la Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937" start="20348" end="20352" title="1813" label="1813"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679953" start="20355" end="20370" title="Henry James Pye" label="Henry James Pye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656" start="20411" end="20415" title="1851" label="1851"/>
<link wikidata="Q55069834" start="20418" end="20429" title="Lorenz Oken" label="Lorenz Oken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670" start="20488" end="20492" title="1854" label="1854"/>
<link wikidata="Q451305" start="20495" end="20512" title="Macedonio Melloni" label="Macedonio Melloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717" start="20556" end="20560" title="1868" label="1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q740077" start="20563" end="20578" title="Halfdan Kjerulf" label="Halfdan Kjerulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822" start="20622" end="20626" title="1886" label="1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q237056" start="20629" end="20642" title="Lydia Koidula" label="Lydia Koidula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832" start="20684" end="20688" title="1890" label="1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q44490" start="20691" end="20708" title="John Henry Newman" label="John Henry Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839" start="20753" end="20757" title="1892" label="1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q250920" start="20760" end="20772" title="Enrico Betti" label="Enrico Betti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="20839" end="20843" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543841" start="20846" end="20869" title="Eugenio María de Hostos" label="Eugenio María de Hostos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="20941" end="20945" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642110" start="20948" end="20961" title="Khudiram Bose" label="Khudiram Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="21003" end="21007" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="21010" end="21025" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442802" start="21089" end="21111" title="Carnegie Steel Company" label="Carnegie Steel Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="21116" end="21129" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="21141" end="21145" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780796" start="21148" end="21159" title="Mary Sumner" label="Mary Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917548" start="21197" end="21216" title="Mothers&amp;#x27; Union" label="Mothers&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="21228" end="21232" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q560588" start="21235" end="21247" title="Blas Infante" label="Blas Infante"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="21293" end="21297" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q276032" start="21300" end="21313" title="Edith Wharton" label="Edith Wharton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="21367" end="21371" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685402" start="21374" end="21386" title="Jean Bugatti" label="Jean Bugatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q696832" start="21431" end="21447" title="Siegfried Flesch" label="Siegfried Flesch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="21476" end="21480" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622841" start="21483" end="21496" title="Stefan Jaracz" label="Stefan Jaracz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="21544" end="21548" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q174277" start="21551" end="21565" title="Tazio Nuvolari" label="Tazio Nuvolari"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="21623" end="21627" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q37571" start="21630" end="21645" title="Jackson Pollock" label="Jackson Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="21675" end="21679" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770956" start="21682" end="21695" title="Antanas Škėma" label="Antanas Škėma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="21768" end="21772" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q650142" start="21775" end="21785" title="Otto Wahle" label="Otto Wahle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="21834" end="21838" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q784331" start="21841" end="21854" title="Bill Woodfull" label="Bill Woodfull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="21901" end="21905" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873360" start="21908" end="21922" title="Miriam Licette" label="Miriam Licette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="21964" end="21968" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q46928" start="21971" end="21982" title="Max Theiler" label="Max Theiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="22032" end="22043" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="22064" end="22068" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521948" start="22071" end="22090" title="Vicente Emilio Sojo" label="Vicente Emilio Sojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="22137" end="22141" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q238798" start="22144" end="22169" title="Frederic Calland Williams" label="Frederic Calland Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424528" start="22198" end="22219" title="Williams tube" label="Williams-Kilborn tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="22274" end="22278" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q289990" start="22281" end="22291" title="Berta Ruck" label="Berta Ruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="22339" end="22343" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q542763" start="22346" end="22359" title="J. G. Farrell" label="J. G. Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="22387" end="22391" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372117" start="22394" end="22405" title="Paul Robert (lexicographer)" label="Paul Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="22453" end="22457" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q552848" start="22460" end="22469" title="Tom Drake" label="Tom Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="22508" end="22512" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q61108" start="22515" end="22534" title="Alfred A. Knopf Sr." label="Alfred A. Knopf Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1431868" start="22564" end="22585" title="Alfred A. Knopf" label="Alfred A. Knopf, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q73034" start="22605" end="22623" title="Paul Felix Schmidt" label="Paul Felix Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="22679" end="22683" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q831130" start="22686" end="22698" title="János Drapál" label="János Drapál"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="22738" end="22742" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q234083" start="22745" end="22756" title="Anne Ramsey" label="Anne Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="22786" end="22790" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q441661" start="22793" end="22805" title="John Meillon" label="John Meillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="22835" end="22839" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105290" start="22842" end="22856" title="J. D. McDuffie" label="J. D. McDuffie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="22894" end="22898" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q309589" start="22901" end="22914" title="Peter Cushing" label="Peter Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="22941" end="22945" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q596717" start="22948" end="22959" title="Phil Harris" label="Phil Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="23009" end="23013" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q158017" start="23016" end="23030" title="Rafael Kubelík" label="Rafael Kubelík"/>
<link wikidata="Q459516" start="23080" end="23096" title="Ambrosio Padilla" label="Ambrosio Padilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="23151" end="23155" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q773049" start="23158" end="23179" title="Jean Papineau-Couture" label="Jean Papineau-Couture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="23223" end="23227" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167591" start="23230" end="23244" title="Percy Stallard" label="Percy Stallard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="23283" end="23287" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094569" start="23290" end="23302" title="Galen Rowell" label="Galen Rowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="23353" end="23357" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q123474" start="23360" end="23372" title="Armand Borel" label="Armand Borel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390562" start="23435" end="23446" title="Herb Brooks" label="Herb Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="23496" end="23500" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386707" start="23503" end="23515" title="Mike Douglas" label="Mike Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="23563" end="23567" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383628" start="23570" end="23582" title="George Furth" label="George Furth"/>
<link wikidata="Q224870" start="23633" end="23647" title="Dursun Karataş" label="Dursun Karataş"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="23753" end="23757" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q272908" start="23760" end="23782" title="Eunice Kennedy Shriver" label="Eunice Kennedy Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043220" start="23815" end="23831" title="Special Olympics" label="Special Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="23843" end="23847" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q366436" start="23850" end="23872" title="James Mourilyan Tanner" label="James Mourilyan Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="23920" end="23924" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937460" start="23927" end="23938" title="Red Bastien" label="Red Bastien"/>
<link wikidata="Q961948" start="24000" end="24013" title="Michael Dokes" label="Michael Dokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698324" start="24049" end="24062" title="Lucy Gallardo" label="Lucy Gallardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="24120" end="24124" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q572943" start="24127" end="24142" title="Raymond Delisle" label="Raymond Delisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064224" start="24178" end="24193" title="Zafar Futehally" label="Zafar Futehally"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993094" start="24246" end="24258" title="David Howard (ballet teacher)" label="David Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="24306" end="24310" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q703632" start="24313" end="24327" title="Vladimir Beara" label="Vladimir Beara"/>
<link wikidata="Q353550" start="24380" end="24394" title="Raymond Gravel" label="Raymond Gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6068797" start="24446" end="24466" title="Kika Szaszkiewiczowa" label="Kika Szaszkiewiczowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83338" start="24513" end="24527" title="Robin Williams" label="Robin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="24568" end="24572" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479254" start="24575" end="24587" title="Serge Collot" label="Serge Collot"/>
<link wikidata="Q923271" start="24641" end="24655" title="Harald Nielsen" label="Harald Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328189" start="24706" end="24720" title="Richard Oriani" label="Richard Oriani"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="24779" end="24783" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q22302045" start="24786" end="24801" title="Yisrael Kristal" label="Yisrael Kristal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28408135" start="24923" end="24936" title="Segun Bucknor" label="Segun Bucknor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="24982" end="24986" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q44593" start="24989" end="25000" title="V S Naipaul" label="V S Naipaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="25018" end="25029" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q25274" start="25050" end="25054" title="2019" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648367" start="25057" end="25076" title="Sergio Obeso Rivera" label="Sergio Obeso Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="25121" end="25125" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q540134" start="25128" end="25139" title="Trini Lopez" label="Trini Lopez"/>
<link wikidata="Q725940" start="25190" end="25205" title="Sumner Redstone" label="Sumner Redstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="25251" end="25255" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q234610" start="25258" end="25268" title="Anne Heche" label="Anne Heche"/>
<link wikidata="Q755465" start="25306" end="25316" title="Hanae Mori" label="Hanae Mori"/>
<link wikidata="Q49622" start="25355" end="25359" title="2023" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313187" start="25362" end="25372" title="Mike Ahern (Australian politician)" label="Mike Ahern"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526082" start="25402" end="25423" title="Premier of Queensland" label="Premier of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="25435" end="25439" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076901" start="25442" end="25455" title="Ángel Salazar" label="Ángel Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484545" start="25509" end="25521" title="Noël Treanor" label="Noël Treanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="25603" end="25612" title="Calendar of saints" label="Feast Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072290" start="25617" end="25625" title="Athracht" label="Athracht"/>
<link wikidata="Q191107" start="25629" end="25644" title="Clare of Assisi" label="Clare of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q585739" start="25648" end="25658" title="Gaugericus" label="Gaugericus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44490" start="25662" end="25679" title="John Henry Newman" label="John Henry Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="25681" end="25698" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q466428" start="25703" end="25712" title="Philomena" label="Philomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q272987" start="25716" end="25723" title="Saint Susanna" label="Susanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516180" start="25727" end="25745" title="Saint Taurinus" label="Taurinus of Évreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330524" start="25749" end="25773" title="Saint Tiburtius" label="Tiburtius and Chromatius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820491" start="25777" end="25815" title="August 11 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="August 11 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916333" start="25818" end="25826" title="Flag Day" label="Flag Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="25828" end="25836" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4788791" start="25840" end="25856" title="List of national independence days" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="25889" end="25893" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="25899" end="25905" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996756" start="25917" end="25929" title="Mountain Day" label="Mountain Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="25931" end="25936" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2193" wikidata="Q673699" url="?curid=2193" title="Arcology">
<text>Arcology, a portmanteau of &quot;architecture&quot; and &quot;ecology&quot;, is a field of creating architectural design principles for very densely populated and ecologically low-impact human habitats. 

The term was coined in 1969 by architect Paolo Soleri, who believed that a completed arcology would provide space for a variety of residential, commercial, and agricultural facilities while minimizing individual human environmental impact. These structures have been largely hypothetical, as no large-scale arcology has yet been built.

The concept has been promoted by various science fiction writers. Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle provided a detailed description of an arcology in their 1981 novel &quot;Oath of Fealty&quot;. William Gibson popularized the term in his seminal 1984 cyberpunk novel &quot;Neuromancer&quot;, where each corporation has its own self-contained city known as an arcology. More recently, authors such as Peter Hamilton in &quot;Neutronium Alchemist&quot; and Paolo Bacigalupi in &quot;The Water Knife&quot; explicitly used arcologies as part of their scenarios. They are often portrayed as self-contained or economically self-sufficient.

==Development==

An arcology is distinguished from a merely large building in that it is designed to lessen the impact of human habitation on any given ecosystem. It could be self-sustainable, employing all or most of its own available resources for a comfortable life: power, climate control, food production, air and water conservation and purification, sewage treatment, etc. An arcology is designed to make it possible to supply those items for a large population. An arcology would supply and maintain its own municipal or urban infrastructures in order to operate and connect with other urban environments apart from its own.

Arcologies were proposed in order to reduce human impact on natural resources. Arcology designs might apply conventional building and civil engineering techniques in very large, but practical projects in order to achieve pedestrian economies of scale that have proven, post-automobile, to be difficult to achieve in other ways.

Frank Lloyd Wright proposed an early version called Broadacre City although, in contrast to an arcology, his idea is comparatively two-dimensional and depends on a road network. Wright&#x27;s plan described transportation, agriculture, and commerce systems that would support an economy. Critics said that Wright&#x27;s solution failed to account for population growth, and assumed a more rigid democracy than the US actually has.
Buckminster Fuller proposed the Old Man River&#x27;s City project, a domed city with a capacity of 125,000, as a solution to the housing problems in East St. Louis, Illinois.

Paolo Soleri proposed later solutions, and coined the term &quot;arcology&quot;. Soleri describes ways of compacting city structures in three dimensions to combat two-dimensional urban sprawl, to economize on transportation and other energy uses. Like Wright, Soleri proposed changes in transportation, agriculture, and commerce. Soleri explored reductions in resource consumption and duplication, land reclamation; he also proposed to eliminate most private transportation. He advocated for greater &quot;frugality&quot; and favored greater use of shared social resources, including public transit (and public libraries).

==Similar real-world projects==
Arcosanti is an experimental &quot;arcology prototype&quot;, a demonstration project under construction in central Arizona since 1970. Designed by Paolo Soleri, its primary purpose is to demonstrate Soleri&#x27;s personal designs, his application of principles of arcology to create a pedestrian-friendly urban form.

Many cities in the world have proposed projects adhering to the design principles of the arcology concept, like Tokyo, and Dongtan near Shanghai. The Dongtan project may have collapsed, and it failed to open for the Shanghai World Expo in 2010. The Ihme-Zentrum in Hanover was an attempt to build a &quot;city within a city&quot;.
McMurdo Station of the United States Antarctic Program and other scientific research stations on Antarctica resemble the popular conception of an arcology as a technologically advanced, relatively self-sufficient human community. The Antarctic research base provides living and entertainment amenities for roughly 3,000 staff who visit each year. Its remoteness and the measures needed to protect its population from the harsh environment give it an insular character. The station is not self-sufficientthe U.S. military delivers 30,000,000 liters (8,000,000 US gal) of fuel and of supplies and equipment yearly through its Operation Deep Freeze resupply effortbut it is isolated from conventional support networks. Under international treaty, it must avoid damage to the surrounding ecosystem.

Begich Towers operates like a small-scale arcology encompassing nearly all of the population of Whittier, Alaska. The building contains residential housing as well as a police station, grocery, and municipal offices.
Whittier once boasted a second structure known as the Buckner Building. The Buckner Building still stands but was deemed unfit for habitation after the 1969 earthquake.

The Line was planned as a long and wide linear smart city in Saudi Arabia in Neom, Tabuk Province, designed to have no cars, streets or carbon emissions. The Line is planned to be the first development in Neom, a $500 billion project. The city&#x27;s plans anticipated a population of 9 million. Excavation work had started along the entire length of the project by October 2022. However, the project was scaled down in 2024 to long, housing 300,000 people.

==In popular culture==
Most proposals to build real arcologies have failed due to financial, structural or conceptual shortcomings. Arcologies are therefore found primarily in fictional works.

* In Robert Silverberg&#x27;s &quot;The World Inside&quot;, most of the global population of 75 billion live inside giant skyscrapers, called &quot;urbmons&quot;, each of which contains hundreds of thousands of people. The urbmons are arranged in &quot;constellations&quot;. Each urbmon is divided into &quot;neighborhoods&quot; of 40 or so floors. All the needs of the inhabitants are provided inside the building – food is grown outside and brought into the building – so the idea of going outside is heretical and can be a sign of madness. The book examines human life when the population density is extremely high.
* Another significant example is the 1981 novel &quot;Oath of Fealty&quot; by Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle, in which a segment of the population of Los Angeles has moved into an arcology. The plot examines the social changes that result, both inside and outside the arcology. Thus the arcology is not just a plot device but a subject of critique.
* In the city-building video game &quot;SimCity 2000&quot;, self-contained arcologies can be built, reducing the infrastructure needs of the city.
* The isometric, cyberpunk themed action roleplay game &quot;The Ascent &quot; takes place in a futuristic dystopian version of an arcology on the alien world Velesand prominently uses the structure and its levels to flesh out progression in the game, starting you in the bottom levels of the sewers with the ultimate goal of reaching the top of the structure to leave the city.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==References==
Notes
Further reading
* Soleri, Paolo. &quot;Arcology: The City in the Image of Man&quot;. 1969: Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT Press.

==External links==

* &quot;Arcology: The City in the Image of Man&quot; by Paolo Soleri (full text online)
* Arcology.com – useful links
* &quot;The Night Land&quot; by William Hope Hodgson (full text online)
* Victory City
* A discussion of arcology concepts
* What is an Arcology?

Usage of &quot;arcology&quot; vs. &quot;hyperstructure&quot;
* Arcology.com (&quot;An arcology in southern China&quot; on front page)
* Arcology (&quot;An arcology is a self-contained environment...&quot;)
* SculptorsWiki: Arcology (&quot;The only arcology yet on Earth...&quot;)
* Review of Shadowrun: Renraku Arcology (&quot;What&#x27;s an arcology? A self-contained, largely self-sufficient living, working, recreational structure...&quot;)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q673699" start="0" end="8" title="Arcology" label="Arcology"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="12" end="23" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="33" end="45" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="62" end="69" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="163" end="186" title="Sustainable development" label="ecologically low-impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q447351" start="246" end="258" title="Paolo Soleri" label="Paolo Soleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144359" start="423" end="443" title="environmental impact" label="environmental impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="583" end="598" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q316610" start="608" end="619" title="Larry Niven" label="Larry Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q578031" start="624" end="639" title="Jerry Pournelle" label="Jerry Pournelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074477" start="713" end="727" title="Oath of Fealty (novel)" label="Oath of Fealty"/>
<link wikidata="Q188987" start="735" end="749" title="William Gibson" label="William Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="791" end="800" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q662029" start="813" end="824" title="Neuromancer" label="Neuromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q455495" start="940" end="954" title="Peter F. Hamilton" label="Peter Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3201692" start="964" end="984" title="The Neutronium Alchemist" label="Neutronium Alchemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q26116" start="995" end="1011" title="Paolo Bacigalupi" label="Paolo Bacigalupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720831" start="1021" end="1036" title="The Water Knife" label="The Water Knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q309070" start="1144" end="1172" title="Autarky" label="economically self-sufficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="1287" end="1313" title="Human impact on the environment" label="impact of human habitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="1327" end="1336" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="2040" end="2058" title="economies of scale" label="economies of scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="2137" end="2155" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q922000" start="2189" end="2203" title="Broadacre City" label="Broadacre City"/>
<link wikidata="Q102289" start="2568" end="2586" title="Buckminster Fuller" label="Buckminster Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084459" start="2600" end="2633" title="Old Man River&amp;#x27;s City project" label="Old Man River&amp;#x27;s City project"/>
<link wikidata="Q577891" start="2717" end="2741" title="East St. Louis, Illinois" label="East St. Louis, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="2923" end="2935" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q23582796" start="3104" end="3124" title="resource consumption" label="resource consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q637869" start="3400" end="3409" title="Arcosanti" label="Arcosanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="3515" end="3522" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q447351" start="3547" end="3559" title="Paolo Soleri" label="Paolo Soleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="3830" end="3835" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241468" start="3841" end="3848" title="Dongtan, Shanghai" label="Dongtan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="3854" end="3862" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q192452" start="3934" end="3953" title="Expo 2010" label="Shanghai World Expo"/>
<link wikidata="Q785056" start="3967" end="3979" title="Ihme-Zentrum" label="Ihme-Zentrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="3983" end="3990" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q498627" start="4049" end="4064" title="McMurdo Station" label="McMurdo Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q955267" start="4072" end="4103" title="United States Antarctic Program" label="United States Antarctic Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="4146" end="4156" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756995" start="4673" end="4694" title="Operation Deep Freeze" label="Operation Deep Freeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991463" start="4771" end="4791" title="Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty" label="international treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880475" start="4845" end="4858" title="Begich Towers" label="Begich Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79716" start="4941" end="4957" title="Whittier, Alaska" label="Whittier, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q19460723" start="5116" end="5132" title="Buckner Building" label="Buckner Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q104772074" start="5232" end="5240" title="The_Line, Saudi Arabia" label="The Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q505681" start="5272" end="5278" title="linear settlement" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231558" start="5279" end="5289" title="smart city" label="smart city"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="5293" end="5305" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42310572" start="5309" end="5313" title="Neom" label="Neom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315953" start="5315" end="5329" title="Tabuk Province" label="Tabuk Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="5368" end="5384" title="carbon emissions" label="carbon emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q42310572" start="5437" end="5441" title="Neom" label="Neom"/>
<link wikidata="Q314553" start="5890" end="5907" title="Robert Silverberg" label="Robert Silverberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356615" start="5921" end="5937" title="The World Inside" label="The World Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074477" start="6558" end="6572" title="Oath of Fealty (novel)" label="Oath of Fealty"/>
<link wikidata="Q316610" start="6582" end="6593" title="Larry Niven" label="Larry Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q578031" start="6598" end="6613" title="Jerry Pournelle" label="Jerry Pournelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767176" start="6894" end="6906" title="SimCity 2000" label="SimCity 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q93777745" start="7056" end="7079" title="The Ascent (video game)" label="&amp;quot;The Ascent &amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q447351" start="7451" end="7464" title="Paolo Soleri" label="Soleri, Paolo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2194" wikidata="Q2507" url="?curid=2194" title="April 5">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
* 823 – Lothair I is crowned King of Italy by Pope Paschal I.
* 919 – The second Fatimid invasion of Egypt begins, when the Fatimid heir-apparent, al-Qa&#x27;im bi-Amr Allah, sets out from Raqqada at the head of his army.
*1242 – During the Battle on the Ice of Lake Peipus, Russian forces, led by Alexander Nevsky, rebuff an invasion attempt by the Teutonic Knights.
*1536 – Charles V makes a Royal Entry into Rome, demolishing a swath of the city to re-enact a Roman triumph.
*1566 – Two hundred Dutch noblemen, led by Hendrick van Brederode, force themselves into the presence of Margaret of Parma and present the Petition of Compromise, denouncing the Spanish Inquisition in the Seventeen Provinces.
===1601–1900===
*1614 – In Virginia, Native American Pocahontas marries English colonist John Rolfe.
*1621 – The &quot;Mayflower&quot; sets sail from Plymouth, Massachusetts on a return trip to England.
*1792 – United States President George Washington exercises his authority to veto a bill, the first time this power is used in the United States.
*1795 – Peace of Basel between France and Prussia is made.
*1818 – In the Battle of Maipú, Chile&#x27;s independence movement, led by Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins and José de San Martín, win a decisive victory over Spain, leaving 2,000 Spaniards and 1,000 Chilean patriots dead.
*1862 – American Civil War: The Battle of Yorktown begins.
*1879 – Bolivia declares war on Chile, and Chile declares war on Peru, starting the War of the Pacific.
===1901–present===
*1902 – A stand box collapses at Ibrox Park (now Ibrox Stadium) in Glasgow, Scotland, which led to the deaths of 25 and injuries to more than 500 supporters during an international association football match between Scotland and England.
*1910 – The Transandine Railway connecting Chile and Argentina is inaugurated.
*1922 – The American Birth Control League, forerunner of Planned Parenthood, is incorporated.
*1932 – Dominion of Newfoundland: Ten thousand rioters seize the Colonial Building leading to the end of self-government.
*1933 – U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt signs two executive orders: 6101 to establish the Civilian Conservation Corps, and 6102 &quot;forbidding the Hoarding of Gold Coin, Gold Bullion, and Gold Certificates&quot; by U.S. citizens.
* 1933 – Andorran Revolution: The Young Andorrans occupy the Casa de la Vall and force the government to hold democratic elections with universal male suffrage.
*1936 – Tupelo–Gainesville tornado outbreak: An F5 tornado kills 233 in Tupelo, Mississippi.
*1938 – Spanish Civil War: Two days after the Nationalist army occupied the Catalan city of Lleida, dictator Francisco Franco decrees the abolition of the Generalitat (the autonomous government of Catalonia), the self-government granted by the Republic, and the official status of the Catalan language.
*1942 – World War II: Adolf Hitler issues Fuhrer Directive No. 41 summarizing Case Blue, including the German Sixth Army&#x27;s planned assault on Stalingrad.
* 1942 – World War II: The Imperial Japanese Navy launches a carrier-based air attack on Colombo, Ceylon during the Indian Ocean raid. Port and civilian facilities are damaged and the Royal Navy cruisers and are sunk southwest of the island.
*1943 – World War II: United States Army Air Forces bomber aircraft accidentally cause more than 900 civilian deaths, including 209 children, and 1,300 wounded among the civilian population of the Belgian town of Mortsel. Their target was the Erla factory from the residential area hit.
*1945 – Cold War: Yugoslav leader Josip Broz Tito signs an agreement with the Soviet Union to allow &quot;temporary entry of Soviet troops into Yugoslav territory&quot;.
*1946 – Soviet troops end their year-long occupation of the Danish island of Bornholm.
* 1946 – A Fleet Air Arm Vickers Wellington crashes into a residential area in Rabat, Malta during a training exercise, killing all 4 crew members and 16 civilians on the ground.
*1949 – A fire in a hospital in Effingham, Illinois, kills 77 people and leads to nationwide fire code improvements in the United States.
*1951 – Cold War: Ethel and Julius Rosenberg are sentenced to death for spying for the Soviet Union.
*1956 – Cuban Revolution: Fidel Castro declares himself at war with Cuban President Fulgencio Batista.
*1958 – Ripple Rock, an underwater threat to navigation in the Seymour Narrows in Canada is destroyed in one of the largest non-nuclear controlled explosions of the time.
*1966 – During the Buddhist Uprising, South Vietnamese Prime Minister Nguyễn Cao Kỳ personally attempts to lead the capture of the restive city of Đà Nẵng before backing down.
*1971 – In Sri Lanka, Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna launches a revolt against the United Front government of Sirimavo Bandaranaike.
*1974 – &quot;Carrie&quot;, the first novel by American author Stephen King, is published for the first time with a print run of 30,000 copies.
*1976 – In China, the April Fifth Movement leads to the Tiananmen Incident.
*1977 – The US Supreme Court rules that congressional legislation that diminished the size of the Sioux people&#x27;s reservation thereby destroyed the tribe&#x27;s jurisdictional authority over the area in &quot;Rosebud Sioux Tribe v. Kneip.&quot;
*1991 – An ASA EMB 120 crashes in Brunswick, Georgia, killing all 23 aboard including Sen. John Tower and astronaut Sonny Carter.
*1991 – The Space shuttle &quot;Atlantis&quot; launches on STS-37 to deploy the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory.
*1992 – Alberto Fujimori, president of Peru, dissolves the Peruvian congress by military force.
* 1992 – Peace protesters Suada Dilberovic and Olga Sučić are killed on the Vrbanja Bridge in Sarajevo, becoming the first casualties of the Bosnian War.
*1998 – In Japan, the Akashi Kaikyō Bridge opens to traffic, becoming the longest bridge span in the world.
*1999 – Two Libyans suspected of bringing down Pan Am Flight 103 in 1988 are handed over for eventual trial in the Netherlands.
*2007 – The cruise ship MS &quot;Sea Diamond&quot; strikes a volcanic reef near Nea Kameni and sinks the next day. Two passengers were never recovered and are presumed dead.
*2009 – North Korea launches its controversial Kwangmyŏngsŏng-2 satellite. The satellite passed over mainland Japan, which prompted an immediate reaction from the United Nations Security Council, as well as participating states of Six-party talks.
*2010 – Up to 50 people are killed and another 100 injured in two militant suicide bombings and attacks in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province of Pakistan: the first on an Awami National Party rally in Timergara; the second on the U.S. Consulate in Peshawar.
* 2010 – Twenty-nine coal miners are killed in an explosion at the Upper Big Branch Mine in West Virginia.
* 2010 – Space Shuttle &quot;Discovery&quot; is launched on STS-131 to resupply the International Space Station.
*2018 – Agents with the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement raid a slaughterhouse in Tennessee, detaining nearly 100 undocumented Hispanic workers in one of the largest workplace raids in the history of the United States.

==Births==

===Pre-1600===
*1170 – Isabella of Hainault (d. 1190)
*1219 – Wonjong of Goryeo, 24th ruler of Goryeo (d. 1274)
*1279 – Al-Nuwayri, Egyptian Muslim historian (d. 1333)
*1288 – Emperor Go-Fushimi of Japan (d. 1336)
*1315 – James III of Majorca (d. 1349)
*1365 – William II, Duke of Bavaria (d. 1417)
*1472 – Bianca Maria Sforza, Italian wife of Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor (d. 1510)
*1521 – Francesco Laparelli, Italian architect (d. 1570)
*1523 – Blaise de Vigenère, French cryptographer and diplomat (d. 1596)
*1533 – Giulio della Rovere, Italian Catholic Cardinal (d. 1578)
*1539 – George Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach (d. 1603)
*1549 – Princess Elizabeth of Sweden (d. 1597)
*1568 – Pope Urban VIII (d. 1644)
*1588 – Thomas Hobbes, English philosopher (d. 1679)
*1591 – Frederick Ulrich, Duke of Brunswick-Luneburg (d. 1634)
*1595 – John Wilson, English composer and educator (d. 1674)
===1601–1900===
*1604 – Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine (d. 1675)
*1616 – Frederick, Count Palatine of Zweibrücken (d. 1661)
*1622 – Vincenzo Viviani, Italian mathematician, astronomer, and physicist (d. 1703)
*1649 – Elihu Yale, American-English merchant and philanthropist (d. 1721)
*1656 – Nikita Demidov, Russian industrialist (d. 1725)
*1664 – Élisabeth Thérèse de Lorraine, French noblewoman and Princess of Epinoy (d. 1748)
*1674 – Margravine Elisabeth Sophie of Brandenburg (d. 1748)
*1691 – Louis VIII, Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt (d. 1768)
*1692 – Adrienne Lecouvreur, French actress (d. 1730)
*1719 – Axel von Fersen the Elder, Swedish field marshal and politician, Lord Marshal of Sweden (d. 1794)
*1726 – Benjamin Harrison V, American politician, planter and merchant (d. 1791)
*1727 – Pasquale Anfossi, Italian violinist and composer (d. 1797)
*1729 – Frederick Charles Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg (d. 1809)
*1730 – Jean Baptiste Seroux d&#x27;Agincourt, French archaeologist and historian (d. 1814)
*1732 – Jean-Honoré Fragonard, French painter and etcher (d. 1806)
*1735 – Franziskus Herzan von Harras, Czech Roman Catholic cardinal (d. 1804)
*1739 – Philemon Dickinson, American lawyer and politician (d. 1809)
*1752 – Sébastien Érard, French instrument maker (d. 1831)
*1761 – Sybil Ludington, American figure of the American Revolutionary War (d. 1839)
*1769 – Sir Thomas Hardy, 1st Baronet, English admiral (d. 1839)
*1773 – José María Coppinger, governor of Spanish East Florida (d. 1844)
*1773 – Duchess Therese of Mecklenburg-Strelitz (d. 1839)
*1774 – David Gillespie, American politician and surveyor (d. 1829)
*1777 – Marie Jules César Savigny, French zoologist (d. 1851)
*1782 – Wincenty Krasiński, Polish nobleman (d. 1858)
*1784 – Louis Spohr, German violinist, composer, and conductor (d. 1859)
*1788 – Franz Pforr, German painter (d. 1812)
*1793 – Casimir Delavigne, French poet and dramatist (d. 1843)
* 1793 – Felix de Muelenaere, Belgian politician (d. 1862)
*1795 – Henry Havelock, British general (d. 1857)
*1799 – Jacques Denys Choisy, Swiss clergyman and botanist (d. 1859)
*1801 – Félix Dujardin, French biologist (d. 1860)
* 1801 – Vincenzo Gioberti, Italian philosopher, publicist and politician (d. 1852)
*1804 – Matthias Jakob Schleiden, German botanist (d. 1881)
*1809 – Karl Felix Halm, German scholar and critic (d. 1882)
*1810 – Sir Henry Rawlinson, British East India Company army officer and politician (d. 1895)
*1811 – Jules Dupré, French painter (d. 1889)
*1814 – Felix Lichnowsky, Czech soldier and politician (d. 1848)
*1822 – Émile Louis Victor de Laveleye, Belgian economist (d. 1892)
*1827 – Joseph Lister, English surgeon and academic (d. 1912)
*1832 – Jules Ferry, French lawyer and politician, 44th Prime Minister of France (d. 1893)
*1834 – Prentice Mulford, American humorist and author (d. 1891)
* 1834 – Wilhelm Olbers Focke, German medical doctor and botanist (d. 1922)
* 1834 – Frank R. Stockton, American writer and humorist (d. 1902)
*1835 – Vítězslav Hálek, Czech poet, writer, journalist, dramatist and theatre critic. (d. 1874)
*1837 – Algernon Charles Swinburne, English poet, playwright, novelist, and critic (d. 1909)
*1839 – Robert Smalls, African-American ship&#x27;s pilot, sea captain, and politician (d. 1915)
*1840 – Ghazaros Aghayan, Armenian historian and linguist (d. 1911)
*1842 – Hans Hildebrand, Swedish archaeologist (d. 1913)
*1845 – Friedrich Sigmund Merkel, German anatomist and histopathologist (d. 1919)
* 1845 – Jules Cambon, French diplomat (d. 1935)
*1846 – Sigmund Exner, Austrian physiologist (d. 1926)
* 1846 – Henry Wellesley, British peer and politician (d. 1900)
*1848 – Thure de Thulstrup, American illustrator (d. 1930)
* 1848 – Ulrich Wille, Swiss army general (d. 1925)
*1850 – Enrico Mazzanti, Italian engineer and cartoonist (d. 1910)
*1852 – Émile Billard, French sailor (d. 1930)
* 1852 – Walter W. Winans, American marksman and sculptor (d. 1920)
* 1852 – Franz Eckert, German composer and musician (d. 1916)
*1856 – Booker T. Washington, African-American educator, essayist and historian (d. 1915)
*1857 – Alexander of Battenberg (d. 1893)
*1858 – Washington Atlee Burpee, Canadian businessman, founded Burpee Seeds (d. 1915)
*1859 – Reinhold Seeberg, German theologian (d. 1935)
*1860 – Harry S. Barlow, British tennis player (d. 1917)
*1862 – Louis Ganne, French conductor (d. 1923)
* 1862 – Leo Stern, English cellist (d. 1904)
*1863 – Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine (d. 1950)
*1867 – Ernest Lewis, British tennis player (d. 1930)
*1869 – Sergey Chaplygin, Russian physicist, mathematician, and engineer (d. 1942)
* 1869 – Albert Roussel, French composer (d. 1937)
*1870 – Motobu Chōki, Japanese karateka (d. 1944)
*1871 – Stanisław Grabski, Polish economist and politician (d. 1949)
*1872 – Samuel Cate Prescott, American microbiologist and chemist (d. 1962)
*1873 – Joseph Rheden, Austrian astronomer (d. 1946)
*1874 – Emmanuel Célestin Suhard, French Cardinal of the Catholic Church (d. 1949)
* 1874 – Manuel María Ponce Brousset, President of Peru (d. 1966)
*1878 – Albert Champion, French cyclist (d. 1927)
* 1878 – Georg Misch, German philosopher (d. 1965)
* 1878 – Paul Weinstein, German high jumper (d. 1964)
*1879 – Arthur Berriedale Keith, Scottish lawyer (d. 1944)
* 1879 – Nikolaus zu Dohna-Schlodien, German naval officer and author (d. 1956)
*1880 – Eric Carlberg, Swedish Army officer, diplomat, shooter, fencer and modern pentathlete (d. 1963)
* 1880 – Vilhelm Carlberg, Swedish Army officer and shooter (d. 1970)
*1882 – Song Jiaoren, Chinese revolutionary (d. 1913)
* 1882 – Natalia Sedova, 2nd wife of Leon Trotsky (d. 1962)
*1883 – Walter Huston, Canadian-American actor and singer (d. 1950)
*1884 – Ion Inculeț, Bessarabian academic and politician, President of Moldova (d. 1940)
*1885 – Dimitrie Cuclin, Romanian composer (d. 1978)
*1886 – Gotthelf Bergsträsser, German linguist (d. 1933)
* 1886 – Frederick Lindemann, British physicist (d. 1957)
* 1886 – Gustavo Jiménez, Peruvian colonel and politician, 73rd President of Peru (d. 1933)
*1887 – William Cowhig, British gymnast (d. 1964)
*1889 – Vicente Ferreira Pastinha, Brazilian martial artist (d. 1981)
*1890 – Karl Kirk, Danish gymnast (d. 1955)
* 1890 – William Moore, British track and field athlete (d. 1956)
*1891 – Arnold Jackson, English runner, soldier, and lawyer (d. 1972)
* 1891 – Laura Vicuña, Chilean nun (d. 1904)
*1892 – Raymond Bonney, American ice hockey player (d. 1964)
*1893 – Frithjof Andersen, Norwegian wrestler (d. 1975)
* 1893 – Clas Thunberg, Finnish speed skater (d. 1973)
*1894 – Lawrence Dale Bell, American industrialist and founder of Bell Aircraft Corporation (d. 1956)
* 1894 – Hans Hüttig, German SS officer (d. 1980)
* 1894 – Carl Rudolf Florin, Swedish botanist (d. 1965)
*1895 – Mike O&#x27;Dowd, American boxer (d. 1957)
*1896 – Einar Lundborg, Swedish aviator (d. 1931)
*1897 – Hans Schuberth, German politician (d. 1976)
*1898 – Solange d&#x27;Ayen, French noblewoman, Duchess of Ayen and journalist (d. 1976)
*1899 – Alfred Blalock, American surgeon and academic (d. 1964)
*1900 – Herbert Bayer, Austrian-American graphic designer, painter, and photographer (d. 1985)
* 1900 – Roman Steinberg, Estonian wrestler (d. 1939)
* 1900 – Spencer Tracy, American actor (d. 1967)

===1901–present===
*1901 – Curt Bois, German actor (d. 1991)
* 1901 – Chester Bowles, American diplomat and ambassador (d. 1986)
* 1901 – Melvyn Douglas, American actor (d. 1981)
* 1901 – Doggie Julian, American football, basketball, and baseball player and coach (d. 1967)
*1902 – Menachem Mendel Schneerson, Russian-American rabbi (d. 1994)
*1903 – Marion Aye, American actress (d. 1951)
*1904 – Richard Eberhart, American poet and academic (d. 2005)
*1906 – Albert Charles Smith, American botanist (d. 1999)
* 1906 – Fernando Germani, Italian organist (d. 1998)
* 1906 – Ted Morgan, New Zealand boxer (d. 1952)
*1907 – Sanya Dharmasakti, Thai jurist (d. 2002)
*1908 – Bette Davis, American actress (d. 1989)
* 1908 – Kurt Neumann, German director (d. 1958)
* 1908 – Jagjivan Ram, Indian politician, 4th Deputy Prime Minister of India (d. 1986)
* 1908 – Herbert von Karajan, Austrian conductor and manager (d. 1989)
*1909 – Albert R. Broccoli, American film producer, co-founded Eon Productions (d. 1996)
* 1909 – Giacomo Gentilomo, Italian film director and painter (d. 2001)
* 1909 – Károly Sós, Hungarian footballer and manager (d. 1991)
* 1909 – Erwin Wegner, German hurdler (d. 1945)
*1910 – Sven Andersson, Swedish politician (d. 1987)
* 1910 – Oronzo Pugliese, Italian football manager (d. 1990)
*1911 – Hedi Amara Nouira, Tunisian politician (d. 1993)
* 1911 – Johnny Revolta, American golfer (d. 1991)
*1912 – Jehan Buhan, French fencer (d. 1999)
* 1912 – Habib Elghanian, Iranian businessman (d. 1979)
* 1912 – Antonio Ferri, Italian scientist (d. 1975)
* 1912 – Carlos Guastavino, Argentine composer (d. 2000)
* 1912 – Makar Honcharenko, Ukrainian footballer and manager (d. 1997)
* 1912 – John Le Mesurier, English actor (d. 1983)
* 1912 – István Örkény, Hungarian author and playwright (d. 1979)
* 1912 – Bill Roberts, English sprinter and soldier (d. 2001)
*1913 – Antoni Clavé, Catalan artist (d. 2005)
* 1913 – Nicolas Grunitzky, 2nd President of Togo (d. 1969)
* 1913 – Ruth Smith, Faroese artist (d. 1958)
*1914 – Felice Borel, Italian footballer (d. 1993)
*1916 – Gregory Peck, American actor, political activist, and producer (d. 2003)
*1917 – Robert Bloch, American author (d. 1994)
* 1917 – Frans Gommers, Belgian footballer (d. 1996)
*1919 – Lester James Peries, Sri Lankan director, screenwriter, and producer (d. 2018)
*1920 – Barend Biesheuvel, Dutch politician, Prime Minister of the Netherlands (d. 2001)
* 1920 – Arthur Hailey, English-Canadian soldier and author (d. 2004)
* 1920 – Alfonso Thiele, Turkish-Italian race car driver (d. 1986)
* 1920 – John Willem Gran, Swedish bishop (d. 2008)
*1921 – Christopher Hewett, English actor and theatre director (d. 2001)
*1922 – Tom Finney, English footballer (d. 2014)
* 1922 – Harry Freedman, Polish-Canadian horn player, composer, and educator (d. 2005)
* 1922 – Andy Linden, American race car driver (d. 1987)
* 1922 – Gale Storm, American actress and singer (d. 2009)
*1923 – Ernest Mandel, German-born Belgian Marxist economist, Trotskyist activist and theorist (d. 1995)
* 1923 – Michael V. Gazzo, American actor (d. 1995)
* 1923 – Nguyễn Văn Thiệu, Vietnamese general and politician, 5th President of South Vietnam (d. 2001)
*1924 – Igor Borisov, Soviet rower (d. 2003)
*1925 – Janet Rowley, American human geneticist (d. 2013)
* 1925 – Pierre Nihant, Belgian cyclist (d. 1993)
*1926 – Roger Corman, American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 2024)
* 1926 – Liang Yusheng, Chinese writer (d. 2009)
*1927 – Thanin Kraivichien, Thai lawyer and politician (d. 2025)
* 1927 – Arne Hoel, Norwegian ski jumper (d. 2006)
*1928 – Enzo Cannavale, Italian actor (d. 2011)
* 1928 – Tony Williams, American singer (d. 1992)
*1929 – Hugo Claus, Belgian author, poet, and painter (d. 2008)
* 1929 – Ivar Giaever, Norwegian-American physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate
* 1929 – Nigel Hawthorne, English actor and producer (d. 2001)
* 1929 – Joe Meek, English songwriter and producer (d. 1967)
* 1929 – Mahmoud Mollaghasemi, Iranian wrestler
*1930 – Mary Costa, American singer and actress
* 1930 – Pierre Lhomme, French director of photography (d. 2019)
*1931 – Jack Clement, American singer-songwriter and producer (d. 2013)
* 1931 – Héctor Olivera, Argentine director, producer and screenwriter
*1933 – Feridun Buğeker, Turkish footballer (d. 2014)
* 1933 – Frank Gorshin, American actor (d. 2005)
* 1933 – Barbara Holland, American author (d. 2010)
* 1933 – K. Kailasapathy, Sri Lankan journalist and academic (d. 1982)
*1934 – John Carey, English author and critic
* 1934 – Roman Herzog, German lawyer and politician, 7th President of Germany (d. 2017)
* 1934 – Moise Safra, Brazilian businessman and philanthropist, co-founded Banco Safra (d. 2014)
* 1934 – Stanley Turrentine, American saxophonist and composer (d. 2000)
*1935 – Giovanni Cianfriglia, Italian actor (d. 2024)
* 1935 – Peter Grant, English talent manager (d. 1995)
* 1935 – Donald Lynden-Bell, English astrophysicist and astronomer (d. 2018)
* 1935 – Frank Schepke, German rower (d. 2017)
*1936 – Ronnie Bucknum, American race car driver (d. 1992)
* 1936 – Glenn Jordan, American director and producer
* 1936 – Dragoljub Minić, Yugoslavian chess Grandmaster (d. 2005)
*1937 – Joseph Lelyveld, American journalist and author (d. 2024)
* 1937 – Colin Powell, American general and politician, 65th United States Secretary of State (d. 2021)
* 1937 – Andrzej Schinzel, Polish mathematician (d. 2021)
* 1937 – Arie Selinger, Israeli volleyball player and manager
* 1937 – Juan Vicente Lezcano, Paraguayan footballer (d. 2012)
*1938 – Colin Bland, Zimbabwean-South African cricketer (d. 2018)
* 1938 – Mal Colston, Australian educator and politician (d. 2003)
* 1938 – Nancy Holt, American sculptor and painter (d. 2014)
* 1938 – Natalya Kustinskaya, Soviet actress (d. 2012)
* 1938 – Giorgos Sideris, Greek footballer
*1939 – Leka I, Crown Prince of Albania (d. 2011)
* 1939 – Crispian St. Peters, English singer-songwriter (d. 2010)
* 1939 – Haidar Abu Bakr al-Attas, Prime Minister of Yemen
* 1939 – Ronald White, American singer-songwriter (d. 1995)
* 1939 – David Winters, English-American actor, choreographer and producer (d. 2019)
*1940 – Tommy Cash, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2024)
* 1940 – Gilles Proulx, Canadian journalist, historian, and radio host
*1941 – Michael Moriarty, American-Canadian actor 
* 1941 – Dave Swarbrick, English singer-songwriter and fiddler (d. 2016)
*1942 – Allan Clarke, English singer-songwriter
* 1942 – Pascal Couchepin, Swiss politician
* 1942 – Juan Gisbert Sr., Spanish tennis player
* 1942 – Peter Greenaway, Welsh director and screenwriter
*1943 – Dean Brown, Australian politician, 41st Premier of South Australia
* 1943 – Max Gail, American actor and director
* 1943 – Fighting Harada, Japanese boxer
* 1943 – Miet Smet, Belgian politician
* 1943 – Jean-Louis Tauran, French cardinal (d. 2018)
*1944 – Willeke van Ammelrooy, Dutch actress and director
* 1944 – János Martonyi, Hungarian politician
* 1944 – Evan Parker, British musician
* 1944 – Douangchay Phichit, Laotian politician (d. 2014)
* 1944 – Willy Planckaert, Belgian cyclist
* 1944 – Pedro Rosselló, Puerto Rican physician and politician, 7th Governor of Puerto Rico
* 1944 – Peter T. King, American soldier, lawyer, and politician
*1945 – Ove Bengtson, Swedish tennis player
* 1945 – Steve Carver, American director and producer (d. 2021)
* 1945 – Cem Karaca, Turkish musician (d. 2004)
* 1945 – Tommy Smith, English footballer (d. 2019)
*1946 – Jane Asher, English actress
* 1946 – Julio Ángel Fernández, Uruguayan astronomer
* 1946 – Björn Granath, Swedish actor (d. 2017)
* 1946 – Georgi Markov, Bulgarian Greco-Roman wrestler
*1947 – Đurđica Bjedov, Yugoslav swimmer
* 1947 – Willy Chirino, Cuban-American musician
* 1947 – Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, Filipino academic and politician, 14th President of the Philippines
* 1947 – Ramón Mifflin, Peruvian footballer
* 1947 – Virendra Sharma, Indian-English lawyer and politician
*1948 – Pierre-Albert Chapuisat, Swiss footballer
* 1948 – Dave Holland, English drummer (d. 2018)
* 1948 – Roy McFarland, English footballer and manager
*1949 – Stanley Dziedzic, American wrestler
* 1949 – Larry Franco, American film producer
* 1949 – Judith Resnik, American engineer and astronaut (d. 1986)
*1950 – Ann C. Crispin, American writer (d. 2013)
* 1950 – Franklin Chang Díaz, Costa Rican-Chinese American astronaut and physicist
* 1950 – Agnetha Fältskog, Swedish singer-songwriter and producer
* 1950 – Toshiko Fujita, Japanese actress, singer and narrator (d. 2018)
* 1950 – Miki Manojlović, Serbian actor
*1951 – Les Binks, Irish drummer and songwriter
* 1951 – Yevgeniy Gavrilenko, Belarusian hurdler
* 1951 – Nedim Gürsel, Turkish writer
* 1951 – Dean Kamen, American inventor and businessman, founded Segway Inc.
* 1951 – Dave McArtney, New Zealand singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2013)
* 1951 – Ubol Ratana, Thai Princess
*1952 – Alfie Conn, Scottish international footballer
* 1952 – John C. Dvorak, American author and editor
* 1952 – Sandy Mayer, American tennis player
* 1952 – Dennis Mortimer, English footballer
* 1952 – Mitch Pileggi, American actor
*1953 – Frank Gaffney, American journalist and radio host
* 1953 – Keiko Han, Japanese actress
* 1953 – Tae Jin-ah, South Korean singer
* 1953 – Raleb Majadele, Israeli politician
* 1953 – Ian Swales, English accountant and politician
*1954 – Guy Bertrand, Canadian linguist and radio host
* 1954 – Peter Case, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
* 1954 – Mohamed Ben Mouza, Tunisian footballer
* 1954 – Stan Ridgway, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
* 1954 – Yoshiichi Watanabe, Japanese footballer
*1955 – Charlotte de Turckheim, French actress, producer, and screenwriter
* 1955 – Ricardo Ferrero, Argentine footballer (d. 2015)
* 1955 – Christian Gourcuff, French footballer and manager
* 1955 – Anthony Horowitz, English author and screenwriter
* 1955 – Bernard Longley, English prelate
* 1955 – Akira Toriyama, Japanese illustrator (d. 2024)
* 1955 – Takayoshi Yamano, Japanese footballer 
*1956 – Diamond Dallas Page, American wrestler and actor
* 1956 – Leonid Fedun, Russian businessman
* 1956 – Reid Ribble, American politician
*1957 – Sebastian Adayanthrath, Indian bishop
* 1957 – Karin Roßley, German hurdler
*1958 – Kevin Dann, Australian rugby league player (d. 2021)
* 1958 – Henrik Dettmann, Finnish basketball coach
* 1958 – Ryoichi Kawakatsu, Japanese footballer
* 1958 – Johan Kriek, South African-American tennis player
* 1958 – Daniel Schneidermann, French journalist
* 1958 – Lasantha Wickrematunge, Sri Lankan lawyer and journalist (d. 2009)
*1959 – Paul Chung, Hong Kong actor and host (d. 1989)
*1960 – Asteris Koutoulas, Romanian-German record producer, manager, and author
* 1960 – Larry McCray, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
* 1960 – Ian Redford, Scottish footballer and manager (d. 2014)
* 1960 – Hiromi Taniguchi, Japanese long-distance runner
* 1960 – Adnan Terzić, Bosnian politician
*1961 – Andrea Arnold, English filmmaker and actress
* 1961 – Anna Caterina Antonacci, Italian soprano
* 1961 – Abdulhadi al-Khawaja, Bahraini-Danish human rights activist
* 1961 – Lisa Zane, American actress and singer
*1962 – Lana Clarkson, American actress and model (d. 2003)
* 1962 – Sara Danius, Swedish scholar of literature and aesthetics (d. 2019)
* 1962 – Richard Gough, Swedish born Scottish international footballer
* 1962 – Arild Monsen, Norwegian cross-country skier
* 1962 – Kirsan Ilyumzhinov, Russian businessman and politician, 1st President of Kalmykia
*1963 – Arthur Adams, American comic book artist and writer
*1964 – Neil Eckersley, British judoka
* 1964 – Vakhtang Iagorashvili, Soviet modern pentathlete
* 1964 – Levon Julfalakyan, Soviet Armenian Greco-Roman wrestler
* 1964 – Marius Lăcătuș, Romanian footballer and coach
*1965 – Aykut Kocaman, Turkish footballer and manager
* 1965 – Lang Tzu-yun, Taiwanese actress
* 1965 – Elizabeth McIntyre, American freestyle skier
* 1965 – Svetlana Paramygina, Belarusian biathlete
*1966 – Yoon Hyun, South Korean judoka
* 1966 – Mike McCready, American guitarist and songwriter
* 1966 – Peter Overton, English-Australian journalist and television host
*1967 – Troy Gentry, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2017)
* 1967 – Franck Silvestre, French footballer
* 1967 – Erland Johnsen, Norwegian footballer
* 1967 – Laima Zilporytė, Soviet cyclist
*1968 – Paula Cole, American singer-songwriter and pianist
*1969 – Dinos Angelidis, Greek basketball player
* 1969 – Viatcheslav Djavanian, Russian cyclist
* 1969 – Pontus Kåmark, Swedish footballer
* 1969 – Pavlo Khnykin, Ukrainian swimmer
* 1969 – Tomislav Piplica, Bosnian footballer and manager
* 1969 – Ravindra Prabhat, Indian writer and journalist
*1970 – Soheil Ayari, French race car driver
* 1970 – Valérie Bonneton, French actress
* 1970 – Diamond D, American hip hop producer
* 1970 – Petar Genov, Bulgarian chess grandmaster
* 1970 – Thea Gill, Canadian actress
* 1970 – Miho Hatori, Japanese singer-songwriter
* 1970 – Irina Timofeyeva, Russian long-distance runner
*1971 – Dong Abay, Filipino singer-songwriter and guitarist
* 1971 – Krista Allen, American actress
* 1971 – Austin Berry, Costa Rican footballer
* 1971 – Simona Cavallari, Italian actress
* 1971 – Victoria Hamilton, English actress
* 1971 – Nelson Parraguez, Chilean footballer
* 1971 – Kim Soo-nyung, South Korean archer
*1972 – Nima Arkani-Hamed, American-Canadian theoretical physicist
* 1972 – Tom Coronel, Dutch race car driver
* 1972 – Paul Okon, Australian footballer and manager
* 1972 – Duncan Spencer, English cricketer
* 1972 – Yasuhiro Takemoto, Japanese animator and director (d. 2019)
* 1972 – Junko Takeuchi, Japanese actress
*1973 – Élodie Bouchez, French-American actress
* 1973 – Brendan Cannon, Australian rugby player
* 1973 – Lidia Trettel, Italian snowboarder
* 1973 – Pharrell Williams, American singer, songwriter and rapper
*1974 – Sandra Bagarić, Croatian opera singer and actress
* 1974 – Julien Boutter, French tennis player
* 1974 – Katja Holanti, Finnish biathlete
* 1974 – Oleg Khodkov, Russian handball player
* 1974 – Ariel López, Argentine footballer
* 1974 – Lukas Ridgeston, Slovak actor and director 
* 1974 – Vyacheslav Voronin, Russian high jumper
*1975 – Sarah Baldock, English organist and conductor
* 1975 – John Hartson, Welsh footballer and coach
* 1975 – Juicy J, American rapper and producer
* 1975 – Serhiy Klymentiev, Ukrainian ice hockey player
* 1975 – Caitlin Moran, English journalist, author, and critic
* 1975 – Marcos Vales, Spanish footballer
* 1975 – Shammond Williams, American basketball player and coach
*1976 – Luis de Agustini, Uruguayan footballer
* 1976 – Péter Biros, Hungarian water polo player
* 1976 – Sterling K. Brown, American actor
* 1976 – Aleksei Budõlin, Estonian judoka
* 1976 – Simone Inzaghi, Italian footballer
* 1976 – Fernando Morientes, Spanish footballer and coach
* 1976 – Natascha Ragosina, Russian boxer
* 1976 – Henrik Stenson, Swedish golfer
* 1976 – Valeria Straneo, Italian long-distance runner
* 1976 – Indrek Tobreluts, Estonian biathlete
* 1976 – Anouska van der Zee, Dutch cyclist
*1977 – Jonathan Erlich, Israeli tennis player
* 1977 – Trevor Letowski, Canadian ice hockey player and coach
* 1977 – Daniel Majstorović, Swedish footballer
*1978 – Dwain Chambers, British track sprinter
* 1978 – Marcone Amaral Costa, Qatari footballer
* 1978 – Tarek El-Said, Egyptian footballer
* 1978 – Jairo Patiño, Colombian footballer
* 1978 – Sohyang, South Korean singer
* 1978 – Stephen Jackson, American basketball player
* 1978 – Arnaud Tournant, French cyclist
* 1978 – Franziska van Almsick, German swimmer
* 1978 – Günther Weidlinger, Austrian long-distance runner
*1979 – Vlada Avramov, Serbian footballer
* 1979 – Josh Boone, American screenwriter and director
* 1979 – Song Dae-nam, South Korean judoka
* 1979 – Timo Hildebrand, German footballer
* 1979 – Imany, French singer
* 1979 – Barel Mouko, Congolese footballer
* 1979 – Cesare Natali, Italian footballer
* 1979 – Mitsuo Ogasawara, Japanese footballer
* 1979 – Alexander Resch, German luger
* 1979 – Andrius Velička, Lithuanian footballer
* 1979 – Dante Wesley, American football player
* 1979 – Chen Yanqing, Chinese weightlifter
*1980 – Matt Bonner, American basketball player
* 1980 – Alberta Brianti, Italian tennis player
* 1980 – Rafael Cavalcante, Brazilian mixed martial artist
* 1980 – David Chocarro, Argentinian baseball player and actor
* 1980 – Mike Glumac, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1980 – Mario Kasun, Croatian basketball player
* 1980 – Lee Jae-won, South Korean DJ and singer
* 1980 – Joris Mathijsen, Dutch footballer
* 1980 – Rasmus Quist Hansen, Danish rower
* 1980 – Odlanier Solís, Cuban boxer
*1981 – Matthew Emmons, American rifle shooter
* 1981 – Michael A. Monsoor, American sailor, Medal of Honor recipient (d. 2006)
* 1981 – Mariqueen Maandig, Filipino-American musician and singer-songwriter
* 1981 – Daba Modibo Keïta, Malian taekwondo athlete
* 1981 – Marissa Nadler, American musician
* 1981 – Tom Riley, English actor and producer
* 1981 – Mompati Thuma, Botswana footballer
* 1981 – Pieter Weening, Dutch cyclist
*1982 – Hayley Atwell, English-American actress
* 1982 – Matheus Coradini Vivian, Brazilian footballer
* 1982 – Thomas Hitzlsperger, German footballer
* 1982 – Kelly Pavlik, American boxer
* 1982 – Matt Pickens, American soccer player
* 1982 – Alexandre Prémat, French race car driver
* 1982 – Danylo Sapunov, Ukrainian-Kazakhstani triathlete
* 1982 – Hubert Schwab, Swiss cyclist
* 1982 – Marcel Seip, Dutch former footballer
*1983 – Jaime Castrillón, Colombian footballer 
* 1983 – Jorge Andrés Martínez, Uruguayan footballer
* 1983 – Brock Radunske, Canadian-South Korean ice hockey player
* 1983 – Yohann Sangaré, French basketball player
* 1983 – Cécile Storti, French cross-country skier
* 1983 – Shikha Uberoi, Indian-American tennis player
*1984 – Marshall Allman, American actor
* 1984 – Aram Mp3, Armenian singer and comedian
* 1984 – Rune Brattsveen, Norwegian biathlete
* 1984 – Alexei Glukhov, Russian ice hockey player
* 1984 – Maartje Goderie, Dutch field hockey player
* 1984 – Darija Jurak, Croatian tennis player
* 1984 – Dejan Kelhar, Slovenian footballer
* 1984 – Dmitry Kozonchuk, Russian cyclist
* 1984 – Shin Min-a, South Korean actress
* 1984 – Jess Sum, Hong Kong actress
* 1984 – Peter Penz, Austrian luger
* 1984 – Samuele Preisig, Swiss footballer
* 1984 – Cristian Săpunaru, Romanian footballer
* 1984 – Fabio Vitaioli, San Marinese footballer
* 1984 – Kisho Yano, Japanese footballer
* 1984 – Saba Qamar, Pakistani actress-model
*1985 – Daniel Congré, French footballer
* 1985 – Erwin l&#x27;Ami, Dutch chess player
* 1985 – Jolanda Keizer, Dutch heptathlete
* 1985 – Sergey Khachatryan, Armenian violinist
* 1985 – Linas Pilibaitis, Lithuanian footballer
* 1985 – Jan Smeets, Dutch chess grandmaster
* 1985 – Kristof Vandewalle, Belgian cyclist
*1986 – Anna Sophia Berglund, American model and actress
* 1986 – Anzor Boltukayev, Chechen wrestler
* 1986 – Diego Chará, Colombian footballer
* 1986 – Charlotte Flair, American wrestler, author and actress
* 1986 – Róbert Kasza, Hungarian Modern pentathlete
* 1986 – Eetu Muinonen, Finnish footballer
* 1986 – Manuel Ruz, Spanish footballer
* 1986 – Albert Selimov, Azerbaijani boxer
*1987 – Max Grün, German footballer
* 1987 – Balázs Hárai, Hungarian water polo player
* 1987 – Anton Kokorin, Russian sprint athlete
* 1987 – Fyodor Kudryashov, Russian footballer
* 1987 – Etiënne Reijnen, Dutch footballer
*1988 – Gerson Acevedo, Chilean footballer
* 1988 – Teresa Almeida, Angolan handball player
* 1988 – Quade Cooper, New Zealand-Australian rugby player and boxer
* 1988 – Jonathan Davies, Welsh rugby union player
* 1988 – Gevorg Ghazaryan, Armenian footballer
* 1988 – Alisha Glass, American ex-indoor volleyball player
* 1988 – Vurğun Hüseynov, Azerbaijani footballer
* 1988 – Matthias Jaissle, German footballer and manager
* 1988 – Christopher Papamichalopoulos, Cypriot skier
* 1988 – Zack Smith, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1988 – Pape Sy, French basketball player
* 1988 – Alexey Volkov, Russian biathlete
*1989 – Kader Amadou, Nigerien footballer
* 1989 – Yémi Apithy, Beninese fencer
* 1989 – Liemarvin Bonevacia, Dutch sprinter
* 1989 – Freddie Fox, English actor
* 1989 – Emre Güral, Turkish footballer
* 1989 – Justin Holiday, American basketball player
* 1989 – Rachel Homan, Canadian curler
* 1989 – Lily James, English actress
* 1989 – Trevor Marsicano, American speed skater
* 1989 – Jonathan Rossini, Swiss footballer
* 1989 – Kiki Sukezane, Japanese actress
* 1989 – Sosuke Takatani, Japanese wrestler
*1990 – Amer Said Al-Shatri, Omani footballer
* 1990 – Alex Cuthbert, Welsh rugby player
* 1990 – Patrick Dangerfield, Australian footballer
* 1990 – Fredy Hinestroza, Colombian footballer
* 1990 – Chen Huijia, Chinese swimmer
* 1990 – Haruma Miura, Japanese actor and singer (d. 2020)
* 1990 – Ismaeel Mohammad, Qatari footballer
* 1990 – Iryna Pamialova, Belarusian canoeist
* 1990 – Jakub Sedláček, Czech ice hockey player
* 1990 – Sercan Yıldırım, Turkish footballer
* 1990 – Género Zeefuik, Dutch footballer
*1991 – Yassine Bounou, Moroccan footballer
* 1991 – Nathaniel Clyne, English footballer
* 1991 – Adriano Grimaldi, Italian-German footballer
* 1991 – Joël Mall, Swiss footballer
* 1991 – Guilherme dos Santos Torres, Brazilian footballer
*1992 – Emmalyn Estrada, Canadian singer-songwriter and dancer
* 1992 – Shintaro Kurumaya, Japanese footballer
* 1992 – Kaveh Rezaei, Iranian footballer
* 1992 – Dmytro Ryzhuk, Ukrainian footballer
*1993 – Andreas Bouchalakis, Greek footballer
* 1993 – Maya DiRado, American swimmer
* 1993 – Laura Feiersinger, Austrian footballer
* 1993 – Benjamin Garcia, French rugby league player
* 1993 – Kurtis Patterson, Australian cricketer
* 1993 – Scottie Wilbekin, American-Turkish basketball player 
*1994 – Mateusz Bieniek, Polish volleyball player
* 1994 – Edem Rjaïbi, Tunisian footballer
* 1994 – Richard Sánchez, Mexican footballer
*1995 – Viliame Kikau, Fijian rugby league player
* 1995 – Sei Muroya, Japanese footballer
* 1995 – Gleb Rassadkin, Belarusian footballer
* 1995 – Sebastian Starke Hedlund, Swedish footballer
*1996 – Nicolas Beer, Danish race car driver
* 1996 – Raouf Benguit, Algerian footballer
*1997 – Borja Mayoral, Spanish footballer
* 1997 – Dominik Mysterio, American wrestler
*1999 – Bobby Miller, American baseball player
*2001 – Johnny Beecher, American ice hockey player
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 517 – Timothy I of Constantinople, Byzantine patriarch
* 582 – Eutychius of Constantinople, Byzantine patriarch 
* 584 – Ruadán of Lorrha, Irish abbot
* 902 – Al-Mu&#x27;tadid, Abbasid caliph
*1168 – Robert de Beaumont, 2nd Earl of Leicester, English politician (b. 1104)
*1183 – Ramon Berenguer III, Spanish count of Cerdanya and Provence
*1205 – Isabella I of Jerusalem, queen regnant of Jerusalem (b. 1172)
*1258 – Juliana of Liège, Belgian canoness and saint
*1308 – Ivan Kőszegi, Hungarian baron and oligarch
*1325 – Ralph de Monthermer, 1st Baron of Monthermer and Earl of Gloucester (b. c. 1270)
*1419 – Vincent Ferrer, Spanish missionary and saint (b. 1350)
*1431 – Bernard I, margrave of Baden-Baden (b. 1364)
*1512 – Lazzaro Bastiani, Italian painter (b. 1429)
*1534 – Jan Matthys, Dutch anabaptist reformer
*1594 – Catherine of Palma, Spanish nun (b. 1533)
===1601–1900===
*1612 – Diana Scultori, Italian engraver (b. 1547)
*1617 – Alonso Lobo, Spanish composer (b. 1555)
*1626 – Anna Koltovskaya, Russian tsarina 
*1673 – François Caron, Belgian-French explorer and politician, 8th Governor of Formosa (b. 1600)
*1679 – Anne Geneviève de Bourbon, French princess (b. 1619)
*1684 – William Brouncker, English mathematician (b. 1620)
* 1684 – Karl Eusebius, prince of Liechtenstein (b. 1611)
*1693 – Anne Marie Louise d&#x27;Orléans, French noblewoman (b. 1627)
* 1693 – Philip William August, German nobleman (b. 1668)
*1695 – George Savile, English politician, Lord President of the Council (b. 1633)
*1697 – Charles XI, king of Sweden (b. 1655)
*1704 – Christian Ulrich I, German nobleman and Duke of Württemberg-Oels (b. 1652)
*1708 – Christian Heinrich, German prince and member of the House of Hohenzollern (b. 1661)
*1709 – Roger de Piles, French painter, engraver, art critic and diplomat (b. 1635)
*1712 – Jan Luyken, Dutch poet, illustrator and engraver (b. 1649)
*1717 – Jean Jouvenet, French painter (b. 1647)
*1723 – Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach, Austrian architect, sculptor and historian (b. 1656)
*1735 – William Derham, English minister and philosopher (b. 1657)
*1751 – Frederick I, prince consort and king of Sweden (b. 1676)
*1765 – Edward Young, English poet and author (b. 1683)
*1767 – Princess Charlotte Wilhelmine of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, German princess of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld (b. 1685)
*1768 – Egidio Forcellini, Italian philologist (b. 1688)
*1769 – Marc-Antoine Laugier, Jesuit priest (b. 1713)
*1794 – Georges Danton, French lawyer and politician, French Minister of Justice (b. 1759)
* 1794 – François Chabot, French politician (b. 1756)
* 1794 – Camille Desmoulins, French journalist, lawyer, and politician (b. 1760)
* 1794 – Fabre d&#x27;Églantine, French actor, dramatist, poet and politician (b. 1750)
* 1794 – Marie-Jean Hérault de Séchelles, French judge and politician (b. 1759)
* 1794 – Pierre Philippeaux, French lawyer (b. 1754)
* 1794 – François Joseph Westermann, French general (b. 1751)
*1799 – Johann Christoph Gatterer, German historian (b. 1727)
*1804 – Jean-Charles Pichegru, French general (b. 1761)
*1808 – Johann Georg Wille, German engraver (b. 1715)
*1830 – Richard Chenevix, Irish chemist and playwright (b. 1774)
*1831 – Pierre Léonard Vander Linden, Belgian entomologist (b. 1797)
*1842 – Shah Shujah Durrani, 5th Emir of Afghanistan (b. 1785)
*1852 – Prince Felix of Schwarzenberg, (b. 1800)
*1861 – Ferdinand Joachimsthal, German mathematician (b. 1818)
*1862 – Barend Cornelis Koekkoek, Dutch artist (b. 1803)
*1865 – Manfredo Fanti, Italian general (b. 1806)
*1866 – Thomas Hodgkin, British physician (b. 1798)
*1868 – Karel Purkyně, Czech painter (b. 1834)
*1871 – Paolo Savi, Italian geologist and ornithologist (b. 1798)
*1872 – Paul-Auguste-Ernest Laugier, French astronomer (b. 1812)
*1873 – Milivoje Blaznavac, Serbian soldier and politician (b. 1824)
*1882 – Pierre Guillaume Frédéric le Play, (b. 1806)
*1888 – Vsevolod Garshin, Russian author (b. 1855)
*1891 – Johann Hermann Bauer, Austrian chess master (b. 1861)
*1900 – Joseph Bertrand, French mathematician, economist, and academic (b. 1822)
* 1900 – Osman Nuri Pasha, Ottoman field marshal and the hero of the Siege of Plevna in 1877 (b. 1832)

===1901–present===
*1901 – Angelo Messedaglia, Italian social scientist and statistician (b. 1820)
*1902 – Hans Ernst August Buchner, German bacteriologist (b. 1850)
*1904 – Ernst Leopold, 4th Prince of Leiningen (b. 1830)
* 1904 – Frances Power Cobbe, Irish writer (b. 1822)
*1906 – Eastman Johnson, American painter (b. 1824)
*1914 – Bernard Borggreve, German forestry scientist (b. 1836)
*1916 – Maksim Kovalevsky, Russian sociologist (b. 1851)
*1918 – George Tupou II, King of Tonga (b. 1874)
* 1918 – Paul Vidal de La Blache, French geographer (b. 1845)
*1920 – Laurent Marqueste, French sculptor (b. 1848)
*1921 – Alphons Diepenbrock, Dutch composer (b. 1862)
* 1921 – Sophie Elkan, Swedish writer and translator (b. 1853)
*1923 – George Herbert, 5th Earl of Carnarvon, English archaeologist and businessman (b. 1866)
*1924 – Victor Hensen, German zoologist (b. 1835)
*1928 – Roy Kilner, English cricketer and soldier (b. 1890)
* 1928 – Viktor Oliva, Czech painter and illustrator (b. 1861)
*1929 – Francis Aidan Gasquet, English Benedictine monk (b. 1846)
* 1929 – Ludwig von Sybel, German archeologist (b. 1846)
*1932 – María Blanchard, Spanish painter (b. 1881)
*1933 – Earl Derr Biggers, American novelist and playwright (b. 1884)
* 1933 – Hjalmar Mellin, Finnish mathematician and functional theorist (b. 1854)
*1934 – Salvatore Di Giacomo, Italian poet, playwright, songwriter and fascist intellectual (b. 1860)
* 1934 – Jiro Sato, Japanese tennis player (b. 1908)
*1935 – Achille Locatelli, Roman Catholic cardinal (b. 1856)
* 1935 – Emil Młynarski, Polish conductor, violinist, composer, and pedagogue (b. 1870)
* 1935 – Franz von Vecsey, Hungarian violinist and composer (b. 1893)
*1936 – Chandler Egan, American golfer and architect (b. 1884)
*1937 – Gustav Adolf Deissmann, (b. 1866)
* 1937 – José Benlliure y Gil, Spanish painter (b. 1858)
*1938 – Helena Westermarck, Finnish artist and writer (b. 1857)
* 1938 – Verner Lehtimäki, Finnish revolutionary (b. 1890)
*1940 – Charles Freer Andrews, English-Indian priest, missionary, and educator (b. 1871)
* 1940 – Robert Maillart, Swiss civil engineer (b. 1872)
* 1940 – Jay O&#x27;Brien, American bobsledder (b. 1883)
* 1940 – Song Zheyuan, Chinese general (b. 1885)
*1941 – Parvin E&#x27;tesami, Persian poet (b. 1907)
* 1941 – Nigel Gresley, Scottish-English engineer (b. 1876)
* 1941 – Franciszek Kleeberg, Polish general (b. 1888)
*1945 – Heinrich Borgmann, German officer (b. 1912)
* 1945 – Karl-Otto Koch, German SS officer (b. 1897)
*1946 – Vincent Youmans, American composer and producer (b. 1898)
*1947 – Bernhard Pankok, German painter, artist and architect (b. 1872)
* 1947 – Elis Strömgren, Swedish-Danish astronomer (b. 1870)
*1948 – Abby Aldrich Rockefeller, American socialite and philanthropist (b. 1874)
*1949 – Erich Zeigner, Prime Minister of Saxony (b. 1886)
*1950 – Hiroshi Yoshida, Japanese painter (b. 1876)
*1952 – Agnes Morton, British tennis player (b. 1872)
*1954 – Princess Märtha of Sweden, (b. 1901)
* 1954 – Claude Delvincourt, French pianist and composer (b. 1888)
*1955 – Tibor Szele, Hungarian mathematician (b. 1918)
*1956 – William Titt, British gymnast (b. 1881)
*1958 – Prince Ferdinand of Bavaria (b. 1884)
* 1958 – Ásgrímur Jónsson, Icelandic painter (b. 1876)
* 1958 – Isidora Sekulić, Serbian writer (b. 1877)
*1961 – Nikolai Kryukov, Russian composer (b. 1908)
*1962 – Boo Kullberg, Swedish gymnast (b. 1889)
*1963 – Jacobus Oud, Dutch architect (b. 1890)
*1964 – James Chapin, American ornithologist (b. 1889)
* 1964 – Aloïse Corbaz, Swiss artist (b. 1886)
* 1964 – Douglas MacArthur, American general (b. 1880)
*1965 – Pedro Sernagiotto, Italian-Brazilian footballer (b. 1908)
* 1965 – Sándor Szalay, Hungarian figure skater (b. 1893)
*1967 – Mischa Elman, Ukrainian-American violinist (b. 1891)
* 1967 – Johan Falkberget, Norwegian author (b. 1879)
* 1967 – Hermann Joseph Muller, American geneticist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1890)
* 1967 – Herbert Johnston, British runner (b. 1902)
*1968 – Félix Couchoro, Togolese writer (b. 1900)
* 1968 – Lajos Csordás, Hungarian footballer (b. 1932)
* 1968 – Giuseppe Paris, Italian gymnast (b. 1895)
*1969 – Alberto Bonucci, Italian actor and director (b. 1918)
* 1969 – Rómulo Gallegos, Venezuelan novelist and politician (b. 1917)
* 1969 – Ain-Ervin Mere, Estonian SS officer (b. 1903)
*1970 – Louisa Bolus, South African botanist and taxonomist (b. 1877)
* 1970 – Alfred Sturtevant, American geneticist and academic (b. 1891)
* 1970 – Karl von Spreti, German diplomat (b. 1907)
*1971 – José Cubiles, Spanish pianist and conductor (b. 1894)
*1972 – Isabel Jewell, American actress and singer (b. 1907)
*1973 – David Murray, British race car driver (b. 1909)
* 1973 – Alla Tarasova, Russian ballerina (b. 1898)
*1974 – Bino Bini, Italian fencer (b. 1900)
* 1974 – A. Y. Jackson, Canadian painter (b. 1882)
*1975 – Tell Berna, American middle and long-distance runner (b. 1891)
* 1975 – Victor Marijnen, Dutch politician (b. 1917)
* 1975 – Chiang Kai-shek, Chinese general and politician, 1st President of the Republic of China (b. 1887)
* 1975 – Harold Osborn, American track and fielder (b. 1899)
*1976 – Howard Hughes, American pilot, engineer, and director (b. 1905)
* 1976 – Wilder Penfield, American-Canadian surgeon and academic (b. 1891)
* 1976 – Harry Wyld, British cyclist (b. 1900)
*1977 – Carlos Prío Socarrás, President of Cuba, (b. 1903)
* 1977 – Yuri Zavadsky, Russian actor and director (b. 1894)
*1981 – Émile Hanse, Belgian footballer (b. 1892)
* 1981 – Bob Hite, American singer-songwriter (b. 1945)
* 1981 – Pinchus Kremegne, French artist (b. 1890)
*1982 – Abe Fortas, American lawyer and jurist (b. 1910)
*1983 – Abd al-Quddus al-Ansari, Saudi Arabian historian, journalist and writer. (b. 1907)
*1984 – Hans Lunding, Danish military officer (b. 1899)
* 1984 – Giuseppe Tucci, Italian scholar of oriental cultures (b. 1894)
*1986 – Manly Wade Wellman, American writer (b. 1903)
*1987 – Leabua Jonathan, 2nd Prime Minister of Lesotho (b. 1914)
*1988 – Alf Kjellin, Swedish actor and director (b. 1920)
*1989 – Frank Foss, American pole vaulter (b. 1895)
* 1989 – Karel Zeman, Czech director, artist, production designer and animator (b. 1910)
*1991 – Sonny Carter, American soccer player, physician, and astronaut (b. 1947)
* 1991 – Jay Miller, American basketball player (b. 1943)
* 1991 – Jiří Mucha, Czech journalist, writer and screenwriter (b. 1915)
* 1991 – William Sidney, 1st Viscount De L&#x27;Isle (b. 1909)
* 1991 – John Tower, American soldier, academic, and politician (b. 1925)
*1992 – Takeshi Inoue, Japanese footballer (b. 1928)
* 1992 – Molly Picon, American actress (b. 1898)
* 1992 – Sam Walton, American businessman, founded Walmart and Sam&#x27;s Club (b. 1918)
*1993 – Divya Bharti, Indian actress (b. 1974)
*1994 – Kurt Cobain, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (b. 1967)
*1995 – Nicolaas Cortlever, Dutch chess player (b. 1915)
* 1995 – Emilio Greco, Italian sculptor and engraver (b. 1913)
* 1995 – Christian Pineau, French Resistance fighter (b. 1904)
*1996 – Charlene Holt, American actress (b. 1928)
*1997 – Allen Ginsberg, American poet (b. 1926)
*1998 – Charles Frank, British theoretical physicist (b. 1911)
* 1998 – Cozy Powell, English drummer (b. 1947)
*1999 – Giulio Einaudi, Italian book publisher (b. 1912)
*2000 – Heinrich Müller, Austrian footballer (b. 1909)
* 2000 – Lee Petty, American race car driver (b. 1914)
*2001 – Aldo Olivieri, Italian footballer (b. 1910)
*2002 – Layne Staley, American singer-songwriter (b. 1967)
* 2002 – Kim Won-gyun, North Korean composer and politician (b. 1917)
*2003 – Keizo Morishita, Japanese painter (b. 1944)
*2004 – Fernand Goyvaerts, Belgian footballer (b. 1938)
* 2004 – Sławomir Rawicz, Polish lieutenant (b. 1915)
* 2004 – Heiner Zieschang, German mathematician and academic (b. 1936)
*2005 – Saul Bellow, Canadian-American novelist, essayist and short story writer, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1915)
* 2005 – Robert Borg, American military officer and equestrian (b. 1913)
* 2005 – Chung Nam-sik, South Korean footballer (b. 1917)
*2006 – Allan Kaprow, American painter and educator (b. 1927)
* 2006 – Gene Pitney, American singer-songwriter (b. 1940)
* 2006 – Yevgeny Seredin, Russian swimmer (b. 1958)
* 2006 – Pasquale Macchi, Roman Catholic archbishop (b. 1923)
*2007 – Maria Gripe, Swedish journalist and author (b. 1923)
* 2007 – Leela Majumdar, Indian author and academic (b. 1908)
* 2007 – Werner Maser, German historian and journalist (b. 1922)
* 2007 – Mark St. John, American guitarist (b. 1956)
* 2007 – Thomas Stoltz Harvey, American pathologist (b. 1912)
*2008 – Charlton Heston, American actor, director, and political activist (b. 1923)
*2009 – I. J. Good, British mathematician (b. 1916)
*2010 – Vitaly Sevastyanov, Soviet cosmonaut and engineer (b. 1935)
*2011 – Baruch Samuel Blumberg, American physician and geneticist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1925)
* 2011 – Ange-Félix Patassé, Central African politician (b. 1937)
*2012 – Ferdinand Alexander Porsche, German designer (b. 1935)
* 2012 – Pedro Bartolomé Benoit, Dominican Republican politician military officer (b. 1921)
* 2012 – Jim Marshall, English businessman, founded Marshall Amplification (b. 1923)
* 2012 – Barney McKenna, Irish musician (b. 1939)
* 2012 – Bingu wa Mutharika, Malawian economist and politician, 3rd President of Malawi (b. 1934)
*2013 – Regina Bianchi, Italian actress (b. 1921)
* 2013 – Piero de Palma, Italian tenor and actor (b. 1924)
* 2013 – Nikolaos Pappas, Greek Navy admiral (b. 1930)
*2014 – Alan Davie, Scottish saxophonist and painter (b. 1920)
* 2014 – Mariano Díaz, Spanish cyclist (b. 1939)
* 2014 – Peter Matthiessen, American novelist, short story writer, editor, co-founded &quot;The Paris Review&quot; (b. 1927)
* 2014 – John Pinette, American comedian (b. 1964)
* 2014 – José Wilker, Brazilian actor, director, and producer (b. 1947)
*2015 – Fredric Brandt, American dermatologist and author (b. 1949)
* 2015 – Juan Carlos Cáceres, Argentinian singer and pianist (b. 1936)
*2016 – Koço Kasapoğlu, Turkish footballer (b. 1936)
*2017 – Attilio Benfatto, Italian cyclist (b. 1943)
* 2017 – Arthur Bisguier, American chess Grandmaster (b. 1929)
* 2017 – Paul G. Comba, Italian-American computer scientist and astronomer (b. 1926)
* 2017 – Makoto Ōoka, Japanese poet and literary critic (b. 1931)
* 2017 – Paul O&#x27;Neill, American rock composer and producer (b. 1956)
* 2017 – Tim Parnell, British race car driver (b. 1932)
* 2017 – Memè Perlini, Italian actor and director (b. 1947)
* 2017 – Atanase Sciotnic, Romanian sprint canoeist (b. 1942)
* 2017 – Ilkka Sinisalo, Finnish ice hockey player (b. 1958)
*2018 – Isao Takahata, Japanese director (b. 1935)
*2019 – Sydney Brenner, South African biologist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1927)
*2021 – Paul Ritter, English actor (b. 1966)
*2022 – Nehemiah Persoff, Israeli-American actor (b. 1919)
* 2022 – Jimmy Wang Yu, Taiwanese actor (b. 1943)
* 2024 – C. J. Snare, American musician and songwriter (b. 1959)
==Holidays and observances==
*Christian feast day:
**Albert of Montecorvino
**Derfel Gadarn
**Æthelburh of Kent
**Gerald of Sauve-Majeure
**Juliana of Liège
**Maria Crescentia Höss
**Blessed Mariano de la Mata
**Pandita Mary Ramabai (Episcopal Church (USA)) 
**Ruadhán of Lorrha
**Vincent Ferrer
**April 5 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
*Cold Food Festival, held on April 4 if it is a leap year (China); and its related observances:
*Earliest day on which Sham el-Nessim can fall, while May 9 is the latest; celebrated on Monday after the Orthodox Easter (Egypt)
*Children&#x27;s Day (Palestinian territories)
*First Contact Day (International observance)
*Sikmogil (South Korea)
*National Maritime Day is observed in India, in commemoration of the first voyage of SS &quot;Loyalty&quot; of the Scindia Steam Navigation Company Ltd. in 1919.
* International Day of Conscience

==Other==
* April the Fifth (1929–1954), British Thoroughbred racehorse
* (ends 5 April)

==References==
==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* Historical Events on April 5</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q29944" start="28" end="31" title="823" label="823"/>
<link wikidata="Q150735" start="34" end="43" title="Lothair I" label="Lothair I"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="55" end="68" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q103308" start="72" end="86" title="Pope Paschal I" label="Pope Paschal I"/>
<link wikidata="Q23787" start="90" end="93" title="919" label="919"/>
<link wikidata="Q60789138" start="100" end="123" title="Fatimid invasion of Egypt (919–921)" label="second Fatimid invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696332" start="127" end="132" title="Medieval Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q293549" start="173" end="199" title="Al-Qa&amp;#x27;im (Fatimid caliph)" label="al-Qa&amp;#x27;im bi-Amr Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107354" start="215" end="222" title="Raqqada" label="Raqqada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437" start="249" end="253" title="1242" label="1242"/>
<link wikidata="Q14689" start="267" end="284" title="Battle on the Ice" label="Battle on the Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q19253" start="288" end="299" title="Lake Peipus" label="Lake Peipus"/>
<link wikidata="Q151536" start="301" end="308" title="Republic of Novgorod" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q174044" start="324" end="340" title="Alexander Nevsky" label="Alexander Nevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="376" end="392" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457" start="395" end="399" title="1536" label="1536"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="402" end="411" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801358" start="420" end="431" title="Royal Entry" label="Royal Entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q657438" start="489" end="502" title="Roman triumph" label="Roman triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638" start="505" end="509" title="1566" label="1566"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031430" start="524" end="529" title="Habsburg Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349577" start="547" end="569" title="Hendrick van Brederode" label="Hendrick van Brederode"/>
<link wikidata="Q307815" start="609" end="626" title="Margaret of Parma" label="Margaret of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639040" start="643" end="665" title="Compromise of Nobles" label="Petition of Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q184725" start="682" end="701" title="Spanish Inquisition" label="Spanish Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q330533" start="709" end="728" title="Seventeen Provinces" label="Seventeen Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781" start="747" end="751" title="1614" label="1614"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="757" end="765" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="767" end="782" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q193406" start="783" end="793" title="Pocahontas" label="Pocahontas"/>
<link wikidata="Q433948" start="819" end="829" title="John Rolfe" label="John Rolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812" start="832" end="836" title="1621" label="1621"/>
<link wikidata="Q187093" start="849" end="858" title="Mayflower" label="Mayflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q326295" start="880" end="903" title="Plymouth, Massachusetts" label="Plymouth, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805" start="934" end="938" title="1792" label="1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="965" end="982" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q112762791" start="1010" end="1021" title="Veto power in the United States" label="veto a bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815" start="1080" end="1084" title="1795" label="1795"/>
<link wikidata="Q667080" start="1087" end="1101" title="Peace of Basel" label="Peace of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="1121" end="1128" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964" start="1139" end="1143" title="1818" label="1818"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073849" start="1153" end="1168" title="Battle of Maipú" label="Battle of Maipú"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="1170" end="1175" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q28930" start="1213" end="1236" title="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q134160" start="1241" end="1259" title="José de San Martín" label="José de San Martín"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698" start="1354" end="1358" title="1862" label="1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1361" end="1379" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551797" start="1385" end="1403" title="Battle of Yorktown (1862)" label="Battle of Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783" start="1413" end="1417" title="1879" label="1879"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="1420" end="1427" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="1444" end="1449" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="1477" end="1481" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q152004" start="1496" end="1514" title="War of the Pacific" label="War of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="1536" end="1540" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656048" start="1543" end="1578" title="1902 Ibrox disaster" label="A stand box collapses at Ibrox Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q208709" start="1584" end="1597" title="Ibrox Stadium" label="Ibrox Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="1602" end="1609" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="1716" end="1736" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="1751" end="1759" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="1764" end="1771" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="1774" end="1778" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254317" start="1785" end="1804" title="Transandine Railway" label="Transandine Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="1853" end="1857" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q463569" start="1864" end="1893" title="American Birth Control League" label="American Birth Control League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553262" start="1909" end="1927" title="Planned Parenthood" label="Planned Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="1947" end="1951" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q38610" start="1954" end="1978" title="Dominion of Newfoundland" label="Dominion of Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816847" start="1980" end="2000" title="1932 Colonial Building riot" label="Ten thousand rioters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148301" start="2011" end="2028" title="Colonial Building" label="Colonial Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="2069" end="2073" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="2091" end="2112" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338798" start="2123" end="2138" title="executive order" label="executive order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094508" start="2163" end="2190" title="Civilian Conservation Corps" label="Civilian Conservation Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656758" start="2196" end="2200" title="Executive Order 6102" label="6102"/>
<link wikidata="Q20106628" start="2314" end="2333" title="Andorran Revolution" label="Andorran Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q61959496" start="2339" end="2354" title="Young Andorrans" label="Young Andorrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046548" start="2366" end="2381" title="Casa de la Vall" label="Casa de la Vall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754577" start="2415" end="2435" title="1933 Andorran parliamentary election" label="democratic elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895489" start="2441" end="2464" title="universal male suffrage" label="universal male suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="2467" end="2471" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563884" start="2474" end="2509" title="1936 Tupelo–Gainesville tornado outbreak" label="Tupelo–Gainesville tornado outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q380770" start="2514" end="2516" title="Fujita scale" label="F5"/>
<link wikidata="Q667727" start="2538" end="2557" title="Tupelo, Mississippi" label="Tupelo, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="2560" end="2564" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="2567" end="2584" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742116" start="2605" end="2621" title="Nationalist faction (Spanish Civil War)" label="Nationalist army"/>
<link wikidata="Q15090" start="2651" end="2657" title="Lleida" label="Lleida"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="2668" end="2684" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022" start="2714" end="2725" title="Generalitat de Catalunya" label="Generalitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="2756" end="2765" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20104768" start="2772" end="2811" title="Autonomous Region of Catalonia (1931–1939)" label="self-government granted by the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="2844" end="2860" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="2863" end="2867" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2870" end="2882" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="2884" end="2896" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q158287" start="2940" end="2949" title="Case Blue" label="Case Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q161213" start="2965" end="2982" title="6th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="German Sixth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="2990" end="3019" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="planned assault on Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q219712" start="3048" end="3070" title="Imperial Japanese Navy" label="Imperial Japanese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329907" start="3080" end="3117" title="Easter Sunday Raid" label="a carrier-based air attack on Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="3119" end="3125" title="Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q757871" start="3137" end="3154" title="Indian Ocean raid" label="Indian Ocean raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="3205" end="3215" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843" start="3216" end="3224" title="cruisers" label="cruisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="3264" end="3268" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="3285" end="3314" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q688781" start="3476" end="3483" title="Mortsel" label="Mortsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="3551" end="3555" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="3558" end="3566" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="3568" end="3576" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="3584" end="3599" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3628" end="3640" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="3721" end="3725" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3728" end="3734" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q769680" start="3797" end="3805" title="Bornholm" label="Bornholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427735" start="3818" end="3831" title="Fleet Air Arm" label="Fleet Air Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q850244" start="3832" end="3850" title="Vickers Wellington" label="Vickers Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q85722610" start="3851" end="3858" title="1946 Rabat Vickers Wellington crash" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q44381" start="3886" end="3891" title="Rabat, Malta" label="Rabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744657" start="3893" end="3898" title="Crown Colony of Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="3987" end="3991" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587063" start="3996" end="4014" title="St. Anthony&amp;#x27;s Hospital fire" label="fire in a hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q577958" start="4018" end="4037" title="Effingham, Illinois" label="Effingham, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="4125" end="4129" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q769097" start="4142" end="4168" title="Ethel and Julius Rosenberg" label="Ethel and Julius Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="4196" end="4202" title="espionage" label="spying"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4211" end="4223" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="4226" end="4230" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="4233" end="4249" title="Cuban Revolution" label="Cuban Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="4251" end="4263" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370482" start="4293" end="4308" title="President of Cuba" label="Cuban President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11270" start="4309" end="4326" title="Fulgencio Batista" label="Fulgencio Batista"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="4329" end="4333" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532029" start="4336" end="4347" title="Ripple Rock" label="Ripple Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459208" start="4391" end="4406" title="Seymour Narrows" label="Seymour Narrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="4410" end="4416" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="4500" end="4504" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984261" start="4518" end="4535" title="Buddhist Uprising" label="Buddhist Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q372591" start="4569" end="4582" title="Nguyễn Cao Kỳ" label="Nguyễn Cao Kỳ"/>
<link wikidata="Q25282" start="4646" end="4653" title="Da Nang" label="Đà Nẵng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="4676" end="4680" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682545" start="4697" end="4722" title="Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna" label="Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574531" start="4732" end="4740" title="1971 JVP insurrection" label="a revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887791" start="4753" end="4765" title="United Front (Sri Lanka)" label="United Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q194291" start="4780" end="4801" title="Sirimavo Bandaranaike" label="Sirimavo Bandaranaike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="4804" end="4808" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q623394" start="4817" end="4823" title="Carrie (novel)" label="Carrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="4866" end="4878" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4883" end="4911" title="Carrie (novel)#Publication" label="published for the first time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="4948" end="4952" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4958" end="4963" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191151" start="4969" end="4989" title="April Fifth Movement" label="April Fifth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191151" start="5003" end="5021" title="1976 Tiananmen Incident" label="Tiananmen Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="5024" end="5028" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="5035" end="5051" title="US supreme court" label="US Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="5121" end="5126" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="5273" end="5277" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q178765" start="5283" end="5286" title="Atlantic Southeast Airlines" label="ASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163407" start="5287" end="5294" title="EMB 120" label="EMB 120"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816544" start="5295" end="5302" title="Atlantic Southeast Airlines Flight 2311" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q994144" start="5306" end="5324" title="Brunswick, Georgia" label="Brunswick, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658030" start="5358" end="5373" title="John Tower" label="Sen. John Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338912" start="5388" end="5400" title="Sonny Carter" label="Sonny Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q54381" start="5414" end="5448" title="Space Shuttle Atlantis" label="Space shuttle &amp;quot;Atlantis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q608659" start="5461" end="5467" title="STS-37" label="STS-37"/>
<link wikidata="Q41519" start="5482" end="5511" title="Compton Gamma Ray Observatory" label="Compton Gamma Ray Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="5514" end="5518" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q133040" start="5521" end="5537" title="Alberto Fujimori" label="Alberto Fujimori"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893606" start="5558" end="5589" title="1992 Peruvian self-coup" label="dissolves the Peruvian congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q175653" start="5635" end="5651" title="Suada Dilberovic" label="Suada Dilberovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q175653" start="5656" end="5666" title="Olga Sučić" label="Olga Sučić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266711" start="5685" end="5699" title="Vrbanja Bridge" label="Vrbanja Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11194" start="5703" end="5711" title="Sarajevo" label="Sarajevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="5750" end="5761" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="5764" end="5768" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="5774" end="5779" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184213" start="5785" end="5805" title="Akashi Kaikyō Bridge" label="Akashi Kaikyō Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="5872" end="5876" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q17435890" start="5883" end="5890" title="History of Libya under Muammar Gaddafi" label="Libyans"/>
<link wikidata="Q211087" start="5918" end="5935" title="Pan Am Flight 103" label="Pan Am Flight 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="5939" end="5943" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="6000" end="6004" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="6011" end="6022" title="cruise ship" label="cruise ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q578581" start="6023" end="6049" title="MS Sea Diamond" label="MS &amp;quot;Sea Diamond&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547142" start="6079" end="6089" title="Nea Kameni" label="Nea Kameni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="6174" end="6178" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="6181" end="6192" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q714770" start="6220" end="6236" title="Kwangmyŏngsŏng-2" label="Kwangmyŏngsŏng-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="6283" end="6288" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="6336" end="6367" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q495543" start="6404" end="6419" title="Six-party talks" label="Six-party talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="6422" end="6426" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397594" start="6487" end="6524" title="5 April 2010 North-West Frontier Province attacks" label="militant suicide bombings and attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q183314" start="6528" end="6546" title="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa" label="Khyber Pakhtunkhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="6559" end="6567" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q659854" start="6585" end="6605" title="Awami National Party" label="Awami National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583846" start="6615" end="6624" title="Timergara" label="Timergara"/>
<link wikidata="Q28172370" start="6644" end="6670" title="Consulate General of the United States, Peshawar" label="U.S. Consulate in Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898494" start="6739" end="6777" title="Upper Big Branch Mine disaster" label="Upper Big Branch Mine in West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54384" start="6788" end="6823" title="Space Shuttle Discovery" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Discovery&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q651789" start="6839" end="6846" title="STS-131" label="STS-131"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="6863" end="6890" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="6893" end="6897" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q943091" start="6916" end="6956" title="U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement" label="U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q97165285" start="6964" end="6991" title="2018 Southeastern Provisions raid" label="slaughterhouse in Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19681" start="7148" end="7152" title="1170" label="1170"/>
<link wikidata="Q230050" start="7155" end="7175" title="Isabella of Hainault" label="Isabella of Hainault"/>
<link wikidata="Q5388" start="7187" end="7191" title="1219" label="1219"/>
<link wikidata="Q493978" start="7194" end="7211" title="Wonjong of Goryeo" label="Wonjong of Goryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208" start="7227" end="7233" title="Goryeo" label="Goryeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534" start="7245" end="7249" title="1279" label="1279"/>
<link wikidata="Q288067" start="7252" end="7262" title="Al-Nuwayri" label="Al-Nuwayri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5550" start="7301" end="7305" title="1288" label="1288"/>
<link wikidata="Q440454" start="7308" end="7326" title="Emperor Go-Fushimi" label="Emperor Go-Fushimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742" start="7347" end="7351" title="1315" label="1315"/>
<link wikidata="Q727402" start="7354" end="7374" title="James III of Majorca" label="James III of Majorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190" start="7386" end="7390" title="1365" label="1365"/>
<link wikidata="Q77247" start="7393" end="7420" title="William II, Duke of Bavaria" label="William II, Duke of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589" start="7432" end="7436" title="1472" label="1472"/>
<link wikidata="Q161136" start="7439" end="7458" title="Bianca Maria Sforza" label="Bianca Maria Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="7476" end="7508" title="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288" start="7520" end="7524" title="1521" label="1521"/>
<link wikidata="Q983151" start="7527" end="7546" title="Francesco Laparelli" label="Francesco Laparelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302" start="7577" end="7581" title="1523" label="1523"/>
<link wikidata="Q262880" start="7584" end="7602" title="Blaise de Vigenère" label="Blaise de Vigenère"/>
<link wikidata="Q6443" start="7649" end="7653" title="1533" label="1533"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366369" start="7656" end="7675" title="Giulio della Rovere" label="Giulio della Rovere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479" start="7714" end="7718" title="1539" label="1539"/>
<link wikidata="Q41919" start="7721" end="7737" title="George Frederick, Margrave of Brandenburg-Ansbach" label="George Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554" start="7782" end="7786" title="1549" label="1549"/>
<link wikidata="Q654753" start="7789" end="7817" title="Princess Elizabeth of Sweden" label="Princess Elizabeth of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6648" start="7829" end="7833" title="1568" label="1568"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="7836" end="7851" title="Pope Urban VIII" label="Pope Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757" start="7863" end="7867" title="1588" label="1588"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="7870" end="7883" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766" start="7916" end="7920" title="1591" label="1591"/>
<link wikidata="Q63536" start="7923" end="7939" title="Frederick Ulrich, Duke of Brunswick-Luneburg" label="Frederick Ulrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6782" start="7979" end="7983" title="1595" label="1595"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264515" start="7986" end="7997" title="John Wilson (composer)" label="John Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738" start="8056" end="8060" title="1604" label="1604"/>
<link wikidata="Q505101" start="8063" end="8091" title="Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles IV, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788" start="8103" end="8107" title="1616" label="1616"/>
<link wikidata="Q76086" start="8110" end="8119" title="Frederick, Count Palatine of Zweibrücken" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815" start="8162" end="8166" title="1622" label="1622"/>
<link wikidata="Q318037" start="8169" end="8185" title="Vincenzo Viviani" label="Vincenzo Viviani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945" start="8247" end="8251" title="1649" label="1649"/>
<link wikidata="Q514846" start="8254" end="8264" title="Elihu Yale" label="Elihu Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982" start="8322" end="8326" title="1656" label="1656"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971322" start="8329" end="8343" title="Nikita Demidov" label="Nikita Demidov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581" start="8378" end="8382" title="1664" label="1664"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587845" start="8385" end="8414" title="Élisabeth Thérèse de Lorraine" label="Élisabeth Thérèse de Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620" start="8468" end="8472" title="1674" label="1674"/>
<link wikidata="Q442252" start="8475" end="8517" title="Margravine Elisabeth Sophie of Brandenburg (1674–1748)" label="Margravine Elisabeth Sophie of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682" start="8529" end="8533" title="1691" label="1691"/>
<link wikidata="Q213677" start="8536" end="8546" title="Louis VIII, Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt" label="Louis VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q693551" start="8548" end="8576" title="Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt" label="Landgrave of Hesse-Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685" start="8588" end="8592" title="1692" label="1692"/>
<link wikidata="Q237201" start="8595" end="8614" title="Adrienne Lecouvreur" label="Adrienne Lecouvreur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902" start="8642" end="8646" title="1719" label="1719"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453246" start="8649" end="8674" title="Axel von Fersen the Elder" label="Axel von Fersen the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145005" start="8714" end="8736" title="Lord Marshal (Sweden)" label="Lord Marshal of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936" start="8748" end="8752" title="1726" label="1726"/>
<link wikidata="Q387664" start="8755" end="8774" title="Benjamin Harrison V" label="Benjamin Harrison V"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942" start="8829" end="8833" title="1727" label="1727"/>
<link wikidata="Q266985" start="8836" end="8852" title="Pasquale Anfossi" label="Pasquale Anfossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952" start="8896" end="8900" title="1729" label="1729"/>
<link wikidata="Q72707" start="8903" end="8930" title="Frederick Charles Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick-Luneburg" label="Frederick Charles Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957" start="8970" end="8974" title="1730" label="1730"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166892" start="8977" end="9014" title="Jean Baptiste Seroux d&amp;#x27;Agincourt" label="Jean Baptiste Seroux d&amp;#x27;Agincourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966" start="9062" end="9066" title="1732" label="1732"/>
<link wikidata="Q127171" start="9069" end="9090" title="Jean-Honoré Fragonard" label="Jean-Honoré Fragonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984" start="9129" end="9133" title="1735" label="1735"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035811" start="9136" end="9164" title="Franziskus Herzan von Harras" label="Franziskus Herzan von Harras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002" start="9207" end="9211" title="1739" label="1739"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702466" start="9214" end="9232" title="Philemon Dickinson" label="Philemon Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618" start="9276" end="9280" title="1752" label="1752"/>
<link wikidata="Q708709" start="9283" end="9298" title="Sébastien Érard" label="Sébastien Érard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649" start="9335" end="9339" title="1761" label="1761"/>
<link wikidata="Q540504" start="9342" end="9357" title="Sybil Ludington" label="Sybil Ludington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679" start="9420" end="9424" title="1769" label="1769"/>
<link wikidata="Q745286" start="9427" end="9456" title="Sir Thomas Hardy, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Thomas Hardy, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692" start="9485" end="9489" title="1773" label="1773"/>
<link wikidata="Q426381" start="9492" end="9512" title="José María Coppinger" label="José María Coppinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770351" start="9526" end="9546" title="East Florida" label="Spanish East Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q70776" start="9565" end="9604" title="Duchess Therese of Mecklenburg-Strelitz" label="Duchess Therese of Mecklenburg-Strelitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697" start="9616" end="9620" title="1774" label="1774"/>
<link wikidata="Q108631281" start="9623" end="9638" title="David Gillespie (surveyor)" label="David Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709" start="9684" end="9688" title="1777" label="1777"/>
<link wikidata="Q637766" start="9691" end="9716" title="Marie Jules César Savigny" label="Marie Jules César Savigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740" start="9746" end="9750" title="1782" label="1782"/>
<link wikidata="Q888263" start="9753" end="9771" title="Wincenty Krasiński" label="Wincenty Krasiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752" start="9800" end="9804" title="1784" label="1784"/>
<link wikidata="Q57226" start="9807" end="9818" title="Louis Spohr" label="Louis Spohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765" start="9873" end="9877" title="1788" label="1788"/>
<link wikidata="Q705163" start="9880" end="9891" title="Franz Pforr" label="Franz Pforr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807" start="9919" end="9923" title="1793" label="1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q126961" start="9926" end="9943" title="Casimir Delavigne" label="Casimir Delavigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q472276" start="9990" end="10009" title="Felix de Muelenaere" label="Felix de Muelenaere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815" start="10041" end="10045" title="1795" label="1795"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606848" start="10048" end="10062" title="Henry Havelock" label="Henry Havelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827" start="10091" end="10095" title="1799" label="1799"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527095" start="10098" end="10118" title="Jacques Denys Choisy" label="Jacques Denys Choisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877" start="10160" end="10164" title="1801" label="1801"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355541" start="10167" end="10181" title="Félix Dujardin" label="Félix Dujardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q378706" start="10219" end="10236" title="Vincenzo Gioberti" label="Vincenzo Gioberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894" start="10295" end="10299" title="1804" label="1804"/>
<link wikidata="Q76747" start="10302" end="10326" title="Matthias Jakob Schleiden" label="Matthias Jakob Schleiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919" start="10355" end="10359" title="1809" label="1809"/>
<link wikidata="Q96389" start="10362" end="10377" title="Karl Felix Halm" label="Karl Felix Halm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922" start="10416" end="10420" title="1810" label="1810"/>
<link wikidata="Q309602" start="10423" end="10442" title="Sir Henry Rawlinson, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Henry Rawlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="10452" end="10470" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6928" start="10510" end="10514" title="1811" label="1811"/>
<link wikidata="Q959212" start="10517" end="10528" title="Jules Dupré" label="Jules Dupré"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943" start="10556" end="10560" title="1814" label="1814"/>
<link wikidata="Q213731" start="10563" end="10579" title="Felix Lichnowsky" label="Felix Lichnowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983" start="10621" end="10625" title="1822" label="1822"/>
<link wikidata="Q286125" start="10628" end="10658" title="Émile Louis Victor de Laveleye" label="Émile Louis Victor de Laveleye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008" start="10689" end="10693" title="1827" label="1827"/>
<link wikidata="Q155768" start="10696" end="10709" title="Joseph Lister" label="Joseph Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7584" start="10751" end="10755" title="1832" label="1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q959708" start="10758" end="10769" title="Jules Ferry" label="Jules Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="10806" end="10830" title="Prime Minister of France" label="Prime Minister of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591" start="10842" end="10846" title="1834" label="1834"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689726" start="10849" end="10865" title="Prentice Mulford" label="Prentice Mulford"/>
<link wikidata="Q67774" start="10915" end="10935" title="Wilhelm Olbers Focke" label="Wilhelm Olbers Focke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444002" start="10991" end="11008" title="Frank R. Stockton" label="Frank R. Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597" start="11050" end="11054" title="1835" label="1835"/>
<link wikidata="Q594896" start="11057" end="11072" title="Vítězslav Hálek" label="Vítězslav Hálek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608" start="11147" end="11151" title="1837" label="1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q315511" start="11154" end="11180" title="Algernon Charles Swinburne" label="Algernon Charles Swinburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616" start="11240" end="11244" title="1839" label="1839"/>
<link wikidata="Q471892" start="11247" end="11260" title="Robert Smalls" label="Robert Smalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619" start="11337" end="11341" title="1840" label="1840"/>
<link wikidata="Q426811" start="11344" end="11360" title="Ghazaros Aghayan" label="Ghazaros Aghayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625" start="11405" end="11409" title="1842" label="1842"/>
<link wikidata="Q46778" start="11412" end="11427" title="Hans Hildebrand" label="Hans Hildebrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636" start="11462" end="11466" title="1845" label="1845"/>
<link wikidata="Q65488" start="11469" end="11493" title="Friedrich Sigmund Merkel" label="Friedrich Sigmund Merkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q706123" start="11552" end="11564" title="Jules Cambon" label="Jules Cambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640" start="11593" end="11597" title="1846" label="1846"/>
<link wikidata="Q84548" start="11600" end="11613" title="Sigmund Exner" label="Sigmund Exner"/>
<link wikidata="Q334429" start="11656" end="11671" title="Henry Wellesley, 3rd Duke of Wellington" label="Henry Wellesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647" start="11712" end="11716" title="1848" label="1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779204" start="11719" end="11737" title="Thure de Thulstrup" label="Thure de Thulstrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q116124" start="11779" end="11791" title="Ulrich Wille" label="Ulrich Wille"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653" start="11823" end="11827" title="1850" label="1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535205" start="11830" end="11845" title="Enrico Mazzanti" label="Enrico Mazzanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661" start="11890" end="11894" title="1852" label="1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130029" start="11897" end="11910" title="Émile Billard" label="Émile Billard"/>
<link wikidata="Q923016" start="11945" end="11961" title="Walter W. Winans" label="Walter W. Winans"/>
<link wikidata="Q569367" start="12013" end="12025" title="Franz Eckert" label="Franz Eckert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676" start="12067" end="12071" title="1856" label="1856"/>
<link wikidata="Q319871" start="12074" end="12094" title="Booker T. Washington" label="Booker T. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680" start="12157" end="12161" title="1857" label="1857"/>
<link wikidata="Q159591" start="12164" end="12187" title="Alexander of Battenberg" label="Alexander of Battenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684" start="12199" end="12203" title="1858" label="1858"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971666" start="12206" end="12229" title="Washington Atlee Burpee" label="Washington Atlee Burpee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000283" start="12261" end="12273" title="Burpee Seeds" label="Burpee Seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687" start="12285" end="12289" title="1859" label="1859"/>
<link wikidata="Q64584" start="12292" end="12308" title="Reinhold Seeberg" label="Reinhold Seeberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691" start="12339" end="12343" title="1860" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q556160" start="12346" end="12361" title="Harry S. Barlow" label="Harry S. Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698" start="12396" end="12400" title="1862" label="1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q779631" start="12403" end="12414" title="Louis Ganne" label="Louis Ganne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976881" start="12452" end="12461" title="Leo Stern" label="Leo Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701" start="12490" end="12494" title="1863" label="1863"/>
<link wikidata="Q57658" start="12497" end="12536" title="Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine" label="Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715" start="12548" end="12552" title="1867" label="1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q45943" start="12555" end="12567" title="Ernest Lewis (tennis)" label="Ernest Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720" start="12602" end="12606" title="1869" label="1869"/>
<link wikidata="Q983316" start="12609" end="12625" title="Sergey Chaplygin" label="Sergey Chaplygin"/>
<link wikidata="Q313376" start="12693" end="12707" title="Albert Roussel" label="Albert Roussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741" start="12736" end="12740" title="1870" label="1870"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147708" start="12743" end="12755" title="Motobu Chōki" label="Motobu Chōki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746" start="12786" end="12790" title="1871" label="1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327128" start="12793" end="12810" title="Stanisław Grabski" label="Stanisław Grabski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753" start="12855" end="12859" title="1872" label="1872"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411080" start="12862" end="12882" title="Samuel Cate Prescott" label="Samuel Cate Prescott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757" start="12931" end="12935" title="1873" label="1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q114400" start="12938" end="12951" title="Joseph Rheden" label="Joseph Rheden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761" start="12984" end="12988" title="1874" label="1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q704871" start="12991" end="13015" title="Emmanuel Célestin Suhard" label="Emmanuel Célestin Suhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q130968" start="13075" end="13102" title="Manuel María Ponce Brousset" label="Manuel María Ponce Brousset"/>
<link wikidata="Q270818" start="13104" end="13121" title="List of Presidents of Peru" label="President of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776" start="13133" end="13137" title="1878" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q722992" start="13140" end="13155" title="Albert Champion (cyclist)" label="Albert Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q72897" start="13191" end="13202" title="Georg Misch" label="Georg Misch"/>
<link wikidata="Q64681" start="13242" end="13256" title="Paul Weinstein (athlete)" label="Paul Weinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783" start="13288" end="13292" title="1879" label="1879"/>
<link wikidata="Q708643" start="13295" end="13318" title="Arthur Berriedale Keith" label="Arthur Berriedale Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q71864" start="13355" end="13382" title="Nikolaus zu Dohna-Schlodien" label="Nikolaus zu Dohna-Schlodien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806" start="13427" end="13431" title="1880" label="1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447014" start="13434" end="13447" title="Eric Carlberg" label="Eric Carlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q555941" start="13539" end="13555" title="Vilhelm Carlberg" label="Vilhelm Carlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="13601" end="13605" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q532587" start="13608" end="13620" title="Song Jiaoren" label="Song Jiaoren"/>
<link wikidata="Q262376" start="13663" end="13677" title="Natalia Sedova" label="Natalia Sedova"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="13691" end="13703" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816" start="13715" end="13719" title="1883" label="1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q162621" start="13722" end="13735" title="Walter Huston" label="Walter Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819" start="13783" end="13787" title="1884" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q714286" start="13790" end="13801" title="Ion Inculeț" label="Ion Inculeț"/>
<link wikidata="Q312271" start="13840" end="13860" title="President of Moldova" label="President of Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821" start="13872" end="13876" title="1885" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q719331" start="13879" end="13894" title="Dimitrie Cuclin" label="Dimitrie Cuclin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822" start="13925" end="13929" title="1886" label="1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q70123" start="13932" end="13953" title="Gotthelf Bergsträsser" label="Gotthelf Bergsträsser"/>
<link wikidata="Q335593" start="13990" end="14009" title="Frederick Lindemann, 1st Viscount Cherwell" label="Frederick Lindemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q130970" start="14048" end="14063" title="Gustavo Jiménez" label="Gustavo Jiménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5708511" start="14103" end="14120" title="President of Peru" label="President of Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826" start="14132" end="14136" title="1887" label="1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811580" start="14139" end="14153" title="William Cowhig" label="William Cowhig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831" start="14182" end="14186" title="1889" label="1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q928687" start="14189" end="14214" title="Vicente Ferreira Pastinha" label="Vicente Ferreira Pastinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832" start="14252" end="14256" title="1890" label="1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441552" start="14259" end="14268" title="Karl Kirk" label="Karl Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q552383" start="14304" end="14317" title="William Moore (athlete)" label="William Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="14362" end="14366" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q695461" start="14369" end="14383" title="Arnold Jackson (British Army officer)" label="Arnold Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q272702" start="14440" end="14452" title="Laura Vicuña" label="Laura Vicuña"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839" start="14477" end="14481" title="1892" label="1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004928" start="14484" end="14498" title="Raymond Bonney" label="Raymond Bonney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840" start="14538" end="14542" title="1893" label="1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504757" start="14545" end="14562" title="Frithjof Andersen" label="Frithjof Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q349369" start="14602" end="14615" title="Clas Thunberg" label="Clas Thunberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843" start="14649" end="14653" title="1894" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503379" start="14656" end="14674" title="Lawrence Dale Bell" label="Lawrence Dale Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q73183" start="14759" end="14770" title="Hans Hüttig" label="Hans Hüttig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938999" start="14809" end="14827" title="Carl Rudolf Florin" label="Carl Rudolf Florin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844" start="14857" end="14861" title="1895" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392687" start="14864" end="14880" title="Mike O&amp;#x27;Dowd" label="Mike O&amp;#x27;Dowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="14908" end="14912" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q983799" start="14915" end="14929" title="Einar Lundborg" label="Einar Lundborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847" start="14958" end="14962" title="1897" label="1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q90933" start="14965" end="14979" title="Hans Schuberth" label="Hans Schuberth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848" start="15010" end="15014" title="1898" label="1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q116908553" start="15017" end="15036" title="Solange d&amp;#x27;Ayen" label="Solange d&amp;#x27;Ayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="15099" end="15103" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q984215" start="15106" end="15120" title="Alfred Blalock" label="Alfred Blalock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="15163" end="15167" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q213637" start="15170" end="15183" title="Herbert Bayer" label="Herbert Bayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48671" start="15266" end="15281" title="Roman Steinberg" label="Roman Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q71275" start="15320" end="15333" title="Spencer Tracy" label="Spencer Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035" start="15381" end="15385" title="1901" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q66479" start="15388" end="15397" title="Curt Bois" label="Curt Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q880817" start="15431" end="15445" title="Chester Bowles" label="Chester Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q312084" start="15499" end="15513" title="Melvyn Douglas" label="Melvyn Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234700" start="15549" end="15562" title="Doggie Julian" label="Doggie Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="15636" end="15640" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q381397" start="15643" end="15669" title="Menachem Mendel Schneerson" label="Menachem Mendel Schneerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="15705" end="15709" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265674" start="15712" end="15722" title="Marion Aye" label="Marion Aye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="15752" end="15756" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q975736" start="15759" end="15775" title="Richard Eberhart" label="Richard Eberhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049" start="15815" end="15819" title="1906" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922675" start="15822" end="15842" title="Albert Charles Smith" label="Albert Charles Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150470" start="15881" end="15897" title="Fernando Germani" label="Fernando Germani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375498" start="15935" end="15945" title="Ted Morgan (boxer)" label="Ted Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048" start="15976" end="15980" title="1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q974619" start="15983" end="16000" title="Sanya Dharmasakti" label="Sanya Dharmasakti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="16025" end="16029" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q71206" start="16032" end="16043" title="Bette Davis" label="Bette Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q69843" start="16081" end="16093" title="Kurt Neumann (director)" label="Kurt Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471625" start="16130" end="16142" title="Jagjivan Ram" label="Jagjivan Ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708557" start="16167" end="16197" title="Deputy Prime Minister of India" label="Deputy Prime Minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q154895" start="16217" end="16236" title="Herbert von Karajan" label="Herbert von Karajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="16280" end="16284" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q72652" start="16287" end="16305" title="Albert R. Broccoli" label="Albert R. Broccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q219135" start="16342" end="16357" title="Eon Productions" label="Eon Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q441522" start="16377" end="16394" title="Giacomo Gentilomo" label="Giacomo Gentilomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q181473" start="16449" end="16459" title="Károly Sós" label="Károly Sós"/>
<link wikidata="Q276866" start="16513" end="16525" title="Erwin Wegner" label="Erwin Wegner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="16553" end="16557" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q953952" start="16560" end="16574" title="Sven Andersson (politician)" label="Sven Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409891" start="16614" end="16629" title="Oronzo Pugliese" label="Oronzo Pugliese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076" start="16667" end="16671" title="1911" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642894" start="16674" end="16691" title="Hedi Amara Nouira" label="Hedi Amara Nouira"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069196" start="16732" end="16746" title="Johnny Revolta" label="Johnny Revolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="16775" end="16779" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674431" start="16782" end="16793" title="Jehan Buhan" label="Jehan Buhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490187" start="16828" end="16843" title="Habib Elghanian" label="Habib Elghanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q325746" start="16884" end="16897" title="Antonio Ferri" label="Antonio Ferri"/>
<link wikidata="Q559847" start="16936" end="16953" title="Carlos Guastavino" label="Carlos Guastavino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599015" start="16993" end="17010" title="Makar Honcharenko" label="Makar Honcharenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q139712" start="17064" end="17080" title="John Le Mesurier" label="John Le Mesurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q361918" start="17115" end="17128" title="István Örkény" label="István Örkény"/>
<link wikidata="Q862411" start="17181" end="17193" title="Bill Roberts (athlete)" label="Bill Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="17235" end="17239" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q537652" start="17242" end="17254" title="Antoni Clavé" label="Antoni Clavé"/>
<link wikidata="Q561303" start="17290" end="17307" title="Nicolas Grunitzky" label="Nicolas Grunitzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q426232" start="17350" end="17360" title="Ruth Smith (artist)" label="Ruth Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="17388" end="17392" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q68053" start="17395" end="17407" title="Felice Borel" label="Felice Borel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="17439" end="17443" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q108366" start="17446" end="17458" title="Gregory Peck" label="Gregory Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092" start="17520" end="17524" title="1917" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q355879" start="17527" end="17539" title="Robert Bloch" label="Robert Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478998" start="17576" end="17589" title="Frans Gommers" label="Frans Gommers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="17621" end="17625" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236797" start="17628" end="17647" title="Lester James Peries" label="Lester James Peries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="17708" end="17712" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q471204" start="17715" end="17732" title="Barend Biesheuvel" label="Barend Biesheuvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058109" start="17752" end="17785" title="Prime Minister of the Netherlands" label="Prime Minister of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q249544" start="17805" end="17818" title="Arthur Hailey" label="Arthur Hailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q173247" start="17875" end="17889" title="Alfonso Thiele" label="Alfonso Thiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q264732" start="17942" end="17958" title="John Willem Gran" label="John Willem Gran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="17986" end="17990" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q331503" start="17993" end="18011" title="Christopher Hewett" label="Christopher Hewett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="18059" end="18063" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q352338" start="18066" end="18076" title="Tom Finney" label="Tom Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505083" start="18116" end="18130" title="Harry Freedman" label="Harry Freedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q172574" start="18203" end="18214" title="Andy Linden (racing driver)" label="Andy Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q466244" start="18260" end="18270" title="Gale Storm" label="Gale Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="18311" end="18315" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q165121" start="18318" end="18331" title="Ernest Mandel" label="Ernest Mandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q218605" start="18424" end="18440" title="Michael V. Gazzo" label="Michael V. Gazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q313707" start="18476" end="18492" title="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu" label="Nguyễn Văn Thiệu"/>
<link wikidata="Q96785422" start="18533" end="18559" title="President of South Vietnam" label="President of South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="18571" end="18575" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q5993178" start="18578" end="18590" title="Igor Borisov" label="Igor Borisov"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="18616" end="18620" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q436109" start="18623" end="18635" title="Janet Rowley" label="Janet Rowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q284538" start="18682" end="18695" title="Pierre Nihant" label="Pierre Nihant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="18724" end="18728" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="18731" end="18743" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q587083" start="18817" end="18830" title="Liang Yusheng" label="Liang Yusheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="18858" end="18862" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q74861" start="18865" end="18883" title="Thanin Kraivichien" label="Thanin Kraivichien"/>
<link wikidata="Q692481" start="18931" end="18940" title="Arne Hoel" label="Arne Hoel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="18974" end="18978" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q339358" start="18981" end="18995" title="Enzo Cannavale" label="Enzo Cannavale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442928" start="19030" end="19043" title="Tony Williams (singer)" label="Tony Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="19072" end="19076" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q117783" start="19079" end="19089" title="Hugo Claus" label="Hugo Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192688" start="19144" end="19156" title="Ivar Giaever" label="Ivar Giaever"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="19201" end="19212" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q269589" start="19231" end="19246" title="Nigel Hawthorne" label="Nigel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q741007" start="19294" end="19302" title="Joe Meek" label="Joe Meek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884936" start="19355" end="19375" title="Mahmoud Mollaghasemi" label="Mahmoud Mollaghasemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="19395" end="19399" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q401777" start="19402" end="19412" title="Mary Costa" label="Mary Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q932305" start="19451" end="19464" title="Pierre Lhomme" label="Pierre Lhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="19508" end="19512" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q302596" start="19515" end="19527" title="Jack Clement" label="Jack Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296644" start="19588" end="19602" title="Héctor Olivera (film director)" label="Héctor Olivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="19651" end="19655" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479808" start="19658" end="19673" title="Feridun Buğeker" label="Feridun Buğeker"/>
<link wikidata="Q42671" start="19713" end="19726" title="Frank Gorshin" label="Frank Gorshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858987" start="19762" end="19777" title="Barbara Holland" label="Barbara Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949284" start="19814" end="19829" title="K. Kailasapathy" label="K. Kailasapathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="19877" end="19881" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809138" start="19884" end="19894" title="John Carey (critic)" label="John Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563" start="19931" end="19943" title="Roman Herzog" label="Roman Herzog"/>
<link wikidata="Q25223" start="19979" end="19999" title="President of Germany" label="President of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894803" start="20019" end="20030" title="Moise Safra" label="Moise Safra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116096" start="20085" end="20096" title="Banco Safra" label="Banco Safra"/>
<link wikidata="Q638824" start="20116" end="20134" title="Stanley Turrentine" label="Stanley Turrentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="20181" end="20185" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q963576" start="20188" end="20208" title="Giovanni Cianfriglia" label="Giovanni Cianfriglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q433123" start="20243" end="20254" title="Peter Grant (music manager)" label="Peter Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240090" start="20298" end="20316" title="Donald Lynden-Bell" label="Donald Lynden-Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q831972" start="20375" end="20388" title="Frank Schepke" label="Frank Schepke"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="20414" end="20418" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q172034" start="20421" end="20435" title="Ronnie Bucknum" label="Ronnie Bucknum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904987" start="20481" end="20493" title="Glenn Jordan" label="Glenn Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072835" start="20535" end="20550" title="Dragoljub Minić" label="Dragoljub Minić"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="20593" end="20597" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q976445" start="20600" end="20615" title="Joseph Lelyveld" label="Joseph Lelyveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q150851" start="20667" end="20679" title="Colin Powell" label="Colin Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="20719" end="20751" title="United States Secretary of State" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q503570" start="20771" end="20787" title="Andrzej Schinzel" label="Andrzej Schinzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365521" start="20829" end="20842" title="Arie Selinger" label="Arie Selinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481872" start="20891" end="20911" title="Juan Vicente Lezcano" label="Juan Vicente Lezcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="20946" end="20950" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144894" start="20953" end="20964" title="Colin Bland" label="Colin Bland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15506241" start="21020" end="21031" title="Mal Colston" label="Mal Colston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335580" start="21087" end="21097" title="Nancy Holt" label="Nancy Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q617568" start="21148" end="21167" title="Natalya Kustinskaya" label="Natalya Kustinskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454941" start="21203" end="21218" title="Giorgos Sideris" label="Giorgos Sideris"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="21238" end="21242" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q349211" start="21245" end="21251" title="Leka I, Crown Prince of Albania" label="Leka I"/>
<link wikidata="Q325617" start="21296" end="21315" title="Crispian St. Peters" label="Crispian St. Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322893" start="21362" end="21386" title="Haidar Abu Bakr al-Attas" label="Haidar Abu Bakr al-Attas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192903" start="21388" end="21411" title="Prime Minister of Yemen" label="Prime Minister of Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117822" start="21421" end="21433" title="Ronnie White" label="Ronald White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436141" start="21481" end="21494" title="David Winters (choreographer)" label="David Winters"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="21558" end="21562" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q556745" start="21565" end="21575" title="Tommy Cash" label="Tommy Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106466" start="21637" end="21650" title="Gilles Proulx" label="Gilles Proulx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="21700" end="21704" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q531869" start="21707" end="21723" title="Michael Moriarty" label="Michael Moriarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q763897" start="21759" end="21773" title="Dave Swarbrick" label="Dave Swarbrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="21824" end="21828" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837697" start="21831" end="21843" title="Allan Clarke (singer)" label="Allan Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q115513" start="21880" end="21896" title="Pascal Couchepin" label="Pascal Couchepin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290022" start="21924" end="21940" title="Juan Gisbert Sr." label="Juan Gisbert Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q55282" start="21973" end="21988" title="Peter Greenaway" label="Peter Greenaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="22023" end="22027" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020626" start="22030" end="22040" title="Dean Brown" label="Dean Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q676357" start="22070" end="22096" title="Premier of South Australia" label="Premier of South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665344" start="22106" end="22114" title="Max Gail" label="Max Gail"/>
<link wikidata="Q952577" start="22153" end="22168" title="Fighting Harada" label="Fighting Harada"/>
<link wikidata="Q458095" start="22194" end="22203" title="Miet Smet" label="Miet Smet"/>
<link wikidata="Q450310" start="22233" end="22250" title="Jean-Louis Tauran" label="Jean-Louis Tauran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="22279" end="22283" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q447122" start="22286" end="22307" title="Willeke van Ammelrooy" label="Willeke van Ammelrooy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58190" start="22345" end="22359" title="János Martonyi" label="János Martonyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q706941" start="22391" end="22402" title="Evan Parker" label="Evan Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299547" start="22430" end="22448" title="Douangchay Phichit" label="Douangchay Phichit"/>
<link wikidata="Q714238" start="22488" end="22504" title="Willy Planckaert" label="Willy Planckaert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147285" start="22531" end="22545" title="Pedro Rosselló" label="Pedro Rosselló"/>
<link wikidata="Q456951" start="22590" end="22613" title="Governor of Puerto Rico" label="Governor of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q953554" start="22623" end="22636" title="Peter T. King" label="Peter T. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="22680" end="22684" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q374309" start="22687" end="22699" title="Ove Bengtson" label="Ove Bengtson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498879" start="22732" end="22744" title="Steve Carver" label="Steve Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053260" start="22796" end="22806" title="Cem Karaca" label="Cem Karaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179411" start="22844" end="22855" title="Tommy Smith (footballer, born 1945)" label="Tommy Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="22887" end="22891" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q204426" start="22894" end="22904" title="Jane Asher" label="Jane Asher"/>
<link wikidata="Q11863" start="22931" end="22952" title="Julio Ángel Fernández" label="Julio Ángel Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q879616" start="22984" end="22997" title="Björn Granath" label="Björn Granath"/>
<link wikidata="Q953725" start="23032" end="23045" title="Georgi Markov (wrestler)" label="Georgi Markov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="23079" end="23083" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q263983" start="23086" end="23100" title="Đurđica Bjedov" label="Đurđica Bjedov"/>
<link wikidata="Q737307" start="23128" end="23141" title="Willy Chirino" label="Willy Chirino"/>
<link wikidata="Q123665" start="23176" end="23199" title="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo" label="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209571" start="23240" end="23268" title="President of the Philippines" label="President of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q617816" start="23278" end="23291" title="Ramón Mifflin" label="Ramón Mifflin"/>
<link wikidata="Q478387" start="23322" end="23337" title="Virendra Sharma" label="Virendra Sharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="23377" end="23381" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q262932" start="23384" end="23407" title="Pierre-Albert Chapuisat" label="Pierre-Albert Chapuisat"/>
<link wikidata="Q555983" start="23435" end="23447" title="Dave Holland (drummer)" label="Dave Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345376" start="23484" end="23497" title="Roy McFarland" label="Roy McFarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="23531" end="23535" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722154" start="23538" end="23554" title="Stanley Dziedzic" label="Stanley Dziedzic"/>
<link wikidata="Q521038" start="23583" end="23595" title="Larry Franco" label="Larry Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q49284" start="23629" end="23642" title="Judith Resnik" label="Judith Resnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="23687" end="23691" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q440569" start="23694" end="23708" title="Ann C. Crispin" label="Ann C. Crispin"/>
<link wikidata="Q360433" start="23745" end="23764" title="Franklin Chang Díaz" label="Franklin Chang Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q173144" start="23828" end="23844" title="Agnetha Fältskog" label="Agnetha Fältskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q571148" start="23894" end="23908" title="Toshiko Fujita" label="Toshiko Fujita"/>
<link wikidata="Q299968" start="23967" end="23982" title="Miki Manojlović" label="Miki Manojlović"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="23999" end="24003" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179049" start="24006" end="24015" title="Les Binks" label="Les Binks"/>
<link wikidata="Q979158" start="24055" end="24074" title="Yevgeniy Gavrilenko" label="Yevgeniy Gavrilenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381467" start="24104" end="24116" title="Nedim Gürsel" label="Nedim Gürsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q720457" start="24142" end="24152" title="Dean Kamen" label="Dean Kamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446425" start="24197" end="24208" title="Segway Inc." label="Segway Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5229318" start="24218" end="24231" title="Dave McArtney" label="Dave McArtney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315769" start="24296" end="24307" title="Ubol Ratana" label="Ubol Ratana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="24324" end="24328" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721916" start="24331" end="24341" title="Alfie Conn Jr." label="Alfie Conn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6224391" start="24386" end="24400" title="John C. Dvorak" label="John C. Dvorak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096054" start="24438" end="24449" title="Sandy Mayer" label="Sandy Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q964161" start="24483" end="24498" title="Dennis Mortimer" label="Dennis Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q279169" start="24528" end="24541" title="Mitch Pileggi" label="Mitch Pileggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="24559" end="24563" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486759" start="24566" end="24579" title="Frank Gaffney" label="Frank Gaffney"/>
<link wikidata="Q584678" start="24625" end="24634" title="Keiko Han" label="Keiko Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q490719" start="24662" end="24672" title="Tae Jin-ah" label="Tae Jin-ah"/>
<link wikidata="Q705562" start="24703" end="24717" title="Raleb Majadele" label="Raleb Majadele"/>
<link wikidata="Q328019" start="24747" end="24757" title="Ian Swales" label="Ian Swales"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="24794" end="24798" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121561" start="24801" end="24813" title="Guy Bertrand (broadcaster)" label="Guy Bertrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376496" start="24857" end="24867" title="Peter Case" label="Peter Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q611309" start="24919" end="24936" title="Mohamed Ben Mouza" label="Mohamed Ben Mouza"/>
<link wikidata="Q50825" start="24967" end="24979" title="Stan Ridgway" label="Stan Ridgway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522609" start="25031" end="25049" title="Yoshiichi Watanabe" label="Yoshiichi Watanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="25072" end="25076" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q510042" start="25079" end="25101" title="Charlotte de Turckheim" label="Charlotte de Turckheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108171" start="25155" end="25170" title="Ricardo Ferrero" label="Ricardo Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q128900" start="25212" end="25230" title="Christian Gourcuff" label="Christian Gourcuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q279305" start="25271" end="25287" title="Anthony Horowitz" label="Anthony Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q793617" start="25330" end="25345" title="Bernard Longley" label="Bernard Longley"/>
<link wikidata="Q208582" start="25372" end="25386" title="Akira Toriyama" label="Akira Toriyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381188" start="25428" end="25444" title="Takayoshi Yamano" label="Takayoshi Yamano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="25468" end="25472" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q382078" start="25475" end="25494" title="Diamond Dallas Page" label="Diamond Dallas Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133203" start="25533" end="25545" title="Leonid Fedun" label="Leonid Fedun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139894" start="25576" end="25587" title="Reid Ribble" label="Reid Ribble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="25610" end="25614" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058083" start="25617" end="25639" title="Sebastian Adayanthrath" label="Sebastian Adayanthrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q877808" start="25664" end="25676" title="Karin Roßley" label="Karin Roßley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="25694" end="25698" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q65963800" start="25701" end="25711" title="Kevin Dann" label="Kevin Dann"/>
<link wikidata="Q363981" start="25763" end="25778" title="Henrik Dettmann" label="Henrik Dettmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964371" start="25814" end="25831" title="Ryoichi Kawakatsu" label="Ryoichi Kawakatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q54530" start="25862" end="25873" title="Johan Kriek" label="Johan Kriek"/>
<link wikidata="Q146749" start="25921" end="25941" title="Daniel Schneidermann" label="Daniel Schneidermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q687745" start="25970" end="25992" title="Lasantha Wickrematunge" label="Lasantha Wickrematunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="26038" end="26042" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q700349" start="26045" end="26055" title="Paul Chung" label="Paul Chung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="26093" end="26097" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q671241" start="26100" end="26117" title="Asteris Koutoulas" label="Asteris Koutoulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218080" start="26181" end="26193" title="Larry McCray" label="Larry McCray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982675" start="26245" end="26256" title="Ian Redford (footballer)" label="Ian Redford"/>
<link wikidata="Q945821" start="26309" end="26325" title="Hiromi Taniguchi" label="Hiromi Taniguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q359826" start="26366" end="26378" title="Adnan Terzić" label="Adnan Terzić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="26400" end="26404" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q457493" start="26407" end="26420" title="Andrea Arnold" label="Andrea Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q961443" start="26461" end="26484" title="Anna Caterina Antonacci" label="Anna Caterina Antonacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242826" start="26511" end="26531" title="Abdulhadi al-Khawaja" label="Abdulhadi al-Khawaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q26539" start="26580" end="26589" title="Lisa Zane" label="Lisa Zane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="26620" end="26624" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q257277" start="26627" end="26640" title="Lana Clarkson" label="Lana Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944209" start="26688" end="26699" title="Sara Danius" label="Sara Danius"/>
<link wikidata="Q719125" start="26765" end="26778" title="Richard Gough" label="Richard Gough"/>
<link wikidata="Q606033" start="26836" end="26848" title="Arild Monsen" label="Arild Monsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q313594" start="26889" end="26907" title="Kirsan Ilyumzhinov" label="Kirsan Ilyumzhinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689341" start="26949" end="26970" title="Head of Kalmykia" label="President of Kalmykia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="26972" end="26976" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q705364" start="26979" end="26991" title="Arthur Adams (comics)" label="Arthur Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="27032" end="27036" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988493" start="27039" end="27053" title="Neil Eckersley" label="Neil Eckersley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007292" start="27079" end="27100" title="Vakhtang Iagorashvili" label="Vakhtang Iagorashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q983809" start="27137" end="27154" title="Levon Julfalakyan" label="Levon Julfalakyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q539125" start="27202" end="27216" title="Marius Lăcătuș" label="Marius Lăcătuș"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="27249" end="27253" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q793007" start="27256" end="27269" title="Aykut Kocaman" label="Aykut Kocaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15898377" start="27311" end="27323" title="Lang Tzu-yun" label="Lang Tzu-yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363191" start="27352" end="27370" title="Elizabeth McIntyre" label="Elizabeth McIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q435307" start="27406" end="27425" title="Svetlana Paramygina" label="Svetlana Paramygina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="27449" end="27453" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745813" start="27456" end="27465" title="Yoon Hyun" label="Yoon Hyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q381797" start="27496" end="27509" title="Mike McCready" label="Mike McCready"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176249" start="27554" end="27567" title="Peter Overton" label="Peter Overton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="27620" end="27624" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190454" start="27627" end="27638" title="Troy Gentry" label="Troy Gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723249" start="27700" end="27716" title="Franck Silvestre" label="Franck Silvestre"/>
<link wikidata="Q700301" start="27745" end="27759" title="Erland Johnsen" label="Erland Johnsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572967" start="27791" end="27806" title="Laima Zilporytė" label="Laima Zilporytė"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="27824" end="27828" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q269462" start="27831" end="27841" title="Paula Cole" label="Paula Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="27883" end="27887" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410377" start="27890" end="27905" title="Dinos Angelidis" label="Dinos Angelidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101573" start="27940" end="27961" title="Viatcheslav Djavanian" label="Viatcheslav Djavanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q712844" start="27988" end="28001" title="Pontus Kåmark" label="Pontus Kåmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3898339" start="28031" end="28044" title="Pavlo Khnykin" label="Pavlo Khnykin"/>
<link wikidata="Q965609" start="28073" end="28089" title="Tomislav Piplica" label="Tomislav Piplica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4170763" start="28131" end="28147" title="Ravindra Prabhat" label="Ravindra Prabhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="28179" end="28183" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q944778" start="28186" end="28198" title="Soheil Ayari" label="Soheil Ayari"/>
<link wikidata="Q440995" start="28232" end="28248" title="Valérie Bonneton" label="Valérie Bonneton"/>
<link wikidata="Q716928" start="28274" end="28283" title="Diamond D" label="Diamond D"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607838" start="28320" end="28331" title="Petar Genov" label="Petar Genov"/>
<link wikidata="Q434878" start="28370" end="28379" title="Thea Gill" label="Thea Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q442942" start="28407" end="28418" title="Miho Hatori" label="Miho Hatori"/>
<link wikidata="Q451089" start="28456" end="28472" title="Irina Timofeyeva" label="Irina Timofeyeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="28504" end="28508" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546717" start="28511" end="28520" title="Dong Abay" label="Dong Abay"/>
<link wikidata="Q240436" start="28572" end="28584" title="Krista Allen" label="Krista Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479545" start="28612" end="28624" title="Austin Berry (footballer)" label="Austin Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657884" start="28658" end="28674" title="Simona Cavallari (actress)" label="Simona Cavallari"/>
<link wikidata="Q274046" start="28701" end="28718" title="Victoria Hamilton" label="Victoria Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327284" start="28745" end="28761" title="Nelson Parraguez" label="Nelson Parraguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q239901" start="28791" end="28804" title="Kim Soo-nyung" label="Kim Soo-nyung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="28827" end="28831" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q545142" start="28834" end="28851" title="Nima Arkani-Hamed" label="Nima Arkani-Hamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q613816" start="28902" end="28913" title="Tom Coronel" label="Tom Coronel"/>
<link wikidata="Q950467" start="28946" end="28955" title="Paul Okon" label="Paul Okon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567312" start="29000" end="29014" title="Duncan Spencer" label="Duncan Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038856" start="29043" end="29060" title="Yasuhiro Takemoto" label="Yasuhiro Takemoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q242493" start="29112" end="29126" title="Junko Takeuchi" label="Junko Takeuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="29146" end="29150" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q236138" start="29153" end="29167" title="Élodie Bouchez" label="Élodie Bouchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924422" start="29202" end="29216" title="Brendan Cannon" label="Brendan Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058619" start="29251" end="29264" title="Lidia Trettel" label="Lidia Trettel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14313" start="29295" end="29312" title="Pharrell Williams" label="Pharrell Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="29354" end="29358" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348324" start="29361" end="29375" title="Sandra Bagarić" label="Sandra Bagarić"/>
<link wikidata="Q937634" start="29420" end="29434" title="Julien Boutter" label="Julien Boutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q222811" start="29466" end="29479" title="Katja Holanti" label="Katja Holanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092732" start="29508" end="29520" title="Oleg Khodkov" label="Oleg Khodkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288451" start="29555" end="29566" title="Ariel López (footballer, born 1974)" label="Ariel López"/>
<link wikidata="Q725783" start="29598" end="29613" title="Lukas Ridgeston" label="Lukas Ridgeston"/>
<link wikidata="Q462938" start="29651" end="29669" title="Vyacheslav Voronin" label="Vyacheslav Voronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="29692" end="29696" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422081" start="29699" end="29712" title="Sarah Baldock" label="Sarah Baldock"/>
<link wikidata="Q356392" start="29754" end="29766" title="John Hartson" label="John Hartson"/>
<link wikidata="Q602779" start="29804" end="29811" title="Juicy J" label="Juicy J"/>
<link wikidata="Q977232" start="29851" end="29868" title="Serhiy Klymentiev" label="Serhiy Klymentiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398683" start="29907" end="29920" title="Caitlin Moran" label="Caitlin Moran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321870" start="29970" end="29982" title="Marcos Vales" label="Marcos Vales"/>
<link wikidata="Q721011" start="30012" end="30029" title="Shammond Williams" label="Shammond Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="30069" end="30073" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031585" start="30076" end="30092" title="Luis de Agustini" label="Luis de Agustini"/>
<link wikidata="Q529988" start="30124" end="30135" title="Péter Biros" label="Péter Biros"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295000" start="30174" end="30191" title="Sterling K. Brown" label="Sterling K. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q620847" start="30217" end="30232" title="Aleksei Budõlin" label="Aleksei Budõlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q314670" start="30259" end="30273" title="Simone Inzaghi" label="Simone Inzaghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45567" start="30303" end="30321" title="Fernando Morientes" label="Fernando Morientes"/>
<link wikidata="Q470058" start="30361" end="30378" title="Natascha Ragosina" label="Natascha Ragosina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343639" start="30403" end="30417" title="Henrik Stenson" label="Henrik Stenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553701" start="30443" end="30458" title="Valeria Straneo" label="Valeria Straneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661846" start="30498" end="30514" title="Indrek Tobreluts" label="Indrek Tobreluts"/>
<link wikidata="Q511994" start="30544" end="30563" title="Anouska van der Zee" label="Anouska van der Zee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="30580" end="30584" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q335345" start="30587" end="30602" title="Jonathan Erlich" label="Jonathan Erlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q937752" start="30635" end="30650" title="Trevor Letowski" label="Trevor Letowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q351819" start="30698" end="30716" title="Daniel Majstorović" label="Daniel Majstorović"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="30738" end="30742" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q357493" start="30745" end="30759" title="Dwain Chambers" label="Dwain Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459031" start="30793" end="30813" title="Marcone Amaral Costa" label="Marcone Amaral Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314051" start="30842" end="30855" title="Tarek El-Said" label="Tarek El-Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323750" start="30886" end="30898" title="Jairo Patiño" label="Jairo Patiño"/>
<link wikidata="Q16177046" start="30930" end="30937" title="Sohyang" label="Sohyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q461825" start="30968" end="30983" title="Stephen Jackson" label="Stephen Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q559088" start="31021" end="31036" title="Arnaud Tournant" label="Arnaud Tournant"/>
<link wikidata="Q57582" start="31062" end="31083" title="Franziska van Almsick" label="Franziska van Almsick"/>
<link wikidata="Q675652" start="31109" end="31127" title="Günther Weidlinger" label="Günther Weidlinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="31160" end="31164" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q444378" start="31167" end="31180" title="Vlada Avramov" label="Vlada Avramov"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288682" start="31210" end="31220" title="Josh Boone (director)" label="Josh Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q493875" start="31266" end="31278" title="Song Dae-nam" label="Song Dae-nam"/>
<link wikidata="Q57142" start="31309" end="31324" title="Timo Hildebrand" label="Timo Hildebrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q115206" start="31353" end="31358" title="Imany" label="Imany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707137" start="31383" end="31394" title="Barel Mouko" label="Barel Mouko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342559" start="31426" end="31439" title="Cesare Natali" label="Cesare Natali"/>
<link wikidata="Q359741" start="31469" end="31485" title="Mitsuo Ogasawara" label="Mitsuo Ogasawara"/>
<link wikidata="Q685841" start="31516" end="31531" title="Alexander Resch" label="Alexander Resch"/>
<link wikidata="Q512135" start="31555" end="31570" title="Andrius Velička" label="Andrius Velička"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221206" start="31603" end="31615" title="Dante Wesley" label="Dante Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q241706" start="31651" end="31663" title="Chen Yanqing" label="Chen Yanqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="31687" end="31691" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q523646" start="31694" end="31705" title="Matt Bonner" label="Matt Bonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q232559" start="31743" end="31758" title="Alberta Brianti" label="Alberta Brianti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057125" start="31791" end="31808" title="Rafael Cavalcante" label="Rafael Cavalcante"/>
<link wikidata="Q422768" start="31850" end="31864" title="David Chocarro" label="David Chocarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q471608" start="31913" end="31924" title="Mike Glumac" label="Mike Glumac"/>
<link wikidata="Q280437" start="31962" end="31973" title="Mario Kasun" label="Mario Kasun"/>
<link wikidata="Q483991" start="32011" end="32022" title="Lee Jae-won (singer)" label="Lee Jae-won"/>
<link wikidata="Q126461" start="32060" end="32075" title="Joris Mathijsen" label="Joris Mathijsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029761" start="32103" end="32122" title="Rasmus Quist Hansen" label="Rasmus Quist Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q654924" start="32146" end="32160" title="Odlanier Solís" label="Odlanier Solís"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="32175" end="32179" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q438752" start="32182" end="32196" title="Matthew Emmons" label="Matthew Emmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q959110" start="32230" end="32248" title="Michael A. Monsoor" label="Michael A. Monsoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="32267" end="32281" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457001" start="32311" end="32328" title="Mariqueen Maandig" label="Mariqueen Maandig"/>
<link wikidata="Q551935" start="32388" end="32405" title="Daba Modibo Keïta" label="Daba Modibo Keïta"/>
<link wikidata="Q452105" start="32441" end="32455" title="Marissa Nadler" label="Marissa Nadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148197" start="32484" end="32493" title="Tom Riley (actor)" label="Tom Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897489" start="32531" end="32544" title="Mompati Thuma" label="Mompati Thuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q454610" start="32575" end="32589" title="Pieter Weening" label="Pieter Weening"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="32606" end="32610" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q234959" start="32613" end="32626" title="Hayley Atwell" label="Hayley Atwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q146932" start="32662" end="32685" title="Matheus Coradini Vivian" label="Matheus Coradini Vivian"/>
<link wikidata="Q57152" start="32717" end="32736" title="Thomas Hitzlsperger" label="Thomas Hitzlsperger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350704" start="32765" end="32777" title="Kelly Pavlik" label="Kelly Pavlik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789188" start="32803" end="32815" title="Matt Pickens" label="Matt Pickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q532989" start="32849" end="32865" title="Alexandre Prémat" label="Alexandre Prémat"/>
<link wikidata="Q967297" start="32899" end="32913" title="Danylo Sapunov" label="Danylo Sapunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q686882" start="32957" end="32970" title="Hubert Schwab" label="Hubert Schwab"/>
<link wikidata="Q862883" start="32995" end="33006" title="Marcel Seip" label="Marcel Seip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="33033" end="33037" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q975433" start="33040" end="33056" title="Jaime Castrillón" label="Jaime Castrillón"/>
<link wikidata="Q371588" start="33089" end="33110" title="Jorge Andrés Martínez" label="Jorge Andrés Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925909" start="33142" end="33156" title="Brock Radunske" label="Brock Radunske"/>
<link wikidata="Q46213" start="33207" end="33221" title="Yohann Sangaré" label="Yohann Sangaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583252" start="33257" end="33270" title="Cécile Storti" label="Cécile Storti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176237" start="33308" end="33321" title="Shikha Uberoi" label="Shikha Uberoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="33354" end="33358" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q297348" start="33361" end="33376" title="Marshall Allman" label="Marshall Allman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15493504" start="33402" end="33410" title="Aram Mp3" label="Aram Mp3"/>
<link wikidata="Q721114" start="33450" end="33465" title="Rune Brattsveen" label="Rune Brattsveen"/>
<link wikidata="Q975924" start="33496" end="33510" title="Alexei Glukhov" label="Alexei Glukhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q567385" start="33547" end="33562" title="Maartje Goderie" label="Maartje Goderie"/>
<link wikidata="Q271131" start="33599" end="33611" title="Darija Jurak" label="Darija Jurak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183480" start="33645" end="33657" title="Dejan Kelhar" label="Dejan Kelhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232432" start="33689" end="33705" title="Dmitry Kozonchuk" label="Dmitry Kozonchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q464569" start="33732" end="33742" title="Shin Min-a" label="Shin Min-a"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215941" start="33774" end="33782" title="Jess Sum" label="Jess Sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q686652" start="33811" end="33821" title="Peter Penz" label="Peter Penz"/>
<link wikidata="Q327159" start="33847" end="33862" title="Samuele Preisig" label="Samuele Preisig"/>
<link wikidata="Q377899" start="33890" end="33907" title="Cristian Săpunaru" label="Cristian Săpunaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556752" start="33938" end="33952" title="Fabio Vitaioli" label="Fabio Vitaioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q359727" start="33987" end="33997" title="Kisho Yano" label="Kisho Yano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204147" start="34028" end="34038" title="Saba Qamar" label="Saba Qamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="34065" end="34069" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288015" start="34072" end="34085" title="Daniel Congré" label="Daniel Congré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363654" start="34114" end="34130" title="Erwin l&amp;#x27;Ami" label="Erwin l&amp;#x27;Ami"/>
<link wikidata="Q433052" start="34160" end="34174" title="Jolanda Keizer" label="Jolanda Keizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382014" start="34203" end="34221" title="Sergey Khachatryan" label="Sergey Khachatryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q682419" start="34251" end="34267" title="Linas Pilibaitis" label="Linas Pilibaitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379765" start="34300" end="34310" title="Jan Smeets" label="Jan Smeets"/>
<link wikidata="Q738763" start="34345" end="34363" title="Kristof Vandewalle" label="Kristof Vandewalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="34382" end="34386" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q438180" start="34389" end="34409" title="Anna Sophia Berglund" label="Anna Sophia Berglund"/>
<link wikidata="Q15064601" start="34447" end="34463" title="Anzor Boltukayev" label="Anzor Boltukayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467202" start="34491" end="34502" title="Diego Chará" label="Diego Chará"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891336" start="34534" end="34549" title="Charlotte Flair" label="Charlotte Flair"/>
<link wikidata="Q847244" start="34598" end="34610" title="Róbert Kasza" label="Róbert Kasza"/>
<link wikidata="Q892437" start="34650" end="34663" title="Eetu Muinonen" label="Eetu Muinonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q746648" start="34693" end="34703" title="Manuel Ruz" label="Manuel Ruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q578177" start="34733" end="34747" title="Albert Selimov" label="Albert Selimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="34768" end="34772" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q324723" start="34775" end="34783" title="Max Grün" label="Max Grün"/>
<link wikidata="Q805895" start="34812" end="34824" title="Balázs Hárai" label="Balázs Hárai"/>
<link wikidata="Q512326" start="34863" end="34876" title="Anton Kokorin" label="Anton Kokorin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701361" start="34910" end="34927" title="Fyodor Kudryashov" label="Fyodor Kudryashov"/>
<link wikidata="Q152808" start="34957" end="34972" title="Etiënne Reijnen" label="Etiënne Reijnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="34992" end="34996" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058810" start="34999" end="35013" title="Gerson Acevedo" label="Gerson Acevedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303087" start="35043" end="35057" title="Teresa Almeida" label="Teresa Almeida"/>
<link wikidata="Q26037" start="35092" end="35104" title="Quade Cooper" label="Quade Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q460637" start="35161" end="35176" title="Jonathan Davies (rugby union, born 1988)" label="Jonathan Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q959978" start="35212" end="35228" title="Gevorg Ghazaryan" label="Gevorg Ghazaryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773781" start="35259" end="35271" title="Alisha Glass" label="Alisha Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4152772" start="35319" end="35334" title="Vurğun Hüseynov" label="Vurğun Hüseynov"/>
<link wikidata="Q690028" start="35368" end="35384" title="Matthias Jaissle" label="Matthias Jaissle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353250" start="35425" end="35454" title="Christopher Papamichalopoulos" label="Christopher Papamichalopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q139861" start="35479" end="35489" title="Zack Smith" label="Zack Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712666" start="35527" end="35534" title="Pape Sy" label="Pape Sy"/>
<link wikidata="Q953322" start="35570" end="35583" title="Alexey Volkov (biathlete)" label="Alexey Volkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="35604" end="35608" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081843" start="35611" end="35623" title="Kader Amadou" label="Kader Amadou"/>
<link wikidata="Q20666313" start="35654" end="35665" title="Yémi Apithy" label="Yémi Apithy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824222" start="35692" end="35711" title="Liemarvin Bonevacia" label="Liemarvin Bonevacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q303332" start="35737" end="35748" title="Freddie Fox (actor)" label="Freddie Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q445507" start="35773" end="35783" title="Emre Güral" label="Emre Güral"/>
<link wikidata="Q10345662" start="35813" end="35827" title="Justin Holiday" label="Justin Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279274" start="35865" end="35877" title="Rachel Homan" label="Rachel Homan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13217306" start="35904" end="35914" title="Lily James" label="Lily James"/>
<link wikidata="Q494398" start="35941" end="35957" title="Trevor Marsicano" label="Trevor Marsicano"/>
<link wikidata="Q677852" start="35990" end="36006" title="Jonathan Rossini" label="Jonathan Rossini"/>
<link wikidata="Q20036558" start="36034" end="36047" title="Kiki Sukezane" label="Kiki Sukezane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563936" start="36075" end="36090" title="Sosuke Takatani" label="Sosuke Takatani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="36111" end="36115" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147378" start="36118" end="36137" title="Amer Said Al-Shatri" label="Amer Said Al-Shatri"/>
<link wikidata="Q519358" start="36165" end="36178" title="Alex Cuthbert" label="Alex Cuthbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146327" start="36208" end="36227" title="Patrick Dangerfield" label="Patrick Dangerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q8962775" start="36260" end="36276" title="Fredy Hinestroza" label="Fredy Hinestroza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853375" start="36308" end="36319" title="Chen Huijia" label="Chen Huijia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342961" start="36346" end="36358" title="Haruma Miura" label="Haruma Miura"/>
<link wikidata="Q16125330" start="36405" end="36421" title="Ismaeel Mohammad" label="Ismaeel Mohammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q969553" start="36450" end="36465" title="Iryna Pamialova" label="Iryna Pamialova"/>
<link wikidata="Q8840289" start="36496" end="36510" title="Jakub Sedláček (ice hockey)" label="Jakub Sedláček"/>
<link wikidata="Q747003" start="36545" end="36560" title="Sercan Yıldırım" label="Sercan Yıldırım"/>
<link wikidata="Q428593" start="36590" end="36604" title="Género Zeefuik" label="Género Zeefuik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="36624" end="36628" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571952" start="36631" end="36645" title="Yassine Bounou" label="Yassine Bounou"/>
<link wikidata="Q714067" start="36676" end="36691" title="Nathaniel Clyne" label="Nathaniel Clyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q375798" start="36721" end="36737" title="Adriano Grimaldi" label="Adriano Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q122261" start="36774" end="36783" title="Joël Mall" label="Joël Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288822" start="36811" end="36838" title="Guilherme dos Santos Torres" label="Guilherme dos Santos Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="36862" end="36866" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052514" start="36869" end="36884" title="Emmalyn Estrada" label="Emmalyn Estrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17215988" start="36933" end="36950" title="Shintaro Kurumaya" label="Shintaro Kurumaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379176" start="36981" end="36993" title="Kaveh Rezaei" label="Kaveh Rezaei"/>
<link wikidata="Q14751559" start="37023" end="37036" title="Dmytro Ryzhuk" label="Dmytro Ryzhuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="37060" end="37064" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q94329" start="37067" end="37086" title="Andreas Bouchalakis" label="Andreas Bouchalakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14426308" start="37114" end="37125" title="Maya DiRado" label="Maya DiRado"/>
<link wikidata="Q542877" start="37153" end="37170" title="Laura Feiersinger" label="Laura Feiersinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q15063818" start="37201" end="37216" title="Benjamin Garcia" label="Benjamin Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6447204" start="37254" end="37270" title="Kurtis Patterson" label="Kurtis Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16235973" start="37302" end="37318" title="Scottie Wilbekin" label="Scottie Wilbekin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="37357" end="37361" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q20007060" start="37364" end="37379" title="Mateusz Bieniek" label="Mateusz Bieniek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16855337" start="37415" end="37426" title="Edem Rjaïbi" label="Edem Rjaïbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431252" start="37457" end="37472" title="Richard Sánchez (footballer, born 1994)" label="Richard Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="37494" end="37498" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874918" start="37501" end="37514" title="Viliame Kikau" label="Viliame Kikau"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452996" start="37552" end="37562" title="Sei Muroya" label="Sei Muroya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501320" start="37593" end="37607" title="Gleb Rassadkin" label="Gleb Rassadkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20867916" start="37640" end="37664" title="Sebastian Starke Hedlund" label="Sebastian Starke Hedlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="37686" end="37690" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q19402822" start="37693" end="37705" title="Nicolas Beer" label="Nicolas Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22003364" start="37739" end="37752" title="Raouf Benguit" label="Raouf Benguit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="37775" end="37779" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649709" start="37782" end="37795" title="Borja Mayoral" label="Borja Mayoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q96471902" start="37825" end="37841" title="Dominik Mysterio" label="Dominik Mysterio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="37862" end="37866" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q91393913" start="37869" end="37881" title="Bobby Miller (baseball)" label="Bobby Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="37909" end="37913" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q65030545" start="37916" end="37930" title="Johnny Beecher (ice hockey)" label="Johnny Beecher"/>
<link wikidata="Q49187" start="37987" end="37990" title="517" label="517"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272787" start="37993" end="38020" title="Timothy I of Constantinople" label="Timothy I of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q32212" start="38044" end="38047" title="582" label="582"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266046" start="38050" end="38077" title="Eutychius of Constantinople" label="Eutychius of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q33727" start="38102" end="38105" title="584" label="584"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459547" start="38108" end="38124" title="Ruadán of Lorrha" label="Ruadán of Lorrha"/>
<link wikidata="Q23587" start="38140" end="38143" title="902" label="902"/>
<link wikidata="Q284567" start="38146" end="38162" title="Al-Mu&amp;#x27;tadid" label="Al-Mu&amp;#x27;tadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19679" start="38180" end="38184" title="1168" label="1168"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364180" start="38187" end="38228" title="Robert de Beaumont, 2nd Earl of Leicester" label="Robert de Beaumont, 2nd Earl of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q19723" start="38260" end="38264" title="1183" label="1183"/>
<link wikidata="Q918950" start="38267" end="38286" title="Ramon Berenguer III, Count of Provence" label="Ramon Berenguer III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229" start="38328" end="38332" title="1205" label="1205"/>
<link wikidata="Q235629" start="38335" end="38358" title="Isabella I of Jerusalem" label="Isabella I of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506" start="38398" end="38402" title="1258" label="1258"/>
<link wikidata="Q269577" start="38405" end="38421" title="Juliana of Liège" label="Juliana of Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q5723" start="38451" end="38455" title="1308" label="1308"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126757" start="38458" end="38470" title="Ivan Kőszegi" label="Ivan Kőszegi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493428" start="38492" end="38500" title="Oligarch (Kingdom of Hungary)" label="oligarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774" start="38502" end="38506" title="1325" label="1325"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992313" start="38509" end="38528" title="Ralph de Monthermer, 1st Baron Monthermer" label="Ralph de Monthermer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205" start="38591" end="38595" title="1419" label="1419"/>
<link wikidata="Q317131" start="38598" end="38612" title="Vincent Ferrer" label="Vincent Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6344" start="38654" end="38658" title="1431" label="1431"/>
<link wikidata="Q77875" start="38661" end="38670" title="Bernard I, Margrave of Baden-Baden" label="Bernard I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192" start="38707" end="38711" title="1512" label="1512"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358412" start="38714" end="38730" title="Lazzaro Bastiani" label="Lazzaro Bastiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6447" start="38759" end="38763" title="1534" label="1534"/>
<link wikidata="Q683862" start="38766" end="38777" title="Jan Matthys" label="Jan Matthys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777" start="38806" end="38810" title="1594" label="1594"/>
<link wikidata="Q437427" start="38813" end="38831" title="Catherine of Palma" label="Catherine of Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771" start="38872" end="38876" title="1612" label="1612"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026163" start="38879" end="38893" title="Diana Scultori" label="Diana Scultori"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798" start="38923" end="38927" title="1617" label="1617"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839271" start="38930" end="38941" title="Alonso Lobo" label="Alonso Lobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831" start="38971" end="38975" title="1626" label="1626"/>
<link wikidata="Q151587" start="38978" end="38994" title="Anna Koltovskaya" label="Anna Koltovskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617" start="39014" end="39018" title="1673" label="1673"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450963" start="39021" end="39035" title="François Caron" label="François Caron"/>
<link wikidata="Q715356" start="39081" end="39100" title="Governor of Formosa" label="Governor of Formosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638" start="39112" end="39116" title="1679" label="1679"/>
<link wikidata="Q256663" start="39119" end="39144" title="Anne Geneviève de Bourbon" label="Anne Geneviève de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654" start="39173" end="39177" title="1684" label="1684"/>
<link wikidata="Q451693" start="39180" end="39197" title="William Brouncker, 2nd Viscount Brouncker" label="William Brouncker"/>
<link wikidata="Q698118" start="39240" end="39253" title="Karl Eusebius, Prince of Liechtenstein" label="Karl Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689" start="39290" end="39294" title="1693" label="1693"/>
<link wikidata="Q231832" start="39297" end="39329" title="Anne Marie Louise d&amp;#x27;Orléans, Duchess of Montpensier" label="Anne Marie Louise d&amp;#x27;Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q67198" start="39368" end="39389" title="Philip William August, Count Palatine of Neuburg" label="Philip William August"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696" start="39418" end="39422" title="1695" label="1695"/>
<link wikidata="Q335280" start="39425" end="39438" title="George Savile, 1st Marquess of Halifax" label="George Savile"/>
<link wikidata="Q943379" start="39460" end="39489" title="Lord President of the Council" label="Lord President of the Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7702" start="39501" end="39505" title="1697" label="1697"/>
<link wikidata="Q52935" start="39508" end="39518" title="Charles XI of Sweden" label="Charles XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824" start="39546" end="39550" title="1704" label="1704"/>
<link wikidata="Q476219" start="39553" end="39571" title="Christian Ulrich I, Duke of Württemberg-Oels" label="Christian Ulrich I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846" start="39629" end="39633" title="1708" label="1708"/>
<link wikidata="Q657563" start="39636" end="39654" title="Christian Heinrich, Margrave of Brandenburg-Bayreuth-Kulmbach" label="Christian Heinrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q83969" start="39688" end="39709" title="House of Hohenzollern" label="House of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857" start="39721" end="39725" title="1709" label="1709"/>
<link wikidata="Q941981" start="39728" end="39742" title="Roger de Piles" label="Roger de Piles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6871" start="39805" end="39809" title="1712" label="1712"/>
<link wikidata="Q87466" start="39812" end="39822" title="Jan Luyken" label="Jan Luyken"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895" start="39872" end="39876" title="1717" label="1717"/>
<link wikidata="Q712455" start="39879" end="39892" title="Jean Jouvenet" label="Jean Jouvenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921" start="39920" end="39924" title="1723" label="1723"/>
<link wikidata="Q84305" start="39927" end="39961" title="Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach" label="Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984" start="40017" end="40021" title="1735" label="1735"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398235" start="40024" end="40038" title="William Derham" label="William Derham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615" start="40084" end="40088" title="1751" label="1751"/>
<link wikidata="Q52932" start="40091" end="40102" title="Frederick I of Sweden" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7665" start="40149" end="40153" title="1765" label="1765"/>
<link wikidata="Q507699" start="40156" end="40168" title="Edward Young" label="Edward Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672" start="40205" end="40209" title="1767" label="1767"/>
<link wikidata="Q92270" start="40212" end="40265" title="Princess Charlotte Wilhelmine of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld" label="Princess Charlotte Wilhelmine of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675" start="40318" end="40322" title="1768" label="1768"/>
<link wikidata="Q550353" start="40325" end="40342" title="Egidio Forcellini" label="Egidio Forcellini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679" start="40375" end="40379" title="1769" label="1769"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892528" start="40382" end="40402" title="Marc-Antoine Laugier" label="Marc-Antoine Laugier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811" start="40429" end="40433" title="1794" label="1794"/>
<link wikidata="Q184623" start="40436" end="40450" title="Georges Danton" label="Georges Danton"/>
<link wikidata="Q509816" start="40482" end="40508" title="Ministry of Justice (France)" label="French Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q726310" start="40528" end="40543" title="François Chabot" label="François Chabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q249313" start="40582" end="40600" title="Camille Desmoulins" label="Camille Desmoulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q553446" start="40663" end="40685" title="Fabre d&amp;#x27;Églantine" label="Fabre d&amp;#x27;Églantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q253747" start="40751" end="40782" title="Marie-Jean Hérault de Séchelles" label="Marie-Jean Hérault de Séchelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643138" start="40831" end="40849" title="Pierre Philippeaux" label="Pierre Philippeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q358757" start="40884" end="40910" title="François Joseph Westermann" label="François Joseph Westermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827" start="40938" end="40942" title="1799" label="1799"/>
<link wikidata="Q68320" start="40945" end="40970" title="Johann Christoph Gatterer" label="Johann Christoph Gatterer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894" start="41000" end="41004" title="1804" label="1804"/>
<link wikidata="Q355643" start="41007" end="41028" title="Jean-Charles Pichegru" label="Jean-Charles Pichegru"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914" start="41056" end="41060" title="1808" label="1808"/>
<link wikidata="Q509724" start="41063" end="41081" title="Johann Georg Wille" label="Johann Georg Wille"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576" start="41110" end="41114" title="1830" label="1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269878" start="41117" end="41133" title="Richard Chenevix (chemist)" label="Richard Chenevix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579" start="41175" end="41179" title="1831" label="1831"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728333" start="41182" end="41210" title="Pierre Léonard Vander Linden" label="Pierre Léonard Vander Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625" start="41244" end="41248" title="1842" label="1842"/>
<link wikidata="Q457944" start="41251" end="41270" title="Shah Shujah Durrani" label="Shah Shujah Durrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186111" start="41276" end="41295" title="Emir of Afghanistan" label="Emir of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661" start="41307" end="41311" title="1852" label="1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q547074" start="41314" end="41343" title="Prince Felix of Schwarzenberg" label="Prince Felix of Schwarzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693" start="41356" end="41360" title="1861" label="1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710470" start="41363" end="41385" title="Ferdinand Joachimsthal" label="Ferdinand Joachimsthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698" start="41419" end="41423" title="1862" label="1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q808081" start="41426" end="41450" title="Barend Cornelis Koekkoek" label="Barend Cornelis Koekkoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708" start="41476" end="41480" title="1865" label="1865"/>
<link wikidata="Q668283" start="41483" end="41497" title="Manfredo Fanti" label="Manfredo Fanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712" start="41526" end="41530" title="1866" label="1866"/>
<link wikidata="Q456820" start="41533" end="41547" title="Thomas Hodgkin" label="Thomas Hodgkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717" start="41578" end="41582" title="1868" label="1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505153" start="41585" end="41598" title="Karel Purkyně" label="Karel Purkyně"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746" start="41625" end="41629" title="1871" label="1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356835" start="41632" end="41642" title="Paolo Savi" label="Paolo Savi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753" start="41691" end="41695" title="1872" label="1872"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410755" start="41698" end="41725" title="Paul-Auguste-Ernest Laugier" label="Paul-Auguste-Ernest Laugier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757" start="41756" end="41760" title="1873" label="1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q620559" start="41763" end="41781" title="Milivoje Blaznavac" label="Milivoje Blaznavac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="41825" end="41829" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q452627" start="41832" end="41865" title="Pierre Guillaume Frédéric le Play" label="Pierre Guillaume Frédéric le Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829" start="41878" end="41882" title="1888" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q333222" start="41885" end="41901" title="Vsevolod Garshin" label="Vsevolod Garshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="41929" end="41933" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q700107" start="41936" end="41956" title="Johann Hermann Bauer" label="Johann Hermann Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="41991" end="41995" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q315436" start="41998" end="42013" title="Joseph Bertrand" label="Joseph Bertrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q546595" start="42080" end="42096" title="Osman Nuri Pasha" label="Osman Nuri Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035" start="42195" end="42199" title="1901" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617107" start="42202" end="42220" title="Angelo Messedaglia" label="Angelo Messedaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="42275" end="42279" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q77398" start="42282" end="42307" title="Hans Ernst August Buchner" label="Hans Ernst August Buchner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="42342" end="42346" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q84307" start="42349" end="42362" title="Ernst Leopold, 4th Prince of Leiningen" label="Ernst Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q466162" start="42407" end="42426" title="Frances Power Cobbe" label="Frances Power Cobbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049" start="42452" end="42456" title="1906" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278282" start="42459" end="42474" title="Eastman Johnson" label="Eastman Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="42504" end="42508" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q822319" start="42511" end="42528" title="Bernard Borggreve" label="Bernard Borggreve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="42567" end="42571" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374145" start="42574" end="42591" title="Maksim Kovalevsky" label="Maksim Kovalevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="42624" end="42628" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q379844" start="42631" end="42646" title="George Tupou II" label="George Tupou II"/>
<link wikidata="Q311865" start="42681" end="42704" title="Paul Vidal de La Blache" label="Paul Vidal de La Blache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="42735" end="42739" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971720" start="42742" end="42759" title="Laurent Marqueste" label="Laurent Marqueste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="42788" end="42792" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q952378" start="42795" end="42814" title="Alphons Diepenbrock" label="Alphons Diepenbrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q476144" start="42850" end="42862" title="Sophie Elkan" label="Sophie Elkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="42905" end="42909" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q158765" start="42912" end="42949" title="George Herbert, 5th Earl of Carnarvon" label="George Herbert, 5th Earl of Carnarvon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="43000" end="43004" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q70116" start="43007" end="43020" title="Victor Hensen" label="Victor Hensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="43050" end="43054" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057331" start="43057" end="43067" title="Roy Kilner" label="Roy Kilner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469764" start="43118" end="43130" title="Viktor Oliva" label="Viktor Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="43173" end="43177" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q664387" start="43180" end="43201" title="Francis Aidan Gasquet" label="Francis Aidan Gasquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q71255" start="43247" end="43263" title="Ludwig von Sybel" label="Ludwig von Sybel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="43296" end="43300" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q443779" start="43303" end="43318" title="María Blanchard" label="María Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="43347" end="43351" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q983421" start="43354" end="43371" title="Earl Derr Biggers" label="Earl Derr Biggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q155381" start="43425" end="43439" title="Hjalmar Mellin" label="Hjalmar Mellin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="43498" end="43502" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858041" start="43505" end="43525" title="Salvatore Di Giacomo" label="Salvatore Di Giacomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179267" start="43608" end="43617" title="Jiro Sato" label="Jiro Sato"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="43653" end="43657" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q340232" start="43660" end="43677" title="Achille Locatelli" label="Achille Locatelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589146" start="43722" end="43736" title="Emil Młynarski" label="Emil Młynarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q923270" start="43810" end="43826" title="Franz von Vecsey" label="Franz von Vecsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="43872" end="43876" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638533" start="43879" end="43892" title="Chandler Egan" label="Chandler Egan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="43935" end="43939" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q73108" start="43942" end="43964" title="Gustav Adolf Deissmann" label="Gustav Adolf Deissmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668142" start="43985" end="44005" title="José Benlliure y Gil" label="José Benlliure y Gil"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="44034" end="44038" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990378" start="44041" end="44059" title="Helena Westermarck" label="Helena Westermarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260443" start="44106" end="44122" title="Verner Lehtimäki" label="Verner Lehtimäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="44157" end="44161" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q9291837" start="44164" end="44185" title="Charles Freer Andrews" label="Charles Freer Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q123673" start="44254" end="44269" title="Robert Maillart" label="Robert Maillart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384340" start="44311" end="44327" title="Jay O&amp;#x27;Brien (bobsleigh)" label="Jay O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q711969" start="44368" end="44380" title="Song Zheyuan" label="Song Zheyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="44409" end="44413" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q271254" start="44416" end="44436" title="Parvin E&amp;#x27;tesami" label="Parvin E&amp;#x27;tesami"/>
<link wikidata="Q320438" start="44470" end="44483" title="Nigel Gresley" label="Nigel Gresley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354908" start="44530" end="44549" title="Franciszek Kleeberg" label="Franciszek Kleeberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="44577" end="44581" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049549" start="44584" end="44601" title="Heinrich Borgmann" label="Heinrich Borgmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q57495" start="44637" end="44651" title="Karl-Otto Koch" label="Karl-Otto Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="44660" end="44662" title="Schutzstaffel" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="44682" end="44686" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q746951" start="44689" end="44704" title="Vincent Youmans" label="Vincent Youmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="44748" end="44752" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q86346" start="44755" end="44770" title="Bernhard Pankok" label="Bernhard Pankok"/>
<link wikidata="Q705960" start="44828" end="44842" title="Elis Strömgren" label="Elis Strömgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="44881" end="44885" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q306870" start="44888" end="44912" title="Abby Aldrich Rockefeller" label="Abby Aldrich Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="44963" end="44967" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q70049" start="44970" end="44983" title="Erich Zeigner" label="Erich Zeigner"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="44985" end="44999" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="45003" end="45009" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="45021" end="45025" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916723" start="45028" end="45043" title="Hiroshi Yoshida" label="Hiroshi Yoshida"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="45073" end="45077" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q394597" start="45080" end="45092" title="Agnes Morton" label="Agnes Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="45127" end="45131" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q231281" start="45134" end="45159" title="Princess Märtha of Sweden" label="Princess Märtha of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096647" start="45180" end="45198" title="Claude Delvincourt" label="Claude Delvincourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="45239" end="45243" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q600847" start="45246" end="45257" title="Tibor Szele" label="Tibor Szele"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="45294" end="45298" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440822" start="45301" end="45313" title="William Titt" label="William Titt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="45342" end="45346" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537215" start="45349" end="45376" title="Prince Ferdinand of Bavaria" label="Prince Ferdinand of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q252549" start="45396" end="45412" title="Ásgrímur Jónsson" label="Ásgrímur Jónsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279865" start="45451" end="45466" title="Isidora Sekulić" label="Isidora Sekulić"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="45494" end="45498" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q4243140" start="45501" end="45516" title="Nikolai Kryukov (composer)" label="Nikolai Kryukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="45546" end="45550" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806070" start="45553" end="45565" title="Boo Kullberg" label="Boo Kullberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="45594" end="45598" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q470588" start="45601" end="45612" title="Jacobus Oud" label="Jacobus Oud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="45641" end="45645" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680964" start="45648" end="45660" title="James Chapin" label="James Chapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q124783" start="45704" end="45717" title="Aloïse Corbaz" label="Aloïse Corbaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="45751" end="45768" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="45798" end="45802" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004542" start="45805" end="45822" title="Pedro Sernagiotto" label="Pedro Sernagiotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q897596" start="45872" end="45885" title="Sándor Szalay (figure skater)" label="Sándor Szalay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="45922" end="45926" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391355" start="45929" end="45941" title="Mischa Elman" label="Mischa Elman"/>
<link wikidata="Q721749" start="45991" end="46007" title="Johan Falkberget" label="Johan Falkberget"/>
<link wikidata="Q83598" start="46045" end="46066" title="Hermann Joseph Muller" label="Hermann Joseph Muller"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="46102" end="46113" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340070" start="46142" end="46158" title="Herbert Johnston" label="Herbert Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="46186" end="46190" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092429" start="46193" end="46207" title="Félix Couchoro" label="Félix Couchoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q254149" start="46244" end="46257" title="Lajos Csordás" label="Lajos Csordás"/>
<link wikidata="Q599524" start="46299" end="46313" title="Giuseppe Paris" label="Giuseppe Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="46342" end="46346" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q264986" start="46349" end="46364" title="Alberto Bonucci" label="Alberto Bonucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q311401" start="46412" end="46427" title="Rómulo Gallegos" label="Rómulo Gallegos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476456" start="46483" end="46497" title="Ain-Ervin Mere" label="Ain-Ervin Mere"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="46508" end="46510" title="Schutzstaffel" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="46530" end="46534" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q63764" start="46537" end="46549" title="Louisa Bolus" label="Louisa Bolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q535384" start="46608" end="46625" title="Alfred Sturtevant" label="Alfred Sturtevant"/>
<link wikidata="Q76347" start="46679" end="46694" title="Karl von Spreti" label="Karl von Spreti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="46723" end="46727" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067302" start="46730" end="46742" title="José Cubiles" label="José Cubiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="46785" end="46789" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q957673" start="46792" end="46805" title="Isabel Jewell" label="Isabel Jewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="46846" end="46850" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q171879" start="46853" end="46865" title="David Murray (racing driver)" label="David Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451710" start="46910" end="46923" title="Alla Tarasova" label="Alla Tarasova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="46954" end="46958" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q610287" start="46961" end="46970" title="Bino Bini" label="Bino Bini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499926" start="47006" end="47019" title="A. Y. Jackson" label="A. Y. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="47049" end="47053" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q742215" start="47056" end="47066" title="Tell Berna" label="Tell Berna"/>
<link wikidata="Q719701" start="47128" end="47143" title="Victor Marijnen" label="Victor Marijnen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="47181" end="47196" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q887003" start="47234" end="47268" title="President of the Republic of China" label="President of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q558701" start="47288" end="47301" title="Harold Osborn" label="Harold Osborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="47341" end="47345" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q189081" start="47348" end="47361" title="Howard Hughes" label="Howard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q711394" start="47421" end="47436" title="Wilder Penfield" label="Wilder Penfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q72706" start="47496" end="47506" title="Harry Wyld" label="Harry Wyld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="47535" end="47539" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q655779" start="47542" end="47562" title="Carlos Prío Socarrás" label="Carlos Prío Socarrás"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370482" start="47564" end="47581" title="President of Cuba" label="President of Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q860409" start="47602" end="47615" title="Yuri Zavadsky" label="Yuri Zavadsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="47655" end="47659" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806390" start="47662" end="47673" title="Émile Hanse" label="Émile Hanse"/>
<link wikidata="Q887993" start="47713" end="47721" title="Bob Hite" label="Bob Hite"/>
<link wikidata="Q955906" start="47769" end="47785" title="Pinchus Kremegne" label="Pinchus Kremegne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="47812" end="47816" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q318143" start="47819" end="47829" title="Abe Fortas" label="Abe Fortas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="47869" end="47873" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223220" start="47876" end="47899" title="Abd al-Quddus al-Ansari" label="Abd al-Quddus al-Ansari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="47960" end="47964" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425994" start="47967" end="47979" title="Hans Lunding" label="Hans Lunding"/>
<link wikidata="Q715146" start="48024" end="48038" title="Giuseppe Tucci" label="Giuseppe Tucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="48088" end="48092" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981210" start="48095" end="48113" title="Manly Wade Wellman" label="Manly Wade Wellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="48142" end="48146" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347953" start="48149" end="48164" title="Leabua Jonathan" label="Leabua Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q947883" start="48170" end="48195" title="List of Prime Ministers of Lesotho" label="Prime Minister of Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="48207" end="48211" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q518995" start="48214" end="48225" title="Alf Kjellin" label="Alf Kjellin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="48265" end="48269" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q949486" start="48272" end="48282" title="Frank Foss (athlete)" label="Frank Foss"/>
<link wikidata="Q282000" start="48325" end="48336" title="Karel Zeman" label="Karel Zeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="48406" end="48410" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338912" start="48413" end="48425" title="Sonny Carter" label="Sonny Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q518561" start="48495" end="48505" title="Jay Miller (basketball)" label="Jay Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444405" start="48553" end="48563" title="Jiří Mucha" label="Jiří Mucha"/>
<link wikidata="Q333824" start="48626" end="48640" title="William Sidney, 1st Viscount De L&amp;#x27;Isle" label="William Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658030" start="48689" end="48699" title="John Tower" label="John Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="48755" end="48759" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q949957" start="48762" end="48775" title="Takeshi Inoue (footballer)" label="Takeshi Inoue"/>
<link wikidata="Q467563" start="48816" end="48827" title="Molly Picon" label="Molly Picon"/>
<link wikidata="Q497827" start="48865" end="48875" title="Sam Walton" label="Sam Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="48907" end="48914" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972120" start="48919" end="48934" title="Sam&amp;#x27;s Club" label="Sam&amp;#x27;s Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="48946" end="48950" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q465005" start="48953" end="48965" title="Divya Bharti" label="Divya Bharti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="48993" end="48997" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="49000" end="49011" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="49065" end="49069" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350763" start="49072" end="49090" title="Nicolaas Cortlever" label="Nicolaas Cortlever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243408" start="49130" end="49142" title="Emilio Greco" label="Emilio Greco"/>
<link wikidata="Q661825" start="49193" end="49209" title="Christian Pineau" label="Christian Pineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="49248" end="49252" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q518581" start="49255" end="49268" title="Charlene Holt" label="Charlene Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="49298" end="49302" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="49305" end="49319" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="49346" end="49350" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q977036" start="49353" end="49366" title="Charles Frank (physicist)" label="Charles Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q14341" start="49417" end="49428" title="Cozy Powell" label="Cozy Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="49457" end="49461" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264337" start="49464" end="49478" title="Giulio Einaudi" label="Giulio Einaudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="49514" end="49518" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q636256" start="49521" end="49536" title="Heinrich Müller (footballer, born 1909)" label="Heinrich Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q719215" start="49577" end="49586" title="Lee Petty" label="Lee Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="49624" end="49628" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q967005" start="49631" end="49644" title="Aldo Olivieri" label="Aldo Olivieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="49676" end="49680" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q309838" start="49683" end="49695" title="Layne Staley" label="Layne Staley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196825" start="49743" end="49755" title="Kim Won-gyun" label="Kim Won-gyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="49805" end="49809" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814346" start="49812" end="49827" title="Keizo Morishita" label="Keizo Morishita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="49857" end="49861" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388069" start="49864" end="49881" title="Fernand Goyvaerts" label="Fernand Goyvaerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q563218" start="49921" end="49936" title="Sławomir Rawicz" label="Sławomir Rawicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q27427" start="49975" end="49991" title="Heiner Zieschang" label="Heiner Zieschang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="50038" end="50042" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q83059" start="50045" end="50056" title="Saul Bellow" label="Saul Bellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="50119" end="50130" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q526063" start="50159" end="50170" title="Robert Borg" label="Robert Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q485359" start="50232" end="50245" title="Chung Nam-sik" label="Chung Nam-sik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="50282" end="50286" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q366380" start="50289" end="50301" title="Allan Kaprow" label="Allan Kaprow"/>
<link wikidata="Q175238" start="50352" end="50363" title="Gene Pitney" label="Gene Pitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148041" start="50411" end="50426" title="Yevgeny Seredin" label="Yevgeny Seredin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229199" start="50463" end="50478" title="Pasquale Macchi" label="Pasquale Macchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="50517" end="50521" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q234373" start="50524" end="50535" title="Maria Gripe" label="Maria Gripe"/>
<link wikidata="Q432714" start="50586" end="50600" title="Leela Majumdar" label="Leela Majumdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q66327" start="50648" end="50660" title="Werner Maser" label="Werner Maser"/>
<link wikidata="Q347180" start="50713" end="50726" title="Mark St. John" label="Mark St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869196" start="50766" end="50786" title="Thomas Stoltz Harvey" label="Thomas Stoltz Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="50820" end="50824" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="50827" end="50842" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="50904" end="50908" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q224372" start="50911" end="50921" title="I. J. Good" label="I. J. Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="50956" end="50960" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q252726" start="50963" end="50981" title="Vitaly Sevastyanov" label="Vitaly Sevastyanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994" start="51024" end="51028" title="2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q105830" start="51031" end="51053" title="Baruch Samuel Blumberg" label="Baruch Samuel Blumberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q314524" start="51130" end="51148" title="Ange-Félix Patassé" label="Ange-Félix Patassé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="51188" end="51192" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q60716" start="51195" end="51222" title="Ferdinand Alexander Porsche" label="Ferdinand Alexander Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342344" start="51259" end="51281" title="Pedro Bartolomé Benoit" label="Pedro Bartolomé Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q121668" start="51351" end="51363" title="Jim Marshall (businessman)" label="Jim Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q671465" start="51394" end="51416" title="Marshall Amplification" label="Marshall Amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q723053" start="51436" end="51450" title="Barney McKenna" label="Barney McKenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q181586" start="51486" end="51504" title="Bingu wa Mutharika" label="Bingu wa Mutharika"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921529" start="51545" end="51564" title="President of Malawi" label="President of Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="51576" end="51580" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423469" start="51583" end="51597" title="Regina Bianchi" label="Regina Bianchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q660654" start="51634" end="51648" title="Piero de Palma" label="Piero de Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7036076" start="51693" end="51708" title="Nikolaos Pappas" label="Nikolaos Pappas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="51740" end="51744" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q44033" start="51747" end="51757" title="Alan Davie" label="Alan Davie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322154" start="51811" end="51823" title="Mariano Díaz (cyclist)" label="Mariano Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q892108" start="51860" end="51877" title="Peter Matthiessen" label="Peter Matthiessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988628" start="51943" end="51959" title="The Paris Review" label="The Paris Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701437" start="51985" end="51997" title="John Pinette" label="John Pinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366279" start="52036" end="52047" title="José Wilker" label="José Wilker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="52100" end="52104" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q16142589" start="52107" end="52121" title="Fredric Brandt" label="Fredric Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q680400" start="52176" end="52195" title="Juan Carlos Cáceres" label="Juan Carlos Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="52239" end="52243" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561131" start="52246" end="52260" title="Koço Kasapoğlu" label="Koço Kasapoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="52292" end="52296" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q533252" start="52299" end="52315" title="Attilio Benfatto" label="Attilio Benfatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q708680" start="52352" end="52367" title="Arthur Bisguier" label="Arthur Bisguier"/>
<link wikidata="Q470656" start="52415" end="52428" title="Paul G. Comba" label="Paul G. Comba"/>
<link wikidata="Q775466" start="52500" end="52511" title="Makoto Ōoka" label="Makoto Ōoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q909933" start="52566" end="52583" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill (producer)" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q172802" start="52640" end="52651" title="Tim Parnell" label="Tim Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854540" start="52696" end="52708" title="Memè Perlini" label="Memè Perlini"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812762" start="52756" end="52772" title="Atanase Sciotnic" label="Atanase Sciotnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658700" start="52818" end="52832" title="Ilkka Sinisalo" label="Ilkka Sinisalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="52871" end="52875" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q178713" start="52878" end="52891" title="Isao Takahata" label="Isao Takahata"/>
<link wikidata="Q25274" start="52922" end="52926" title="2019" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q234463" start="52929" end="52943" title="Sydney Brenner" label="Sydney Brenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="53002" end="53006" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153247" start="53009" end="53020" title="Paul Ritter (actor)" label="Paul Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="53047" end="53051" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q918369" start="53054" end="53070" title="Nehemiah Persoff" label="Nehemiah Persoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q703153" start="53114" end="53127" title="Jimmy Wang Yu" label="Jimmy Wang Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="53157" end="53161" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930439" start="53164" end="53175" title="C. J. Snare" label="C. J. Snare"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="53260" end="53269" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608656" start="53273" end="53295" title="Albert of Montecorvino" label="Albert of Montecorvino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401174" start="53298" end="53311" title="Saint Derfel" label="Derfel Gadarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266026" start="53314" end="53331" title="Æthelburh of Kent" label="Æthelburh of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q590001" start="53334" end="53357" title="Gerald of Sauve-Majeure" label="Gerald of Sauve-Majeure"/>
<link wikidata="Q269577" start="53360" end="53376" title="Juliana of Liège" label="Juliana of Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q70504" start="53379" end="53400" title="Maria Crescentia Höss" label="Maria Crescentia Höss"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="53403" end="53410" title="Beatification" label="Blessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093883" start="53411" end="53429" title="Mariano de la Mata" label="Mariano de la Mata"/>
<link wikidata="Q94889" start="53432" end="53452" title="Pandita Mary Ramabai" label="Pandita Mary Ramabai"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="53454" end="53476" title="Episcopal Church (USA)" label="Episcopal Church (USA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459547" start="53481" end="53498" title="Ruadhán of Lorrha" label="Ruadhán of Lorrha"/>
<link wikidata="Q317131" start="53501" end="53515" title="Vincent Ferrer" label="Vincent Ferrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781986" start="53518" end="53554" title="April 5 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="April 5 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q715157" start="53556" end="53574" title="Cold Food Festival" label="Cold Food Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="53603" end="53612" title="leap year" label="leap year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312662" start="53674" end="53688" title="Sham el-Nessim" label="Sham el-Nessim"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="53757" end="53765" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="53766" end="53772" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="53774" end="53779" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q37081" start="53782" end="53801" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q407199" start="53803" end="53826" title="Palestinian territories" label="Palestinian territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186774" start="53829" end="53846" title="First Contact Day" label="First Contact Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111813" start="53848" end="53872" title="International observance" label="International observance"/>
<link wikidata="Q483312" start="53875" end="53883" title="Sikmogil" label="Sikmogil"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="53885" end="53896" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53899" end="53920" title="Indian maritime history#National Maritime Day" label="National Maritime Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124394" start="53983" end="54005" title="RMS Empress of India (1890)" label="SS &amp;quot;Loyalty&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089113" start="54013" end="54050" title="Scindia Steam Navigation Company Ltd." label="Scindia Steam Navigation Company Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q96382217" start="54062" end="54093" title="International Day of Conscience" label="International Day of Conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782101" start="54107" end="54122" title="April the Fifth" label="April the Fifth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2195" wikidata="Q2524" url="?curid=2195" title="April 20">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
*1303 – The Sapienza University of Rome is instituted by a bull of Pope Boniface VIII.
===1601–1900===
*1653 – Oliver Cromwell dissolves England&#x27;s Rump Parliament.
*1657 – English Admiral Robert Blake destroys a Spanish silver fleet, under heavy fire from the shore, at the Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife.
* 1657 – Freedom of religion is granted to the Jews of New Amsterdam (later New York City).
*1752 – Start of Konbaung–Hanthawaddy War, a new phase in the Burmese Civil War (1740–57).
*1770 – The Georgian king, Erekle II, abandoned by his Russian ally Count Totleben, wins a victory over Ottoman forces at Aspindza.
*1775 – American Revolutionary War: The Siege of Boston begins, following the battles at Lexington and Concord.
*1789 – George Washington arrives at Grays Ferry, Philadelphia, while en route to Manhattan for his inauguration.
*1792 – France declares war against the &quot;King of Hungary and Bohemia&quot;, the beginning of the French Revolutionary Wars.
*1800 – The Septinsular Republic is established.
*1809 – Two Austrian army corps in Bavaria are defeated by a First French Empire army led by Napoleon at the Battle of Abensberg on the second day of a four-day campaign that ended in a French victory.
*1828 – René Caillié becomes the second non-Muslim to enter Timbuktu, following Major Gordon Laing. He would also be the first to return alive.
*1836 – U.S. Congress passes an act creating the Wisconsin Territory.
*1861 – American Civil War: Robert E. Lee resigns his commission in the United States Army in order to command the forces of the state of Virginia.
* 1861 – Thaddeus S. C. Lowe, attempting to display the value of balloons, makes record journey, flying 900 miles from Cincinnati to South Carolina. 
*1862 – Louis Pasteur and Claude Bernard complete the experiment disproving the theory of spontaneous generation.
*1865 – Astronomer Angelo Secchi demonstrates the Secchi disk, which measures water clarity, aboard Pope Pius IX&#x27;s yacht, the &quot;L&#x27;Immaculata Concezion&quot;.
*1876 – The April Uprising begins. Its suppression shocks European opinion, and Bulgarian independence becomes a condition for ending the Russo-Turkish War.
*1884 – Pope Leo XIII publishes the encyclical &quot;Humanum genus&quot;, condemning Freemasonry.
*1898 – U.S. President William McKinley signs a joint resolution to Congress for declaration of war against Spain, beginning the Spanish–American War.

===1901–present===
*1902 – Pierre and Marie Curie refine radium chloride.
*1908 – Opening day of competition in the New South Wales Rugby League.
*1914 – Nineteen men, women, and children participating in a strike are killed in the Ludlow Massacre during the Colorado Coalfield War.
*1918 – Manfred von Richthofen, a.k.a. The Red Baron, shoots down his 79th and 80th victims, his final victories before his death the following day.
*1922 – The Soviet government creates South Ossetian Autonomous Oblast within Georgian SSR.
*1945 – World War II: U.S. troops capture Leipzig, Germany, only to later cede the city to the Soviet Union.
* 1945 – World War II: Führerbunker: On his 56th birthday Adolf Hitler makes his last trip to the surface to award Iron Crosses to boy soldiers of the Hitler Youth.
* 1945 – Twenty Jewish children used in medical experiments at Neuengamme are killed in the basement of the Bullenhuser Damm school.
*1946 – The League of Nations officially dissolves, giving most of its power to the United Nations.
* 1949 – Amethyst incident: The People&#x27;s Liberation Army attacks travelling to the British embassy in Nanjing during the Chinese Civil War.
*1961 – Cold War: Failure of the Bay of Pigs Invasion of US-backed Cuban exiles against Cuba.
*1968 – English politician Enoch Powell makes his controversial &quot;Rivers of Blood&quot; speech.
* 1968 – South African Airways Flight 228 crashes near the Hosea Kutako International Airport in South West Africa (now Namibia), killing 123 people.
*1972 – Apollo program: Apollo 16 Lunar Module, commanded by John Young and piloted by Charles Duke, lands on the Moon.
*1998 – Air France Flight 422 crashes after taking off from El Dorado International Airport in Bogotá, Colombia, killing all 53 people on board.
*1999 – Columbine High School massacre: Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold kill 13 people and injure 24 others before committing suicide at Columbine High School in Columbine, Colorado.
*2004 - The Nicoll Highway in Singapore collapsed, killing four workers.
*2007 – Johnson Space Center shooting: William Phillips barricades himself with a handgun in NASA&#x27;s Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas before killing a male hostage and himself.
*2008 – Danica Patrick wins the Indy Japan 300 becoming the first female driver in history to win an Indy car race.
*2010 – The &quot;Deepwater Horizon&quot; drilling rig explodes in the Gulf of Mexico, killing eleven workers and beginning an oil spill that would last six months.
*2012 – One hundred twenty-seven people are killed when a plane crashes in a residential area near the Benazir Bhutto International Airport near Islamabad, Pakistan.
*2013 – A 6.6-magnitude earthquake strikes Lushan County, Ya&#x27;an, in China&#x27;s Sichuan province, killing at least 193 people and injuring thousands.
*2015 – Ten people are killed in a bomb attack on a convoy carrying food supplies to a United Nations compound in Garowe in the Somali region of Puntland.
*2020 – For the first time in history, oil prices drop below zero, an effect of the 2020 Russia-Saudi Arabia oil price war.
*2021 – State of Minnesota v. Derek Michael Chauvin: Derek Chauvin is found guilty of all charges in the murder of George Floyd by the Fourth Judicial District Court of Minnesota.
*2023 – SpaceX&#x27;s Starship rocket, the largest and most powerful rocket ever built, launches for the first time. It explodes 4 minutes into flight.

==Births==
===Pre-1600===
*1494 – Johannes Agricola, German theologian and reformer (d. 1566)
*1544 – Renata of Lorraine, Duchess consort of Bavaria (d. 1602)
*1586 – Rose of Lima, Peruvian mystic and saint (d. 1617)
===1601–1900===
*1633 – Emperor Go-Kōmyō of Japan (d. 1654)
*1646 – Charles Plumier, French botanist and author (d. 1704)
*1650 – William Bedloe, English spy (d. 1680)
*1718 – David Brainerd, American missionary (d. 1747)
*1723 – Cornelius Harnett, American merchant, farmer, and politician (d. 1781)
*1727 – Florimond Claude, Comte de Mercy-Argenteau, Belgian-Austrian minister and diplomat (d. 1794)
*1745 – Philippe Pinel, French physician and psychiatrist (d. 1826)
*1748 – Georg Michael Telemann, German composer and theologian (d. 1831)
*1808 – Napoleon III, French politician, 1st President of France, Emperor of French Second Empire (d. 1873)
*1816 – Bogoslav Šulek, Croatian philologist, historian, and lexicographer (d. 1895)
*1818 – Heinrich Göbel, German-American mechanic and engineer (d. 1893)
*1826 – Dinah Craik, English author and poet (d. 1887)
*1839 – Carol I of Romania, King of Romania (d. 1914)
*1840 – Odilon Redon, French painter and illustrator (d. 1916)
*1850 – Daniel Chester French, American sculptor, designed the Lincoln statue (d. 1931)
*1851 – Alexander Dianin, Russian chemist (d. 1918)
* 1851 – Siegmund Lubin, Polish-American businessman, founded the Lubin Manufacturing Company (d. 1923)
*1860 – Justinien de Clary, French target shooter (d. 1933)
*1871 – Sydney Chapman, English economist and civil servant (d. 1951)
*1873 – James Harcourt, English character actor (d. 1951)
*1875 – Vladimir Vidrić, Croatian poet and lawyer (d. 1909)
*1879 – Paul Poiret, French fashion designer (d. 1944)
*1882 – Holland Smith, American general (d. 1967)
*1884 – Princess Beatrice of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (d. 1966)
* 1884 – Oliver Kirk, American boxer (d. 1960)
* 1884 – Daniel Varoujan, Armenian poet and educator (d. 1915)
*1889 – Albert Jean Amateau, Turkish rabbi, lawyer, and activist (d. 1996)
* 1889 – Prince Erik, Duke of Västmanland (d. 1918)
* 1889 – Marie-Antoinette de Geuser, French mystic (d. 1918)
* 1889 – Adolf Hitler, Austrian-born German politician, Führer of Nazi Germany (d. 1945)
* 1889 – Tonny Kessler, Dutch footballer (d. 1960)
*1890 – Maurice Duplessis, Canadian lawyer and politician, 16th Premier of Quebec (d. 1959)
* 1890 – Adolf Schärf, Austrian soldier and politician, 6th President of Austria (d. 1965)
*1891 – Dave Bancroft, American baseball player and manager (d. 1972)
*1893 – Harold Lloyd, American actor, comedian, and producer (d. 1971)
* 1893 – Joan Miró, Spanish painter and sculptor (d. 1983)
*1895 – Henry de Montherlant, French essayist, novelist, and dramatist (d. 1972)
*1899 – Alan Arnett McLeod, Canadian lieutenant, Victoria Cross recipient (d. 1918)

===1901–present===
*1904 – Bruce Cabot, American actor (d. 1972)
*1907 – Miran Bakhsh, Pakistani cricketer (d. 1991)
* 1907 – Augoustinos Kantiotes, Greek bishop (d. 2010)
*1908 – Lionel Hampton, American vibraphone player, pianist, bandleader, and actor (d. 2002)
*1910 – Fatin Rüştü Zorlu, Turkish diplomat and politician (d. 1961)
*1913 – Mimis Fotopoulos, Greek actor and poet (d. 1986)
* 1913 – Willi Hennig, German biologist and entomologist (d. 1976)
*1914 – Betty Lou Gerson, American actress (d. 1999)
*1915 – Joseph Wolpe, South African psychotherapist and physician (d. 1997)
*1916 – Nasiba Zeynalova, Azerbaijani actress (d. 2004)
*1918 – Kai Siegbahn, Swedish physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2007)
*1919 – Richard Hillary, Australian lieutenant and pilot (d. 1943)
*1920 – Frances Ames, South African neurologist, psychiatrist, and human rights activist (d. 2002)
* 1920 – Clement Isong, Nigerian banker and politician, Governor of Cross River State (d. 2000)
* 1920 – John Paul Stevens, American lawyer and jurist, Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States (d. 2019)
*1921 – Katarína Kolníková, Slovak actress (d. 2006)
*1923 – Mother Angelica, American nun and broadcaster, founded Eternal Word Television Network (d. 2016)
* 1923 – Irene Lieblich, Polish-American painter and illustrator (d. 2008)
* 1923 – Tito Puente, American drummer and producer (d. 2000)
*1924 – Nina Foch, Dutch-American actress (d. 2008)
* 1924 – Leslie Phillips, English actor and producer (d. 2022)
* 1924 – Guy Rocher, Canadian sociologist and academic
*1925 – Ernie Stautner, German-American football player and coach (d. 2006)
* 1925 – Elena Verdugo, American actress (d. 2017)
*1927 – Bud Cullen, Canadian judge and politician, 1st Canadian Minister of Employment and Immigration (d. 2005)
* 1927 – Phil Hill, American race car driver (d. 2008)
* 1927 – K. Alex Müller, Swiss physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2023)
*1928 – Robert Byrne, American chess player and author (d. 2013)
* 1928 – Johnny Gavin, Irish international footballer (d. 2007)
*1930 – Dwight Gustafson, American composer and conductor (d. 2014)
* 1930 – Antony Jay, English director and screenwriter (d. 2016)
*1931 – Michael Allenby, 3rd Viscount Allenby, English lieutenant and politician (d. 2014)
* 1931 – John Eccles, 2nd Viscount Eccles, English businessman and politician
*1932 – Myriam Bru, French actress
*1936 – Lisa Davis, English-American actress
* 1936 – Pauli Ellefsen, Faroese technician, surveyor, and politician, 6th Prime Minister of the Faroe Islands (d. 2012)
* 1936 – Pat Roberts, American captain, journalist, and politician
*1937 – Jiří Dienstbier, Czech journalist and politician, Czech Minister of Foreign Affairs (d. 2011)
* 1937 – Harvey Quaytman, American painter and educator (d. 2002)
* 1937 – George Takei, American actor
*1938 – Betty Cuthbert, Australian sprinter (d. 2017)
* 1938 – Manfred Kinder, German runner
* 1938 – Eszter Tamási, Hungarian actress (d. 1991)
*1939 – Peter S. Beagle, American author and screenwriter
* 1939 – Gro Harlem Brundtland, Norwegian physician and politician, 22nd Prime Minister of Norway
* 1939 – Johnny Tillotson, American singer-songwriter
*1940 – James Gammon, American actor (d. 2010)
*1941 – Ryan O&#x27;Neal, American actor (d. 2023)
*1943 – Alan Beith, English academic and politician
* 1943 – John Eliot Gardiner, English conductor and director
*1944 – Toivo Aare, Estonian journalist and author (d. 1999)
*1945 – Michael Brandon, American actor and director
* 1945 – Olga Karlatos, Greek actress and Bermudian lawyer
* 1945 – Thein Sein, Burmese general and politician, 8th President of Burma
* 1945 – Naftali Temu, Kenyan runner (d. 2003)
* 1945 – Steve Spurrier, American football player and coach
*1946 – Sandro Chia, Italian painter and sculptor
*1947 – Rita Dionne-Marsolais, Canadian economist and politician
* 1947 – Viktor Suvorov, Russian intelligence officer, historian, and author
* 1947 – Niko Lekishvili, Georgian politician (d. 2025)
*1948 – Matthias Kuhle, German geographer and academic (d. 2015)
*1949 – Veronica Cartwright, English-American actress
* 1949 – Toller Cranston, Canadian-Mexican figure skater and painter (d. 2015)
* 1949 – Massimo D&#x27;Alema, Italian journalist and politician, 76th Prime Minister of Italy
* 1949 – Jessica Lange, American actress
*1950 – Alexander Lebed, Russian general and politician (d. 2002)
* 1950 – N. Chandrababu Naidu, Indian politician, 13th Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh
*1951 – Luther Vandross, American singer-songwriter and producer (d. 2005)
*1952 – Louka Katseli, Greek economist and politician
*1953 – Sebastian Faulks, English journalist and author
* 1953 – James Chance, American musician (d. 2024)
*1955 – Donald Pettit, American engineer and astronaut
* 1955 – Svante Pääbo, Swedish geneticist and Nobel Laureate
*1956 – Beatrice Ask, Swedish politician, Swedish Minister for Justice
* 1956 – Peter Chelsom, English film director, writer, and actor
* 1956 – Kakha Bendukidze, Georgian economist and politician (d. 2014)
*1958 – Viacheslav Fetisov, Russian ice hockey player and coach
*1960 – Debbie Flintoff-King, Australian hurdler and coach
*1961 – Don Mattingly, American baseball player, coach, and manager
* 1961 – Konstantin Lavronenko, Russian actor
*1963 – Rachel Whiteread, English sculptor
*1964 – John Carney, American football player
* 1964 – Crispin Glover, American actor and filmmaker
* 1964 – Andy Serkis, English actor and director
* 1964 – Rosalynn Sumners, American figure skater
*1965 – Kostis Chatzidakis, Greek politician, Ministry of Economy, Infrastructure, Shipping and Tourism
* 1965 – Léa Fazer, Swiss film director, screenwriter and actress
* 1965 – Mark Mallia, Maltese painter and sculptor (d. 2024)
*1966 – David Chalmers, Australian philosopher and academic
* 1966 – David Filo, American businessman, co-founded Yahoo!
*1967 – Mike Portnoy, American drummer and songwriter
*1968 – Julia Morris, Australian entertainer
*1969 – Felix Baumgartner, Austrian daredevil
* 1969 – Will Hodgman, Australian politician, 45th Premier of Tasmania
*1970 – Shemar Moore, American actor
*1971 – Allan Houston, American basketball player
*1972 – Carmen Electra, American model and actress
* 1972 – Stephen Marley, Jamaican-American musician
*1973 – Julie Powell, American food writer and memoirist (d. 2022)
*1975 – Killer Mike, American rapper
*1978 – Carl Greenidge, English cricketer
*1980 – Emma Husar, Australian politician
*1983 – Miranda Kerr, Australian model
*1987 – Jorge Pinto, Portuguese politician
*1988 – Brandon Belt, American baseball player
*1989 – Vannesa Rosales, Venezuelan activist and teacher
*1990 - Kyle Higashioka, American baseball player
*1990 – Jason Behrendorff, Australian cricketer
*1991 – Luke Kuechly, American football player
*1997 – Alexander Zverev, German tennis player
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 689 – Cædwalla, king of Wessex (b. 659)
*888 – Xi Zong, Chinese emperor (b. 862)
*1099 – Peter Bartholomew (b. 1061)
*1164 – Antipope Victor IV
*1176 – Richard de Clare, 2nd Earl of Pembroke, English-Irish politician, Lord Chief Justice of Ireland (b. 1130)
*1248 – Güyük Khan, Mongol ruler, 3rd Great Khan of the Mongol Empire (b. 1206)
*1284 – Hōjō Tokimune, regent of Japan (b. 1251)
*1314 – Pope Clement V (b. 1264)
*1322 – Simon Rinalducci, Italian Augustinian friar
*1502 – Mary of Looz-Heinsberg, Dutch noble (b. 1424)
*1521 – Zhengde, Chinese emperor (b. 1491)
*1534 – Elizabeth Barton, English nun and martyr (b. 1506)
*1558 – Johannes Bugenhagen, German priest and theologian (b. 1485)
===1601–1900===
*1643 – Christoph Demantius, German composer and poet (b. 1567)
*1703 – Lancelot Addison, English clergyman and educator (b. 1632)
*1769 – Chief Pontiac, American tribal leader (b. 1720)
*1831 – John Abernethy, English surgeon and anatomist (b. 1764)
*1873 – William Tite, English architect, designed the Royal Exchange (b. 1798)
*1874 – Alexander H. Bailey, American lawyer, judge, and politician (b. 1817)
*1881 – William Burges, English architect and designer (b. 1827)
*1886 – Charles-François-Frédéric, marquis de Montholon-Sémonville, French general and diplomat, French ambassador to the United States (b. 1814)
*1887 – Muhammad Sharif Pasha, Greek-Egyptian politician, 2nd Prime Minister of Egypt (b. 1826)
*1899 – Joseph Wolf, German ornithologist and illustrator (b. 1820)
===1901–present===
*1902 – Joaquim de Sousa Andrade, Brazilian poet and educator (b. 1833)
*1912 – Bram Stoker, Anglo-Irish novelist and critic, created Count Dracula (b. 1847)
*1918 – Jussi Merinen, Finnish politician (b. 1873)
*1918 – Karl Ferdinand Braun, German-American physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1850)
*1927 – Enrique Simonet, Spanish painter and educator (b. 1866)
*1929 – Prince Henry of Prussia (b. 1862)
*1931 – Sir Cosmo Duff-Gordon, 5th Baronet, Scottish-English fencer and businessman (b. 1862)
*1932 – Giuseppe Peano, Italian mathematician and philosopher (b. 1858)
*1935 – John Cameron, Scottish footballer and manager (b. 1872)
* 1935 – Lucy, Lady Duff-Gordon, English fashion designer (b. 1863)
*1942 – Jüri Jaakson, Estonian businessman and politician, 6th State Elder of Estonia (b. 1870)
*1944 – Elmer Gedeon, American baseball player and pilot (b. 1917)
*1945 – Erwin Bumke, Polish-German jurist and politician (b. 1874)
*1946 – Mae Busch, Australian actress (b. 1891)
*1947 – Christian X of Denmark (b. 1870)
*1951 – Ivanoe Bonomi, Italian politician, 25th Prime Minister of Italy (b. 1873)
*1967 – Léo-Paul Desrosiers, Canadian journalist and author (b. 1896)
*1968 – Rudolph Dirks, German-American illustrator (b. 1877)
*1969 – Vjekoslav Luburić, Croatian Ustaše official and concentration camp administrator (b. 1914)
*1980 – M. Canagaratnam, Sri Lankan politician (b. 1924)
*1982 – Archibald MacLeish, American poet, playwright, and lawyer (b. 1892)
*1986 – Sibte Hassan, Pakistani journalist, scholar, and activist (b. 1916)
*1991 – Steve Marriott, English singer-songwriter and producer (b. 1947)
* 1991 – Don Siegel, American director and producer (b. 1912) 
*1992 – Marjorie Gestring, American springboard diver (b. 1922)
* 1992 – Benny Hill, English comedian, actor, and screenwriter (b. 1924)
*1993 – Cantinflas, Mexican actor, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1911)
*1995 – Milovan Đilas, Yugoslav communist, politician, theorist and author (b. 1911)
*1996 – Trần Văn Trà, Vietnamese general and politician (b. 1918)
*1999 – Rick Rude, American professional wrestler (b. 1958)
*1999 – Rachel Scott, American victim of Columbine High School massacre (b. 1981)
*1999 – Cassie Bernall, American victim of Columbine High School massacre (b. 1981)
*2001 – Giuseppe Sinopoli, Italian conductor and composer (b. 1946)
*2002 – Alan Dale, American singer (b. 1925)
*2003 – Bernard Katz, German-English biophysicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1911)
*2004 – Lizzy Mercier Descloux, French musician, singer-songwriter, composer, actress, writer and painter (b. 1956)
*2005 – Fumio Niwa, Japanese journalist and author (b. 1904)
*2007 – Andrew Hill, American pianist, composer, and bandleader (b. 1931)
* 2007 – Michael Fu Tieshan, Chinese bishop (b. 1931)
*2008 – Monica Lovinescu, Romanian journalist and author (b. 1923)
*2010 – Dorothy Height, American educator and activist (b. 1912)
*2011 – Tim Hetherington, English photographer and journalist (b. 1970)
*2012 – Bert Weedon, English guitarist and songwriter (b. 1920)
*2014 – Neville Wran, Australian politician, 35th Premier of New South Wales (b. 1926)
*2016 – Victoria Wood, British comedian, actress and writer (b. 1953)
*2018 – Avicii, Swedish DJ and musician (b. 1989)
*2021 – Idriss Déby, Chadian politician and military officer (b. 1952)
* 2021 – Monte Hellman, American film director (b. 1929)
* 2021 – Les McKeown, Scottish pop singer (b. 1955)
*2022 – Gavin Millar, Scottish film director (b. 1938)
*2024 – Antonio Cantafora, Italian film and television actor (b. 1944)
*2024 – Andrew Davis, English conductor (b. 1944)
*2024 – Roman Gabriel, Filipino-American NBA American footballer
*2024 – Lourdes Portillo, Mexican film director, producer, and writer (b. 1943)
==Holidays and observances==
* Christian feast day:
**Agnes of Montepulciano
**Beuno
**Johannes Bugenhagen (Lutheran)
**Theotimos
**April 20 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
* 420 (cannabis culture)
*UN Chinese Language Day (United Nations)

==References==
==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* Historical Events on April 20</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5614" start="27" end="31" title="1303" label="1303"/>
<link wikidata="Q209344" start="38" end="65" title="Sapienza University of Rome" label="Sapienza University of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="85" end="89" title="papal bull" label="bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="93" end="111" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965" start="130" end="134" title="1653" label="1653"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="137" end="152" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477668" start="178" end="193" title="Rump Parliament" label="Rump Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987" start="196" end="200" title="1657" label="1657"/>
<link wikidata="Q320959" start="219" end="231" title="Robert Blake (admiral)" label="Robert Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325495" start="305" end="337" title="Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife (1657)" label="Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="348" end="367" title="Freedom of religion" label="Freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q223308" start="394" end="407" title="New Amsterdam" label="New Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618" start="432" end="436" title="1752" label="1752"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428897" start="448" end="472" title="Konbaung–Hanthawaddy War" label="Konbaung–Hanthawaddy War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683" start="523" end="527" title="1770" label="1770"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="534" end="542" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q379624" start="549" end="558" title="Erekle II" label="Erekle II"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="577" end="584" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q78058" start="590" end="604" title="Gottlieb Heinrich Totleben" label="Count Totleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="626" end="640" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887900" start="644" end="652" title="Battle of Aspindza" label="Aspindza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700" start="655" end="659" title="1775" label="1775"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="662" end="688" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q815128" start="694" end="709" title="Siege of Boston" label="Siege of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="743" end="764" title="Battles of Lexington and Concord" label="Lexington and Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772" start="767" end="771" title="1789" label="1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="774" end="791" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598347" start="803" end="828" title="Grays Ferry, Philadelphia" label="Grays Ferry, Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454184" start="866" end="878" title="first inauguration of George Washington" label="inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805" start="881" end="885" title="1792" label="1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q130834" start="926" end="953" title="Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="King of Hungary and Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="982" end="1007" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875" start="1010" end="1014" title="1800" label="1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077630" start="1021" end="1041" title="Septinsular Republic" label="Septinsular Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919" start="1059" end="1063" title="1809" label="1809"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="1119" end="1138" title="First French Empire" label="First French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1151" end="1159" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q479979" start="1167" end="1186" title="Battle of Abensberg" label="Battle of Abensberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570" start="1261" end="1265" title="1828" label="1828"/>
<link wikidata="Q368976" start="1268" end="1280" title="René Caillié" label="René Caillié"/>
<link wikidata="Q9427" start="1320" end="1328" title="Timbuktu" label="Timbuktu"/>
<link wikidata="Q587573" start="1340" end="1358" title="Alexander Gordon Laing" label="Major Gordon Laing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601" start="1405" end="1409" title="1836" label="1836"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="1412" end="1425" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186251" start="1453" end="1472" title="Wisconsin Territory" label="Wisconsin Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693" start="1475" end="1479" title="1861" label="1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1482" end="1500" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q165557" start="1502" end="1515" title="Robert E. Lee" label="Robert E. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="1546" end="1564" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="1612" end="1620" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304181" start="1631" end="1650" title="Thaddeus S. C. Lowe" label="Thaddeus S. C. Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698" start="1773" end="1777" title="1862" label="1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="1780" end="1793" title="Louis Pasteur" label="Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q208230" start="1798" end="1812" title="Claude Bernard" label="Claude Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q178263" start="1862" end="1884" title="spontaneous generation" label="spontaneous generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708" start="1887" end="1891" title="1865" label="1865"/>
<link wikidata="Q312416" start="1905" end="1918" title="Angelo Secchi" label="Angelo Secchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q575941" start="1936" end="1947" title="Secchi disk" label="Secchi disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="1986" end="1998" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766" start="2059" end="2063" title="1876" label="1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q622059" start="2070" end="2084" title="April Uprising of 1876" label="April Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="2196" end="2213" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–78)" label="Russo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819" start="2216" end="2220" title="1884" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235290" start="2268" end="2281" title="Humanum genus" label="Humanum genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848" start="2314" end="2318" title="1898" label="1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="2336" end="2352" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="2442" end="2462" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="2485" end="2489" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q37463" start="2492" end="2498" title="Pierre Curie" label="Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="2503" end="2514" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344375" start="2522" end="2537" title="radium chloride" label="radium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="2540" end="2544" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339014" start="2581" end="2609" title="New South Wales Rugby League" label="New South Wales Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="2612" end="2616" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018743" start="2697" end="2712" title="Ludlow Massacre" label="Ludlow Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148759" start="2724" end="2746" title="Colorado Coalfield War" label="Colorado Coalfield War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="2749" end="2753" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701" start="2756" end="2778" title="Manfred von Richthofen" label="Manfred von Richthofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="2898" end="2902" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2909" end="2915" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q877642" start="2935" end="2967" title="South Ossetian Autonomous Oblast" label="South Ossetian Autonomous Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q130229" start="2975" end="2987" title="Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Georgian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="2990" end="2994" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2997" end="3009" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="3031" end="3038" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3084" end="3096" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q153491" start="3121" end="3133" title="Führerbunker" label="Führerbunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="3156" end="3168" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="3213" end="3223" title="Iron Cross" label="Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q38791" start="3249" end="3261" title="Hitler Youth" label="Hitler Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q31896" start="3303" end="3322" title="Nazi human experimentation" label="medical experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q312478" start="3326" end="3336" title="Neuengamme concentration camp" label="Neuengamme"/>
<link wikidata="Q76633469" start="3371" end="3387" title="Bullenhuser Damm" label="Bullenhuser Damm"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="3397" end="3401" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="3408" end="3425" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282797" start="3437" end="3446" title="dissolution (law)" label="dissolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3480" end="3494" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="3498" end="3502" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202301" start="3505" end="3522" title="Amethyst incident" label="Amethyst incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="3528" end="3557" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="3603" end="3610" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="3622" end="3639" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="3642" end="3646" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="3649" end="3657" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q191721" start="3674" end="3694" title="Bay of Pigs Invasion" label="Bay of Pigs Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="3729" end="3733" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="3736" end="3740" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q333028" start="3762" end="3774" title="Enoch Powell" label="Enoch Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030207" start="3799" end="3833" title="Rivers of Blood speech" label="&amp;quot;Rivers of Blood&amp;quot; speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565425" start="3844" end="3876" title="South African Airways Flight 228" label="South African Airways Flight 228"/>
<link wikidata="Q667326" start="3894" end="3928" title="Hosea Kutako International Airport" label="Hosea Kutako International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="3932" end="3949" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="3955" end="3962" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="3986" end="3990" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="3993" end="4007" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q188168" start="4009" end="4018" title="Apollo 16" label="Apollo 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="4019" end="4031" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q107667" start="4046" end="4056" title="John Young (astronaut)" label="John Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q112284" start="4072" end="4084" title="Charles Duke" label="Charles Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="4106" end="4110" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083143" start="4113" end="4134" title="Air France Flight 422" label="Air France Flight 422"/>
<link wikidata="Q201785" start="4165" end="4196" title="El Dorado International Airport" label="El Dorado International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="4200" end="4206" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="4251" end="4255" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q473845" start="4258" end="4288" title="Columbine High School massacre" label="Columbine High School massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268542" start="4290" end="4319" title="Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold" label="Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112675" start="4385" end="4406" title="Columbine High School" label="Columbine High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112702" start="4410" end="4429" title="Columbine, Colorado" label="Columbine, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="4432" end="4436" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030296" start="4443" end="4457" title="Nicoll Highway" label="Nicoll Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="4461" end="4470" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874259" start="4471" end="4480" title="Nicoll Highway collapse" label="collapsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="4505" end="4509" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q6268420" start="4512" end="4541" title="Johnson Space Center shooting" label="Johnson Space Center shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574963" start="4586" end="4593" title="handgun" label="handgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="4597" end="4601" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="4609" end="4629" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="4633" end="4647" title="Houston, Texas" label="Houston, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="4692" end="4696" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q213448" start="4699" end="4713" title="Danica Patrick" label="Danica Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088660" start="4723" end="4737" title="Indy Japan 300" label="Indy Japan 300"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614051" start="4792" end="4800" title="American Championship car racing" label="Indy car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="4808" end="4812" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q212975" start="4825" end="4842" title="Deepwater Horizon" label="Deepwater Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656148" start="4862" end="4870" title="Deepwater Horizon explosion" label="explodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735638" start="4934" end="4970" title="Deepwater Horizon oil spill" label="oil spill that would last six months"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="4973" end="4977" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q855050" start="5030" end="5043" title="Bhoja Air Flight 213" label="plane crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q816717" start="5075" end="5111" title="Benazir Bhutto International Airport" label="Benazir Bhutto International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="5117" end="5126" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="5139" end="5143" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q201605" start="5152" end="5161" title="Moment magnitude scale" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547847" start="5162" end="5172" title="2013 Lushan earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345456" start="5181" end="5194" title="Lushan County, Sichuan" label="Lushan County"/>
<link wikidata="Q427557" start="5196" end="5206" title="Ya&amp;#x27;an" label="Ya&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="5224" end="5231" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="5295" end="5299" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q105773158" start="5329" end="5340" title="2015 Garowe attack" label="bomb attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="5381" end="5395" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q822679" start="5408" end="5414" title="Garowe" label="Garowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q485112" start="5439" end="5447" title="Puntland" label="Puntland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="5450" end="5454" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q297279" start="5488" end="5498" title="Price of oil" label="oil prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q91291914" start="5504" end="5514" title="Negative pricing" label="below zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q87496123" start="5533" end="5571" title="2020 Russia–Saudi Arabia oil price war" label="2020 Russia-Saudi Arabia oil price war"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="5574" end="5578" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q95753357" start="5581" end="5624" title="State of Minnesota v. Derek Michael Chauvin" label="State of Minnesota v. Derek Michael Chauvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q95693632" start="5626" end="5639" title="Derek Chauvin" label="Derek Chauvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q95579249" start="5678" end="5700" title="murder of George Floyd" label="murder of George Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868227" start="5708" end="5751" title="District Court of Minnesota" label="Fourth Judicial District Court of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q49622" start="5754" end="5758" title="2023" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q62833385" start="5761" end="5783" title="SpaceX Starship" label="SpaceX&amp;#x27;s Starship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693" start="5933" end="5937" title="1494" label="1494"/>
<link wikidata="Q76554" start="5940" end="5957" title="Johannes Agricola" label="Johannes Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525" start="6001" end="6005" title="1544" label="1544"/>
<link wikidata="Q62223" start="6008" end="6026" title="Renata of Lorraine" label="Renata of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739" start="6066" end="6070" title="1586" label="1586"/>
<link wikidata="Q244383" start="6073" end="6085" title="Rose of Lima" label="Rose of Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q6870" start="6140" end="6144" title="1633" label="1633"/>
<link wikidata="Q329765" start="6147" end="6163" title="Emperor Go-Kōmyō" label="Emperor Go-Kōmyō"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930" start="6184" end="6188" title="1646" label="1646"/>
<link wikidata="Q468460" start="6191" end="6206" title="Charles Plumier" label="Charles Plumier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6951" start="6246" end="6250" title="1650" label="1650"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005312" start="6253" end="6267" title="William Bedloe" label="William Bedloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899" start="6292" end="6296" title="1718" label="1718"/>
<link wikidata="Q727346" start="6299" end="6313" title="David Brainerd" label="David Brainerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921" start="6346" end="6350" title="1723" label="1723"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133813" start="6353" end="6370" title="Cornelius Harnett" label="Cornelius Harnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942" start="6425" end="6429" title="1727" label="1727"/>
<link wikidata="Q138769" start="6432" end="6474" title="Florimond Claude, Comte de Mercy-Argenteau" label="Florimond Claude, Comte de Mercy-Argenteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586" start="6526" end="6530" title="1745" label="1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q311594" start="6533" end="6547" title="Philippe Pinel" label="Philippe Pinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600" start="6594" end="6598" title="1748" label="1748"/>
<link wikidata="Q70857" start="6601" end="6623" title="Georg Michael Telemann" label="Georg Michael Telemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914" start="6667" end="6671" title="1808" label="1808"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="6674" end="6686" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="6711" end="6730" title="President of France" label="President of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="6743" end="6763" title="Second French Empire" label="French Second Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953" start="6775" end="6779" title="1816" label="1816"/>
<link wikidata="Q890654" start="6782" end="6796" title="Bogoslav Šulek" label="Bogoslav Šulek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964" start="6860" end="6864" title="1818" label="1818"/>
<link wikidata="Q61149" start="6867" end="6881" title="Heinrich Göbel" label="Heinrich Göbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004" start="6932" end="6936" title="1826" label="1826"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331155" start="6939" end="6950" title="Dinah Craik" label="Dinah Craik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616" start="6987" end="6991" title="1839" label="1839"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="6994" end="7012" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Carol I of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619" start="7041" end="7045" title="1840" label="1840"/>
<link wikidata="Q154349" start="7048" end="7060" title="Odilon Redon" label="Odilon Redon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653" start="7104" end="7108" title="1850" label="1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q720910" start="7111" end="7132" title="Daniel Chester French" label="Daniel Chester French"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669005" start="7166" end="7180" title="Abraham Lincoln (1920 statue)" label="Lincoln statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656" start="7192" end="7196" title="1851" label="1851"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833620" start="7199" end="7215" title="Alexander Dianin" label="Alexander Dianin"/>
<link wikidata="Q593145" start="7252" end="7266" title="Siegmund Lubin" label="Siegmund Lubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q116439" start="7309" end="7336" title="Lubin Manufacturing Company" label="Lubin Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691" start="7348" end="7352" title="1860" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636095" start="7355" end="7373" title="Justinien de Clary" label="Justinien de Clary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746" start="7408" end="7412" title="1871" label="1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606748" start="7415" end="7429" title="Sydney Chapman (economist)" label="Sydney Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757" start="7478" end="7482" title="1873" label="1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135522" start="7485" end="7499" title="James Harcourt" label="James Harcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764" start="7536" end="7540" title="1875" label="1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q1561456" start="7543" end="7558" title="Vladimir Vidrić" label="Vladimir Vidrić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783" start="7596" end="7600" title="1879" label="1879"/>
<link wikidata="Q631884" start="7603" end="7614" title="Paul Poiret" label="Paul Poiret"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="7651" end="7655" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q528235" start="7658" end="7671" title="Holland Smith" label="Holland Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819" start="7701" end="7705" title="1884" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q235597" start="7708" end="7750" title="Princess Beatrice of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Princess Beatrice of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q459418" start="7770" end="7781" title="Oliver Kirk" label="Oliver Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514770" start="7817" end="7832" title="Daniel Varoujan" label="Daniel Varoujan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831" start="7872" end="7876" title="1889" label="1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710572" start="7879" end="7898" title="Albert Jean Amateau" label="Albert Jean Amateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q714780" start="7955" end="7987" title="Prince Erik, Duke of Västmanland" label="Prince Erik, Duke of Västmanland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291555" start="8007" end="8033" title="Marie-Antoinette de Geuser" label="Marie-Antoinette de Geuser"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="8068" end="8080" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q484079" start="8115" end="8121" title="Führer" label="Führer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="8125" end="8137" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q384961" start="8157" end="8170" title="Tonny Kessler" label="Tonny Kessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832" start="8200" end="8204" title="1890" label="1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q113941" start="8207" end="8224" title="Maurice Duplessis" label="Maurice Duplessis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911019" start="8263" end="8280" title="Premier of Quebec" label="Premier of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q72898" start="8300" end="8312" title="Adolf Schärf" label="Adolf Schärf"/>
<link wikidata="Q475658" start="8351" end="8371" title="President of Austria" label="President of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="8383" end="8387" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173104" start="8390" end="8403" title="Dave Bancroft" label="Dave Bancroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840" start="8453" end="8457" title="1893" label="1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q104340" start="8460" end="8472" title="Harold Lloyd" label="Harold Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q152384" start="8532" end="8541" title="Joan Miró" label="Joan Miró"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844" start="8583" end="8587" title="1895" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q379956" start="8590" end="8610" title="Henry de Montherlant" label="Henry de Montherlant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="8664" end="8668" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706076" start="8671" end="8689" title="Alan Arnett McLeod" label="Alan Arnett McLeod"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="8712" end="8726" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="8768" end="8772" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q373500" start="8775" end="8786" title="Bruce Cabot" label="Bruce Cabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048" start="8814" end="8818" title="1907" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872760" start="8821" end="8833" title="Miran Bakhsh" label="Miran Bakhsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q662519" start="8874" end="8895" title="Augoustinos Kantiotes" label="Augoustinos Kantiotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="8921" end="8925" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q313525" start="8928" end="8942" title="Lionel Hampton" label="Lionel Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="9014" end="9018" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q547250" start="9021" end="9038" title="Fatin Rüştü Zorlu" label="Fatin Rüştü Zorlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="9083" end="9087" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333949" start="9090" end="9106" title="Mimis Fotopoulos" label="Mimis Fotopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q57999" start="9148" end="9160" title="Willi Hennig" label="Willi Hennig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="9207" end="9211" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998128" start="9214" end="9230" title="Betty Lou Gerson" label="Betty Lou Gerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="9260" end="9264" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q565495" start="9267" end="9279" title="Joseph Wolpe" label="Joseph Wolpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="9336" end="9340" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025779" start="9343" end="9359" title="Nasiba Zeynalova" label="Nasiba Zeynalova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="9392" end="9396" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q192712" start="9399" end="9411" title="Kai Siegbahn" label="Kai Siegbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="9445" end="9456" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="9477" end="9481" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326460" start="9484" end="9499" title="Richard Hillary" label="Richard Hillary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="9544" end="9548" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q17626455" start="9551" end="9563" title="Frances Ames" label="Frances Ames"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="9579" end="9590" title="neurologist" label="neurologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131343" start="9651" end="9664" title="Clement Isong" label="Clement Isong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812217" start="9698" end="9727" title="List of Governors of Cross River State" label="Governor of Cross River State"/>
<link wikidata="Q11109" start="9747" end="9764" title="John Paul Stevens" label="John Paul Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="9794" end="9853" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="9865" end="9869" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q12028898" start="9872" end="9890" title="Katarína Kolníková" label="Katarína Kolníková"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="9918" end="9922" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q465684" start="9925" end="9940" title="Mother Angelica" label="Mother Angelica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276539" start="9980" end="10011" title="Eternal Word Television Network" label="Eternal Word Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069105" start="10031" end="10045" title="Irene Lieblich" label="Irene Lieblich"/>
<link wikidata="Q317122" start="10106" end="10117" title="Tito Puente" label="Tito Puente"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="10160" end="10164" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q235632" start="10167" end="10176" title="Nina Foch" label="Nina Foch"/>
<link wikidata="Q710142" start="10220" end="10235" title="Leslie Phillips" label="Leslie Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122110" start="10283" end="10293" title="Guy Rocher" label="Guy Rocher"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="10330" end="10334" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q327793" start="10337" end="10351" title="Ernie Stautner" label="Ernie Stautner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050734" start="10414" end="10427" title="Elena Verdugo" label="Elena Verdugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="10457" end="10461" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000439" start="10464" end="10474" title="Bud Cullen" label="Bud Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251793" start="10511" end="10558" title="Minister of Employment and Immigration (Canada)" label="Canadian Minister of Employment and Immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112" start="10578" end="10587" title="Phil Hill" label="Phil Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q122298" start="10633" end="10647" title="K. Alex Müller" label="K. Alex Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="10679" end="10690" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="10711" end="10715" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q961003" start="10718" end="10730" title="Robert Byrne (chess player)" label="Robert Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182892" start="10784" end="10796" title="Johnny Gavin (footballer)" label="Johnny Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="10840" end="10844" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318163" start="10847" end="10863" title="Dwight Gustafson" label="Dwight Gustafson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354177" start="10916" end="10926" title="Antony Jay" label="Antony Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="10973" end="10977" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926783" start="10980" end="11017" title="Michael Allenby, 3rd Viscount Allenby" label="Michael Allenby, 3rd Viscount Allenby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699919" start="11072" end="11104" title="John Eccles, 2nd Viscount Eccles" label="John Eccles, 2nd Viscount Eccles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="11142" end="11146" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q536113" start="11149" end="11159" title="Myriam Bru" label="Myriam Bru"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="11177" end="11181" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242395" start="11184" end="11194" title="Lisa Davis (actress)" label="Lisa Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q639940" start="11230" end="11244" title="Pauli Ellefsen" label="Pauli Ellefsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000921" start="11296" end="11331" title="Prime Minister of the Faroe Islands" label="Prime Minister of the Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q538375" start="11351" end="11362" title="Pat Roberts" label="Pat Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="11410" end="11414" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q375208" start="11417" end="11432" title="Jiří Dienstbier" label="Jiří Dienstbier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061900" start="11467" end="11500" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Czechoslovakia)" label="Czech Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677520" start="11520" end="11535" title="Harvey Quaytman" label="Harvey Quaytman"/>
<link wikidata="Q110154" start="11586" end="11598" title="George Takei" label="George Takei"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="11616" end="11620" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q166534" start="11623" end="11637" title="Betty Cuthbert" label="Betty Cuthbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q459179" start="11678" end="11692" title="Manfred Kinder" label="Manfred Kinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q950993" start="11717" end="11730" title="Eszter Tamási" label="Eszter Tamási"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="11761" end="11765" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q285007" start="11768" end="11783" title="Peter S. Beagle" label="Peter S. Beagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q133009" start="11827" end="11848" title="Gro Harlem Brundtland" label="Gro Harlem Brundtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334076" start="11891" end="11915" title="Prime Minister of Norway" label="Prime Minister of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q600635" start="11925" end="11941" title="Johnny Tillotson" label="Johnny Tillotson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="11971" end="11975" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q978184" start="11978" end="11990" title="James Gammon" label="James Gammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="12018" end="12022" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q272923" start="12025" end="12041" title="Ryan O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Ryan O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="12069" end="12073" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q260960" start="12076" end="12086" title="Alan Beith" label="Alan Beith"/>
<link wikidata="Q160325" start="12129" end="12148" title="John Eliot Gardiner" label="John Eliot Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="12182" end="12186" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813399" start="12189" end="12199" title="Toivo Aare" label="Toivo Aare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="12243" end="12247" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q961876" start="12250" end="12265" title="Michael Brandon" label="Michael Brandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350422" start="12304" end="12317" title="Olga Karlatos" label="Olga Karlatos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12149" start="12363" end="12373" title="Thein Sein" label="Thein Sein"/>
<link wikidata="Q887124" start="12411" end="12429" title="President of Burma" label="President of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q435758" start="12439" end="12451" title="Naftali Temu" label="Naftali Temu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614020" start="12486" end="12500" title="Steve Spurrier" label="Steve Spurrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="12538" end="12542" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q763368" start="12545" end="12556" title="Sandro Chia" label="Sandro Chia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="12588" end="12592" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433237" start="12595" end="12616" title="Rita Dionne-Marsolais" label="Rita Dionne-Marsolais"/>
<link wikidata="Q130786" start="12661" end="12675" title="Viktor Suvorov" label="Viktor Suvorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506301" start="12738" end="12753" title="Niko Lekishvili" label="Niko Lekishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="12786" end="12790" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q104782" start="12793" end="12807" title="Matthias Kuhle" label="Matthias Kuhle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="12851" end="12855" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q283872" start="12858" end="12877" title="Veronica Cartwright" label="Veronica Cartwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420300" start="12913" end="12928" title="Toller Cranston" label="Toller Cranston"/>
<link wikidata="Q47602" start="12992" end="13012" title="Massimo D&amp;#x27;Alema" label="Massimo D&amp;#x27;Alema"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="13054" end="13077" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="Prime Minister of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173585" start="13087" end="13100" title="Jessica Lange" label="Jessica Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="13120" end="13124" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q295898" start="13127" end="13142" title="Alexander Lebed" label="Alexander Lebed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518013" start="13194" end="13214" title="N. Chandrababu Naidu" label="N. Chandrababu Naidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813083" start="13240" end="13272" title="Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh" label="Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="13274" end="13278" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q311306" start="13281" end="13296" title="Luther Vandross" label="Luther Vandross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="13349" end="13353" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q468064" start="13356" end="13369" title="Louka Katseli" label="Louka Katseli"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="13403" end="13407" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q443055" start="13410" end="13426" title="Sebastian Faulks" label="Sebastian Faulks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540459" start="13467" end="13479" title="James Chance" label="James Chance"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="13510" end="13514" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q363250" start="13517" end="13530" title="Donald Pettit" label="Donald Pettit"/>
<link wikidata="Q170342" start="13573" end="13585" title="Svante Pääbo" label="Svante Pääbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="13626" end="13630" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q297850" start="13633" end="13645" title="Beatrice Ask" label="Beatrice Ask"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315958" start="13667" end="13695" title="Minister for Justice (Sweden)" label="Swedish Minister for Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333379" start="13705" end="13718" title="Peter Chelsom" label="Peter Chelsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395782" start="13770" end="13786" title="Kakha Bendukidze" label="Kakha Bendukidze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="13833" end="13837" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q553302" start="13840" end="13858" title="Viacheslav Fetisov" label="Viacheslav Fetisov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="13897" end="13901" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q262433" start="13904" end="13924" title="Debbie Flintoff-King" label="Debbie Flintoff-King"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="13956" end="13960" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q679120" start="13963" end="13976" title="Don Mattingly" label="Don Mattingly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350195" start="14032" end="14053" title="Konstantin Lavronenko" label="Konstantin Lavronenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="14070" end="14074" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q454041" start="14077" end="14093" title="Rachel Whiteread" label="Rachel Whiteread"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="14113" end="14117" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195457" start="14120" end="14131" title="John Carney (American football)" label="John Carney"/>
<link wikidata="Q310060" start="14167" end="14181" title="Crispin Glover" label="Crispin Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q206922" start="14221" end="14232" title="Andy Serkis" label="Andy Serkis"/>
<link wikidata="Q452502" start="14270" end="14286" title="Rosalynn Sumners" label="Rosalynn Sumners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="14312" end="14316" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348054" start="14319" end="14337" title="Kostis Chatzidakis" label="Kostis Chatzidakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560936" start="14357" end="14414" title="Ministry of Economy, Infrastructure, Shipping and Tourism" label="Ministry of Economy, Infrastructure, Shipping and Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270014" start="14424" end="14433" title="Léa Fazer" label="Léa Fazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55622219" start="14490" end="14501" title="Mark Mallia" label="Mark Mallia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="14543" end="14547" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q366123" start="14550" end="14564" title="David Chalmers" label="David Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q347886" start="14611" end="14621" title="David Filo" label="David Filo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="14656" end="14662" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="14664" end="14668" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q221468" start="14671" end="14683" title="Mike Portnoy" label="Mike Portnoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="14718" end="14722" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q5839929" start="14725" end="14737" title="Julia Morris" label="Julia Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="14763" end="14767" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q4203" start="14770" end="14787" title="Felix Baumgartner" label="Felix Baumgartner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8002867" start="14817" end="14829" title="Will Hodgman" label="Will Hodgman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527933" start="14859" end="14878" title="Premier of Tasmania" label="Premier of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="14880" end="14884" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q320941" start="14887" end="14899" title="Shemar Moore" label="Shemar Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="14917" end="14921" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q554027" start="14924" end="14937" title="Allan Houston" label="Allan Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="14967" end="14971" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q185122" start="14974" end="14988" title="Carmen Electra" label="Carmen Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q468677" start="15026" end="15040" title="Stephen Marley (musician)" label="Stephen Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="15070" end="15074" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q292552" start="15077" end="15089" title="Julie Powell" label="Julie Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="15137" end="15141" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q671665" start="15144" end="15155" title="Killer Mike" label="Killer Mike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="15174" end="15178" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040239" start="15181" end="15195" title="Carl Greenidge" label="Carl Greenidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="15216" end="15220" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q25753138" start="15223" end="15233" title="Emma Husar" label="Emma Husar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="15258" end="15262" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q127454" start="15265" end="15277" title="Miranda Kerr" label="Miranda Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="15297" end="15301" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q125103492" start="15304" end="15315" title="Jorge Pinto" label="Jorge Pinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="15340" end="15344" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156266" start="15347" end="15359" title="Brandon Belt" label="Brandon Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="15387" end="15391" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q104837490" start="15394" end="15409" title="Vannesa Rosales" label="Vannesa Rosales"/>
<link wikidata="Q29349533" start="15451" end="15466" title="Kyle Higashioka" label="Kyle Higashioka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="15494" end="15498" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q6162006" start="15501" end="15518" title="Jason Behrendorff" label="Jason Behrendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="15542" end="15546" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267090" start="15549" end="15561" title="Luke Kuechly" label="Luke Kuechly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="15589" end="15593" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q13990552" start="15596" end="15612" title="Alexander Zverev" label="Alexander Zverev"/>
<link wikidata="Q30526" start="15663" end="15666" title="689" label="689"/>
<link wikidata="Q545062" start="15669" end="15677" title="Cædwalla of Wessex" label="Cædwalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="15687" end="15693" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956" start="15704" end="15707" title="AD 888" label="888"/>
<link wikidata="Q9889" start="15710" end="15717" title="Emperor Xizong of Tang" label="Xi Zong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19496" start="15745" end="15749" title="1099" label="1099"/>
<link wikidata="Q450666" start="15752" end="15769" title="Peter Bartholomew" label="Peter Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q19674" start="15781" end="15785" title="1164" label="1164"/>
<link wikidata="Q241387" start="15788" end="15806" title="Antipope Victor IV (1159–1164)" label="Antipope Victor IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q19693" start="15808" end="15812" title="1176" label="1176"/>
<link wikidata="Q437952" start="15815" end="15853" title="Richard de Clare, 2nd Earl of Pembroke" label="Richard de Clare, 2nd Earl of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679071" start="15881" end="15910" title="Lord Chief Justice of Ireland" label="Lord Chief Justice of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483" start="15922" end="15926" title="1248" label="1248"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520" start="15929" end="15939" title="Güyük Khan" label="Güyük Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187878" start="15959" end="15990" title="Great Khan" label="Great Khan of the Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544" start="16002" end="16006" title="1284" label="1284"/>
<link wikidata="Q430964" start="16009" end="16022" title="Hōjō Tokimune" label="Hōjō Tokimune"/>
<link wikidata="Q5740" start="16051" end="16055" title="1314" label="1314"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="16058" end="16072" title="Pope Clement V" label="Pope Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q5770" start="16084" end="16088" title="1322" label="1322"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519652" start="16091" end="16107" title="Simon Rinalducci" label="Simon Rinalducci"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137" start="16136" end="16140" title="1502" label="1502"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531371" start="16143" end="16165" title="Mary of Looz-Heinsberg" label="Mary of Looz-Heinsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288" start="16190" end="16194" title="1521" label="1521"/>
<link wikidata="Q10007" start="16197" end="16204" title="Zhengde Emperor" label="Zhengde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6447" start="16233" end="16237" title="1534" label="1534"/>
<link wikidata="Q449812" start="16240" end="16256" title="Elizabeth Barton" label="Elizabeth Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601" start="16292" end="16296" title="1558" label="1558"/>
<link wikidata="Q77260" start="16299" end="16318" title="Johannes Bugenhagen" label="Johannes Bugenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917" start="16376" end="16380" title="1643" label="1643"/>
<link wikidata="Q497554" start="16383" end="16402" title="Christoph Demantius" label="Christoph Demantius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822" start="16440" end="16444" title="1703" label="1703"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483601" start="16447" end="16463" title="Lancelot Addison" label="Lancelot Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679" start="16507" end="16511" title="1769" label="1769"/>
<link wikidata="Q314960" start="16514" end="16527" title="Chief Pontiac" label="Chief Pontiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579" start="16563" end="16567" title="1831" label="1831"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232386" start="16570" end="16584" title="John Abernethy (surgeon)" label="John Abernethy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757" start="16627" end="16631" title="1873" label="1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019436" start="16634" end="16646" title="William Tite" label="William Tite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241240" start="16680" end="16694" title="Royal Exchange, London" label="Royal Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761" start="16706" end="16710" title="1874" label="1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719026" start="16713" end="16732" title="Alexander H. Bailey" label="Alexander H. Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808" start="16784" end="16788" title="1881" label="1881"/>
<link wikidata="Q186265" start="16791" end="16805" title="William Burges" label="William Burges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822" start="16849" end="16853" title="1886" label="1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064419" start="16856" end="16914" title="Charles-François-Frédéric, marquis de Montholon-Sémonville" label="Charles-François-Frédéric, marquis de Montholon-Sémonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567806" start="16945" end="16983" title="List of French ambassadors to the United States" label="French ambassador to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826" start="16995" end="16999" title="1887" label="1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q115486" start="17002" end="17023" title="Muhammad Sharif Pasha" label="Muhammad Sharif Pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571396" start="17056" end="17079" title="Prime Minister of Egypt" label="Prime Minister of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="17091" end="17095" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708274" start="17098" end="17109" title="Joseph Wolf" label="Joseph Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="17178" end="17182" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965394" start="17185" end="17209" title="Joaquim de Sousa Andrade" label="Joaquim de Sousa Andrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="17250" end="17254" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q36184" start="17257" end="17268" title="Bram Stoker" label="Bram Stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266236" start="17311" end="17324" title="Count Dracula" label="Count Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="17336" end="17340" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q17382426" start="17343" end="17356" title="Jussi Merinen" label="Jussi Merinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57077" start="17395" end="17415" title="Karl Ferdinand Braun" label="Karl Ferdinand Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="17457" end="17468" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="17489" end="17493" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q94851" start="17496" end="17511" title="Enrique Simonet" label="Enrique Simonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="17553" end="17557" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q57569" start="17560" end="17583" title="Prince Henry of Prussia (1862–1929)" label="Prince Henry of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="17595" end="17599" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q969969" start="17602" end="17636" title="Sir Cosmo Duff-Gordon, 5th Baronet" label="Sir Cosmo Duff-Gordon, 5th Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="17689" end="17693" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q191029" start="17696" end="17710" title="Giuseppe Peano" label="Giuseppe Peano"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="17761" end="17765" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q10386815" start="17768" end="17780" title="John Cameron (footballer, born 1872)" label="John Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q255184" start="17833" end="17855" title="Lucy, Lady Duff-Gordon" label="Lucy, Lady Duff-Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="17893" end="17897" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q887247" start="17900" end="17912" title="Jüri Jaakson" label="Jüri Jaakson"/>
<link wikidata="Q493018" start="17955" end="17977" title="Head of State of Estonia" label="State Elder of Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="17989" end="17993" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306581" start="17996" end="18008" title="Elmer Gedeon" label="Elmer Gedeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="18056" end="18060" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q100942" start="18063" end="18074" title="Erwin Bumke" label="Erwin Bumke"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="18123" end="18127" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q153501" start="18130" end="18139" title="Mae Busch" label="Mae Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="18171" end="18175" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q156617" start="18178" end="18200" title="Christian X of Denmark" label="Christian X of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="18212" end="18216" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q313717" start="18219" end="18232" title="Ivanoe Bonomi" label="Ivanoe Bonomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="18259" end="18282" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="Prime Minister of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="18294" end="18298" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270411" start="18301" end="18320" title="Léo-Paul Desrosiers" label="Léo-Paul Desrosiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="18364" end="18368" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q68586" start="18371" end="18384" title="Rudolph Dirks" label="Rudolph Dirks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="18425" end="18429" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q470694" start="18432" end="18449" title="Vjekoslav Luburić" label="Vjekoslav Luburić"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="18460" end="18466" title="Ustaše" label="Ustaše"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="18524" end="18528" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q14616751" start="18531" end="18546" title="M. Canagaratnam" label="M. Canagaratnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="18581" end="18585" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q633354" start="18588" end="18606" title="Archibald MacLeish" label="Archibald MacLeish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="18657" end="18661" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507288" start="18664" end="18676" title="Sibte Hassan" label="Sibte Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="18733" end="18737" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q506950" start="18740" end="18754" title="Steve Marriott" label="Steve Marriott"/>
<link wikidata="Q358322" start="18814" end="18824" title="Don Siegel" label="Don Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="18869" end="18873" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q465787" start="18876" end="18893" title="Marjorie Gestring" label="Marjorie Gestring"/>
<link wikidata="Q200228" start="18941" end="18951" title="Benny Hill" label="Benny Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="19006" end="19010" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q195371" start="19013" end="19023" title="Cantinflas" label="Cantinflas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="19078" end="19082" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q153909" start="19085" end="19098" title="Milovan Đilas" label="Milovan Đilas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="19163" end="19167" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206845" start="19170" end="19182" title="Trần Văn Trà" label="Trần Văn Trà"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="19229" end="19233" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q732642" start="19236" end="19245" title="Rick Rude" label="Rick Rude"/>
<link wikidata="Q470048" start="19296" end="19308" title="Rachel Scott" label="Rachel Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q473845" start="19329" end="19359" title="Columbine High School massacre" label="Columbine High School massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q76085" start="19378" end="19392" title="Cassie Bernall" label="Cassie Bernall"/>
<link wikidata="Q473845" start="19413" end="19443" title="Columbine High School massacre" label="Columbine High School massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="19455" end="19459" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q316903" start="19462" end="19479" title="Giuseppe Sinopoli" label="Giuseppe Sinopoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="19523" end="19527" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706468" start="19530" end="19539" title="Alan Dale (singer)" label="Alan Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="19568" end="19572" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q4517" start="19575" end="19587" title="Bernard Katz" label="Bernard Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="19631" end="19642" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="19663" end="19667" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q508199" start="19670" end="19692" title="Lizzy Mercier Descloux" label="Lizzy Mercier Descloux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="19779" end="19783" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240552" start="19786" end="19796" title="Fumio Niwa" label="Fumio Niwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="19840" end="19844" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q505138" start="19847" end="19858" title="Andrew Hill (jazz musician)" label="Andrew Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q941286" start="19922" end="19940" title="Michael Fu Tieshan" label="Michael Fu Tieshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="19968" end="19972" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552851" start="19975" end="19991" title="Monica Lovinescu" label="Monica Lovinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="20035" end="20039" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q298259" start="20042" end="20056" title="Dorothy Height" label="Dorothy Height"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994" start="20100" end="20104" title="2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q439394" start="20107" end="20123" title="Tim Hetherington" label="Tim Hetherington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="20172" end="20176" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q827506" start="20179" end="20190" title="Bert Weedon" label="Bert Weedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="20236" end="20240" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429468" start="20243" end="20255" title="Neville Wran" label="Neville Wran"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="20285" end="20311" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="Premier of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="20323" end="20327" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309588" start="20330" end="20343" title="Victoria Wood" label="Victoria Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="20393" end="20397" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q505476" start="20400" end="20406" title="Avicii" label="Avicii"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="20443" end="20447" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q57350" start="20450" end="20461" title="Idriss Déby" label="Idriss Déby"/>
<link wikidata="Q945188" start="20522" end="20535" title="Monte Hellman" label="Monte Hellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224840" start="20579" end="20590" title="Les McKeown" label="Les McKeown"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="20623" end="20627" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099597" start="20630" end="20642" title="Gavin Millar" label="Gavin Millar"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="20678" end="20682" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q601198" start="20685" end="20702" title="Antonio Cantafora" label="Antonio Cantafora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555342" start="20756" end="20768" title="Andrew Davis (conductor)" label="Andrew Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361971" start="20806" end="20819" title="Roman Gabriel" label="Roman Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4308868" start="20871" end="20887" title="Lourdes Portillo" label="Lourdes Portillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="20984" end="20993" title="Calendar of saints" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720655" start="20997" end="21019" title="Agnes of Montepulciano" label="Agnes of Montepulciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q612390" start="21022" end="21027" title="Beuno" label="Beuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q77260" start="21030" end="21049" title="Johannes Bugenhagen" label="Johannes Bugenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="21051" end="21059" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q16291115" start="21063" end="21072" title="Theotimos" label="Theotimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781967" start="21075" end="21112" title="April 20 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="April 20 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q748539" start="21115" end="21137" title="420 (cannabis culture)" label="420 (cannabis culture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865419" start="21139" end="21162" title="UN Chinese Language Day" label="UN Chinese Language Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="21164" end="21178" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2196" wikidata="Q2523" url="?curid=2196" title="April 19">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
*AD 65 – The freedman Milichus betrays Piso&#x27;s plot to kill the Emperor Nero and all of the conspirators are arrested.
* 531 – Battle of Callinicum: A Byzantine army under Belisarius is defeated by the Persians at Raqqa (northern Syria).
*1506 – The Lisbon Massacre begins, in which accused Jews are slaughtered by Portuguese Catholics.
*1529 – Beginning of the Protestant Reformation: After the Second Diet of Speyer bans Lutheranism, a group of rulers (&quot;German:&quot; Fürst) and independent cities protests the reinstatement of the Edict of Worms.
*1539 – The Treaty of Frankfurt between Protestants and the Holy Roman Emperor is signed.
===1601–1900===
*1608 – In Ireland, O&#x27;Doherty&#x27;s Rebellion is launched by the Burning of Derry.
*1677 – The French army captures the town of Cambrai held by Spanish troops.
*1713 – With no living male heirs, Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor, issues the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713 to ensure that Habsburg lands and the Austrian throne would be inheritable by a female; his daughter and successor, Maria Theresa, was not born until 1717.
*1770 – Captain James Cook, still holding the rank of lieutenant, sights the eastern coast of what is now Australia.
* 1770 – Marie Antoinette marries Louis XVI in a proxy wedding.
*1775 – American Revolutionary War: The war begins with an American victory in Concord during the battles of Lexington and Concord.
*1782 – John Adams secures Dutch recognition of the United States as an independent government. The house which he had purchased in The Hague becomes the first American embassy.
*1809 – An Austrian corps is defeated by the forces of the Duchy of Warsaw in the Battle of Raszyn, part of the struggles of the Fifth Coalition. On the same day the Austrian main army is defeated by a First French Empire Corps led by Louis-Nicolas Davout at the Battle of Teugen-Hausen in Bavaria, part of a four-day campaign that ended in a French victory.
*1810 – Venezuela achieves home rule: Vicente Emparán, Governor of the Captaincy General is removed by the people of Caracas and a junta is installed.
*1818 – French physicist Augustin Fresnel signs his preliminary &quot;Note on the Theory of Diffraction&quot; (deposited on the following day). The document ends with what we now call the Fresnel integrals.
*1839 – The Treaty of London establishes Belgium as a kingdom and guarantees its neutrality.
*1861 – American Civil War: Baltimore riot of 1861: A pro-Secession mob in Baltimore attacks United States Army troops marching through the city.

===1901–present===
*1903 – The Kishinev pogrom in Kishinev (Bessarabia) begins, forcing tens of thousands of Jews to later seek refuge in Palestine and the Western world.
*1927 – Mae West is sentenced to ten days in jail for obscenity for her play &quot;Sex&quot;.
*1936 – The Jaffa riots commence, initiating the 1936–1939 Arab revolt in Palestine.
*1942 – World War II: In German-occupied Poland, the Majdan-Tatarski ghetto is established, situated between the Lublin Ghetto and a Majdanek subcamp.
*1943 – World War II: In German-occupied Poland, the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising begins, after German troops enter the Warsaw Ghetto to round up the remaining Jews.
* 1943 – Albert Hofmann deliberately doses himself with LSD for the first time, three days after having discovered its effects on April 16, an event commonly known and celebrated as Bicycle Day.
*1956 – Actress Grace Kelly marries Prince Rainier of Monaco.
*1960 – Students in South Korea hold a nationwide pro-democracy protest against president Syngman Rhee, eventually forcing him to resign.
*1971 – Sierra Leone becomes a republic, and Siaka Stevens the president.
* 1971 – Launch of Salyut 1, the first space station.
* 1971 – Charles Manson is sentenced to death (later commuted to life imprisonment) for conspiracy in the Tate–LaBianca murders.
*1973 – The Portuguese Socialist Party is founded in the German town of Bad Münstereifel.
*1975 – India&#x27;s first satellite Aryabhata launched in orbit from Kapustin Yar, Russia.
* 1975 – South Vietnamese forces withdrew from the town of Xuan Loc in the last major battle of the Vietnam War.
*1976 – A violent F5 tornado strikes around Brownwood, Texas, injuring 11 people. Two people were thrown at least by the tornado and survived uninjured.
*1984 – &quot;Advance Australia Fair&quot; is proclaimed as Australia&#x27;s national anthem, and green and gold as the national colours.
*1985 – Two hundred ATF and FBI agents lay siege to the compound of the white supremacist survivalist group The Covenant, the Sword, and the Arm of the Lord in Arkansas; the CSA surrenders two days later. 
*1987 – &quot;The Simpsons&quot; first appear as a series of shorts on &quot;The Tracey Ullman Show&quot;, first starting with &quot;Good Night&quot;.
*1989 – A gun turret explodes on the , killing 47 sailors.
*1993 – The 51-day FBI siege of the Branch Davidian building in Waco, Texas, USA, ends when a fire breaks out. Seventy-six Davidians, including 18 children under age 10, died in the fire.
*1995 – Oklahoma City bombing: The Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City, USA, is bombed, killing 168 people including 19 children under the age of six.
*1999 – The German Bundestag returns to Berlin.
*2000 – Air Philippines Flight 541 crashes in Samal, Davao del Norte, killing all 131 people on board.
*2001 – Space Shuttle &quot;Endeavour&quot; is launched on STS-100 carrying the Canadarm2 to the International Space Station.
*2005 – Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger is elected to the papacy and becomes Pope Benedict XVI.
*2011 – Fidel Castro resigns as First Secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba after holding the title since July 1961.
*2013 – Boston Marathon bombing suspect Tamerlan Tsarnaev is killed in a shootout with police. His brother Dzhokhar is later captured hiding in a boat inside a backyard in the suburb of Watertown.
*2020 – A killing spree in Nova Scotia, Canada, leaves 22 people and the perpetrator dead, making it the deadliest rampage in the country&#x27;s history.
*2021 – The &quot;Ingenuity&quot; helicopter becomes the first aircraft to achieve flight on another planet.

==Births==
===Pre-1600===
*1452 – Frederick IV, King of Naples (d. 1504)
*1593 – Sir John Hobart, 2nd Baronet, English politician (d. 1647)
===1601–1900===
*1603 – Michel Le Tellier, French politician, French Minister of Defence (d. 1685)
*1613 – Christoph Bach, German musician (d. 1661)
*1633 – Willem Drost, Dutch painter (d. 1659)
*1655 – George St Lo(e), Royal Navy officer and administrator (d. 1718)
*1658 – Johann Wilhelm, Elector Palatine, German husband of Archduchess Maria Anna Josepha of Austria (d. 1716)
*1665 – Jacques Lelong, French author (d. 1721)
*1686 – Vasily Tatishchev, Russian ethnographer and politician (d. 1750)
*1715 – James Nares, English organist and composer (d. 1783)
*1721 – Roger Sherman, American lawyer and politician (d. 1793)
*1734 – Karl von Ordóñez, Austrian violinist and composer (d. 1786)
*1757 – Edward Pellew, 1st Viscount Exmouth, English admiral and politician (d. 1833)
*1758 – William Carnegie, 7th Earl of Northesk, Scottish admiral (d. 1831)
*1785 – Alexandre Pierre François Boëly, French pianist and composer (d. 1858)
*1787 – Deaf Smith, American soldier (d. 1837)
*1793 – Ferdinand I of Austria (d. 1875)
*1806 – Sarah Bagley, American labor organizer (d. 1889)
*1814 – Louis Amédée Achard, French journalist and author (d. 1875)
*1831 – Mary Louise Booth, American writer, editor and translator (d. 1889)
*1832 – José Echegaray, Spanish poet and playwright, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1916)
*1835 – Julius Krohn, Finnish poet and journalist (d. 1888)
*1861 – Amalie Andersen, Norwegian actress (d. 1924)
*1863 – Hemmo Kallio, Finnish actor (d. 1940)
*1872 – Alice Salomon, German social reformer (d. 1948)
*1873 – Sydney Barnes, English cricketer (d. 1967)
*1874 – Ernst Rüdin, Swiss psychiatrist, geneticist, and eugenicist (d. 1952)
*1877 – Ole Evinrude, Norwegian-American engineer, invented the outboard motor (d. 1934)
*1879 – Arthur Robertson, Scottish runner (d. 1957)
*1882 – Getúlio Vargas, Brazilian lawyer and politician, 14th President of Brazil (d. 1954)
*1883 – Henry Jameson, American soccer player (d. 1938)
* 1883 – Richard von Mises, Austrian-American mathematician and physicist (d. 1953)
*1885 – Karl Tarvas, Estonian architect (d. 1975)
*1889 – Otto Georg Thierack, German jurist and politician (d. 1946)
*1891 – Françoise Rosay, French actress (d. 1974)
*1892 – Germaine Tailleferre, French composer and educator (d. 1983)
*1894 – Elizabeth Dilling, American author and activist (d. 1966)
*1897 – Peter de Noronha, Indian businessman and philanthropist (d. 1970)
* 1897 – Jiroemon Kimura, Japanese super-centenarian, oldest verified man ever (d. 2013)
*1898 – Constance Talmadge, American actress and producer (d. 1973)
*1899 – George O&#x27;Brien, American actor (d. 1985)
* 1899 – Cemal Tollu, Turkish lieutenant and painter (d. 1968)
*1900 – Iracema de Alencar, Brazilian film actress (d. 1978)
* 1900 – Richard Hughes, English author, poet, and playwright (d. 1976)
* 1900 – Roland Michener, Canadian lawyer and politician, 20th Governor General of Canada (d. 1991)
* 1900 – Rhea Silberta, American Yiddish songwriter and singing teacher (d. 1959)

===1901–present===
*1902 – Veniamin Kaverin, Russian author and screenwriter (d. 1989)
*1903 – Eliot Ness, American law enforcement agent (d. 1957)
*1908 – Irena Eichlerówna, Polish actress (d. 1990) 
*1912 – Glenn T. Seaborg, American chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1999)
*1913 – Ken Carpenter, American discus thrower and coach (d. 1984)
*1917 – Sven Hassel, Danish-German soldier and author (d. 2012)
*1919 – Sol Kaplan, American pianist and composer (d. 1990)
*1920 – Marvin Mandel, American lawyer and politician, 56th Governor of Maryland (d. 2015)
* 1920 – Julien Ries, Belgian cardinal (d. 2013)
* 1920 – Ragnar Ulstein, Norwegian journalist and war historian (d. 2019)
*1921 – Anna Lee Aldred, American jockey (d. 2006)
* 1921 – Leon Henkin, American logician (d. 2006)
* 1921 – Roberto Tucci, Italian Jesuit leader, cardinal, and theologian (d. 2015)
*1922 – Erich Hartmann, German colonel and pilot (d. 1993)
*1925 – John Kraaijkamp, Sr., Dutch actor (d. 2011)
* 1925 – Hugh O&#x27;Brian, American actor (d. 2016)
*1926 – Rawya Ateya, Egyptian captain and politician (d. 1997)
*1928 – John Horlock, English engineer and academic (d. 2015)
* 1928 – Azlan Shah of Perak, Yang di-Pertuan Agong of Malaysia (d. 2014) 
*1931 – Walter Stewart, Canadian journalist and author (d. 2004)
*1932 – Fernando Botero, Colombian painter and sculptor (d. 2023)
*1933 – Jayne Mansfield, American model and actress (d. 1967)
*1934 – Dickie Goodman, American singer-songwriter and producer (d. 1989)
*1935 – Dudley Moore, English actor, comedian, and pianist (d. 2002)
* 1935 – Justin Francis Rigali, American cardinal
*1936 – Wilfried Martens, Belgian politician, 60th Prime Minister of Belgium (d. 2013)
* 1936 – Jack Pardee, American football player and coach (d. 2013)
*1937 – Antonio Carluccio, Italian-English chef and author (d. 2017)
* 1937 – Elinor Donahue, American actress 
* 1937 – Joseph Estrada, Filipino politician, 13th President of the Philippines
*1938 – Stanley Fish, American theorist, author, and scholar
*1939 – Clay Shaw, American accountant, judge, and politician (d. 2013)
*1941 – Michel Roux, French-English chef and author (d. 2020)
* 1941 – Bobby Russell, American singer-songwriter (d. 1992)
*1942 – Alan Price, English keyboard player, singer, and composer
*1943 – Margo MacDonald, Scottish journalist and politician (d. 2014)
*1944 – James Heckman, American economist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate
* 1944 – Bernie Worrell, American keyboard player and songwriter (d. 2016)
*1946 – Tim Curry, English actor and singer
*1951 – Jóannes Eidesgaard, Faroese educator and politician, Prime Minister of the Faroe Islands
*1952 – Simon Cowell, English conservationist and author
*1954 – Trevor Francis, English footballer and manager (d. 2023)
*1956 – Anne Glover, Scottish biologist and academic
*1957 – Mukesh Ambani, Indian businessman, chairman of Reliance Industries
*1960 – Ara Gevorgyan, Armenian pianist, composer, and producer
* 1960 – Frank Viola, American baseball player and coach
*1964 – Kim Weaver, American astrophysicist, astronomer, and academic
*1965 – Suge Knight, American record executive
*1966 – Véronique Gens, French soprano and actress
*1968 – Ashley Judd, American actress
* 1968 – Mswati III, King (&quot;Ngwenyama&quot;) of Eswatini (Swaziland)
*1970 – Kelly Holmes, English athlete and double Olympic champion
*1972 – Rivaldo Vitor Borba Ferreira, Brazilian footballer
*1978 – James Franco, American actor, director, producer, and screenwriter
* 1978 – Amanda Sage, American-Austrian painter and educator
*1979 – Kate Hudson, American actress
*1981 – Hayden Christensen, Canadian actor
* 1981 – Lise Klaveness, Norwegian footballer and lawyer, president of the Norwegian Football Federation
* 1981 – Troy Polamalu, American football player
*1982 – Samuel C. Morrison, Jr., Liberian-American journalist, producer, and screenwriter
* 1982 – Ali Wong, American comedian and actress
*1983 – Joe Mauer, American baseball player
*1986 – Candace Parker, American basketball player
*1987 – Joe Hart, English footballer
* 1987 – Maria Sharapova, Russian tennis player
*1989 – Simu Liu, Canadian actor
*1990 – Jackie Bradley Jr., American baseball player
* 1990 – Kim Chiu, Filipino actress, singer, and dancer
*1991 – Kelly Olynyk, Canadian basketball player
*2002 – Loren Gray, American singer and internet personality
*2003 – Jackson Merrill, American baseball player
*2016 – Christian Joseph, American internet personality
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 843 – Judith of Bavaria, Frankish empress
*1012 – Ælfheah of Canterbury, English archbishop and saint (b. 954)
*1013 – Hisham II, Umayyad caliph of Córdoba (b. 966)
*1044 – Gothelo I, duke of Lorraine
*1054 – Leo IX, pope of the Catholic Church (b. 1002)
*1321 – Gerasimus I, patriarch of Constantinople
*1390 – Robert II, king of Scotland (b. 1316)
*1405 – Thomas West, 1st Baron West, English nobleman (b. 1335)
*1431 – Adolph III, count of Waldeck (b. 1362)
*1560 – Philip Melanchthon, German theologian and reformer (b. 1497)
*1567 – Michael Stifel, German monk and mathematician (b. 1487)
*1578 – Uesugi Kenshin, Japanese samurai and warlord (b. 1530)
*1588 – Paolo Veronese, Italian painter (b. 1528)
===1601–1900===
*1608 – Thomas Sackville, 1st Earl of Dorset, English poet, playwright, and politician, Lord High Treasurer (b. 1536)
*1618 – Thomas Bastard, English priest and author (b. 1566)
*1619 – Jagat Gosain, Mughal empress (b. 1573)
*1629 – Sigismondo d&#x27;India, Italian composer (b. 1582)
*1686 – Antonio de Solís y Ribadeneyra, Spanish historian and playwright (b. 1610)
*1689 – Christina, queen of Sweden (b. 1626)
*1733 – Elizabeth Hamilton, countess of Orkney (b. 1657)
*1739 – Nicholas Saunderson, English mathematician and academic (b. 1682)
*1768 – Canaletto, Italian painter and etcher (b. 1697)
*1776 – Jacob Emden, German rabbi and author (b. 1697)
*1791 – Richard Price, Welsh-English preacher and philosopher (b. 1723)
*1813 – Benjamin Rush, American physician and educator (b. 1745)
*1824 – Lord Byron, English-Scottish poet and playwright (b. 1788)
*1831 – Johann Gottlieb Friedrich von Bohnenberger, German astronomer and mathematician (b. 1765)
*1833 – James Gambier, 1st Baron Gambier, Bahamian-English admiral and politician, 36th Commodore Governor of Newfoundland (b. 1756)
*1840 – Jean-Jacques Lartigue, Canadian bishop (b. 1777)
*1854 – Robert Jameson, Scottish mineralogist and academic (b. 1774)
*1881 – Benjamin Disraeli, English journalist and politician, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (b. 1804)
*1882 – Charles Darwin, English biologist and theorist (b. 1809)
*1893 – Martin Körber, Estonian-German pastor, composer, and conductor (b. 1817)
===1901–present===
*1901 – Alfred Horatio Belo, American publisher, founded &quot;The Dallas Morning News&quot; (b. 1839)
*1903 – Oliver Mowat, Canadian politician, third Premier of Ontario, eighth Lieutenant Governor of Ontario (b. 1820)
*1906 – Pierre Curie, French physicist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1859)
* 1906 – Spencer Gore, English tennis player and cricketer (b. 1850)
*1909 – Signe Rink, Greenland-born Danish writer and ethnologist (b. 1836)
*1914 – Charles Sanders Peirce, American mathematician and philosopher (b. 1839)
*1915 – Thomas Playford II, English-Australian politician, 17th Premier of South Australia (b. 1837)
*1916 – Ephraim Shay, American engineer, designed the Shay locomotive (b. 1839)
*1926 – Alexander Alexandrovich Chuprov, Russian-Swiss statistician and theorist (b. 1874)
*1930 – Georges-Casimir Dessaulles, Canadian businessman and politician (b. 1827)
*1937 – Martin Conway, 1st Baron Conway of Allington, English cartographer and politician (b. 1856)
* 1937 – William Morton Wheeler, American entomologist and zoologist (b. 1865)
*1940 – Jack McNeela, Irish Republican died on hunger strike
*1941 – Johanna Müller-Hermann, Austrian composer (b. 1878)
*1949 – Ulrich Salchow, Danish-Swedish figure skater (b. 1877)
*1950 – Ernst Robert Curtius, French-German philologist and scholar (b. 1886)
*1952 – Steve Conway, British singer (b. 1921)
*1955 – Jim Corbett, British-Indian colonel, hunter, and author (b. 1875)
*1960 – Beardsley Ruml, American economist and statistician (b. 1894)
*1961 – Max Hainle, German swimmer (b. 1882)
*1966 – Väinö Tanner, Finnish politician of Social Democratic Party of Finland; the Prime Minister of Finland (b. 1881)
*1967 – Konrad Adenauer, German politician, 1st Chancellor of Germany (b. 1876)
*1971 – Luigi Piotti, Italian race car driver (b. 1913)
*1975 – Percy Lavon Julian, American chemist and academic (b. 1899)
*1988 – Kwon Ki-ok, Korean pilot (b. 1901)
*1989 – Daphne du Maurier, English novelist and playwright (b. 1907)
*1991 – Stanley Hawes, English-Australian director and producer (b. 1905)
*1992 – Frankie Howerd, English actor and screenwriter (b. 1917)
*1993 – David Koresh, American cult leader (b. 1959)
* 1993 – George S. Mickelson, American captain, lawyer, and politician, 28th Governor of South Dakota (b. 1941)
*1998 – Octavio Paz, Mexican poet, philosopher, and academic Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1914)
*1999 – Hermine Braunsteiner, Austrian-German SS officer (b. 1919)
*2000 – Louis Applebaum, Canadian composer and conductor (b. 1918)
*2002 – Reginald Rose, American writer (b. 1920)
*2004 – Norris McWhirter, English author and activist co-founded the Guinness World Records (b. 1925)
* 2004 – John Maynard Smith, English biologist and geneticist (b. 1920)
* 2004 – Jenny Pike, Canadian WWII servicewoman and photographer (b. 1922)
*2006 – Albert Scott Crossfield, American engineer, pilot, and astronaut (b. 1921)
*2007 – Jean-Pierre Cassel, French actor (b. 1932)
*2009 – J. G. Ballard, English novelist, short story writer, and essayist (b. 1930)
*2011 – Elisabeth Sladen, English actress (b. 1946)
*2012 – Levon Helm, American musician and actor (b. 1940)
*2013 – François Jacob, French biologist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1920)
* 2013 – Al Neuharth, American journalist, author, and publisher, founded &quot;USA Today&quot; (b. 1924)
*2015 – Raymond Carr, English historian and academic (b. 1919)
* 2015 – Roy Mason, English miner and politician, Secretary of State for Defence (b. 1924)
*2016 – Patricio Aylwin, Chilean politician (b. 1918)
*2017 – Lu Chao-Hsuan, Taiwanese guitarist, performer and educator. (b. 1929)
*2021 – Walter Mondale, American politician, 42nd Vice President of the United States (b. 1928)
* 2021 – Jim Steinman, American composer, lyricist (b. 1947)
*2022 – Kane Tanaka, Japanese supercentenarian (b. 1903)
*2023 – Moonbin, South Korean singer and actor (b. 1998)
*2023 – Ron Hamilton, American musician (b. 1950)
*2024 – Daniel Dennett, American philosopher and author (b. 1942)
==Holidays and observances==
* Christian feast day:
** Ælfheah of Canterbury (Anglican, Catholic)
** Conrad of Ascoli 
** Emma of Lesum
** Expeditus
** George of Antioch
** Olaus and Laurentius Petri (Lutheran)
** Pope Leo IX
** Ursmar
** April 19 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)

==References==
==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* Historical Events on April 19</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30214" start="27" end="32" title="AD 65" label="AD 65"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="39" end="47" title="freedman" label="freedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458140" start="48" end="56" title="Milichus" label="Milichus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268528" start="65" end="81" title="Pisonian conspiracy" label="Piso&amp;#x27;s plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="94" end="101" title="Roman emperor" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="102" end="106" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q18074156" start="122" end="134" title="List of conspiracies (political)" label="conspirators"/>
<link wikidata="Q32871" start="151" end="154" title="531" label="531"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265750" start="157" end="177" title="Battle of Callinicum" label="Battle of Callinicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="181" end="190" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174943" start="202" end="212" title="Belisarius" label="Belisarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="232" end="240" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q283368" start="244" end="249" title="Raqqa" label="Raqqa"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="260" end="265" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154" start="269" end="273" title="1506" label="1506"/>
<link wikidata="Q60830" start="280" end="295" title="Lisbon Massacre" label="Lisbon Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="345" end="355" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421" start="368" end="372" title="1529" label="1529"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="392" end="414" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757553" start="426" end="447" title="Second Diet of Speyer" label="Second Diet of Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18244" start="505" end="510" title="Fürst" label="Fürst"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="516" end="534" title="Free imperial city" label="independent cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q645920" start="535" end="543" title="Protestation at Speyer" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q536822" start="569" end="583" title="Edict of Worms" label="Edict of Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479" start="586" end="590" title="1539" label="1539"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444923" start="597" end="616" title="Treaty of Frankfurt (1539)" label="Treaty of Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758" start="692" end="696" title="1608" label="1608"/>
<link wikidata="Q24196178" start="711" end="742" title="O&amp;#x27;Doherty&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="O&amp;#x27;Doherty&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q24196256" start="762" end="778" title="Burning of Derry" label="Burning of Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631" start="781" end="785" title="1677" label="1677"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485855" start="804" end="832" title="Siege of Cambrai (1677)" label="captures the town of Cambrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873" start="858" end="862" title="1713" label="1713"/>
<link wikidata="Q150665" start="892" end="922" title="Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q313102" start="935" end="961" title="Pragmatic Sanction of 1713" label="Pragmatic Sanction of 1713"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="977" end="985" title="House of Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="1000" end="1015" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austrian throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q131706" start="1078" end="1091" title="Maria Theresa" label="Maria Theresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683" start="1119" end="1123" title="1770" label="1770"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="1134" end="1144" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="1244" end="1260" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="1269" end="1278" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898928" start="1284" end="1297" title="proxy marriage" label="proxy wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700" start="1300" end="1304" title="1775" label="1775"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="1307" end="1333" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q778010" start="1397" end="1429" title="battles of Lexington and Concord" label="battles of Lexington and Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740" start="1432" end="1436" title="1782" label="1782"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="1439" end="1449" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979084" start="1458" end="1496" title="Netherlands–United States relations" label="Dutch recognition of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="1563" end="1572" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919" start="1610" end="1614" title="1809" label="1809"/>
<link wikidata="Q152115" start="1668" end="1683" title="Duchy of Warsaw" label="Duchy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q516282" start="1691" end="1707" title="Battle of Raszyn (1809)" label="Battle of Raszyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q684324" start="1738" end="1753" title="Fifth Coalition" label="Fifth Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="1811" end="1830" title="First French Empire" label="First French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q158778" start="1844" end="1864" title="Louis-Nicolas Davout" label="Louis-Nicolas Davout"/>
<link wikidata="Q573358" start="1872" end="1895" title="Battle of Teugen-Hausen" label="Battle of Teugen-Hausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922" start="1969" end="1973" title="1810" label="1810"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="1976" end="1985" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779244" start="2006" end="2021" title="Vicente Emparán" label="Vicente Emparán"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="2023" end="2031" title="Governor" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323389" start="2039" end="2056" title="Captaincy General" label="Captaincy General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533" start="2085" end="2092" title="Caracas" label="Caracas"/>
<link wikidata="Q616494" start="2099" end="2104" title="Supreme Junta" label="junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964" start="2120" end="2124" title="1818" label="1818"/>
<link wikidata="Q187241" start="2144" end="2160" title="Augustin-Jean Fresnel" label="Augustin Fresnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q580253" start="2307" end="2323" title="Fresnel integral" label="Fresnel integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616" start="2327" end="2331" title="1839" label="1839"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160895" start="2338" end="2354" title="Treaty of London (1839)" label="Treaty of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693" start="2420" end="2424" title="1861" label="1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2427" end="2445" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588241" start="2447" end="2469" title="Baltimore riot of 1861" label="Baltimore riot of 1861"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2477" end="2486" title="Secession in the United States#Confederate States of America" label="Secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="2494" end="2503" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="2586" end="2590" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814439" start="2597" end="2612" title="Chișinău pogrom (1903)" label="Kishinev pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="2616" end="2624" title="Kishinev" label="Kishinev"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="2626" end="2636" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2704" end="2713" title="History of Palestine#Ottoman period" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="2722" end="2735" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="2738" end="2742" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q202878" start="2745" end="2753" title="Mae West" label="Mae West"/>
<link wikidata="Q31110" start="2791" end="2800" title="obscenity" label="obscenity"/>
<link wikidata="Q15613587" start="2820" end="2823" title="Sex (play)" label="Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="2832" end="2836" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q28169846" start="2843" end="2854" title="Jaffa riots (April 1936)" label="Jaffa riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q46057" start="2880" end="2914" title="1936–1939 Arab revolt in Palestine" label="1936–1939 Arab revolt in Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="2917" end="2921" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2924" end="2936" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="2985" end="2991" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q670358" start="3029" end="3042" title="Lublin Ghetto" label="Lublin Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q160135" start="3049" end="3057" title="Majdanek" label="Majdanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="3068" end="3072" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q160161" start="3120" end="3142" title="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising" label="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3157" end="3163" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q154607" start="3181" end="3194" title="Warsaw Ghetto" label="Warsaw Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q122338" start="3236" end="3250" title="Albert Hofmann" label="Albert Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="3283" end="3286" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519" start="3357" end="3365" title="April 16" label="April 16"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3409" end="3420" title="History_of_lysergic_acid_diethylamide#%22Bicycle_Day%22" label="Bicycle Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="3423" end="3427" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q3925" start="3438" end="3449" title="Grace Kelly" label="Grace Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q185025" start="3458" end="3482" title="Rainier III, Prince of Monaco" label="Prince Rainier of Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="3485" end="3489" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q489416" start="3521" end="3555" title="April Revolution" label="a nationwide pro-democracy protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296418" start="3564" end="3573" title="president of South Korea" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q171684" start="3574" end="3586" title="Syngman Rhee" label="Syngman Rhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="3623" end="3627" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="3630" end="3642" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="3653" end="3661" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q515657" start="3667" end="3680" title="Siaka Stevens" label="Siaka Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q211761" start="3715" end="3723" title="Salyut 1" label="Salyut 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q25956" start="3735" end="3748" title="space station" label="space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q485508" start="3759" end="3773" title="Charles Manson" label="Charles Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627314" start="3838" end="3848" title="conspiracy (criminal)" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24930704" start="3856" end="3877" title="Tate–LaBianca murders" label="Tate–LaBianca murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="3880" end="3884" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q847263" start="3902" end="3917" title="Socialist Party (Portugal)" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q241450" start="3951" end="3967" title="Bad Münstereifel" label="Bad Münstereifel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="3970" end="3974" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3977" end="3982" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q19706" start="4006" end="4015" title="Aryabhata (satellite)" label="Aryabhata"/>
<link wikidata="Q753201" start="4039" end="4051" title="Kapustin Yar" label="Kapustin Yar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917" start="4070" end="4093" title="Army of the Republic of Vietnam" label="South Vietnamese forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q487076" start="4094" end="4128" title="Battle of Xuan Loc" label="withdrew from the town of Xuan Loc"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="4161" end="4172" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="4175" end="4179" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q122955540" start="4184" end="4202" title="1976 Brownwood tornado" label="violent F5 tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q981222" start="4218" end="4234" title="Brownwood, Texas" label="Brownwood, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="4328" end="4332" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q170601" start="4341" end="4363" title="Advance Australia Fair" label="Advance Australia Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="4404" end="4419" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979571" start="4447" end="4463" title="National colours of Australia" label="national colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="4466" end="4470" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q434371" start="4485" end="4488" title="Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms" label="ATF"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="4493" end="4496" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="4537" end="4554" title="White supremacy" label="white supremacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229640" start="4555" end="4566" title="Survivalism" label="survivalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727875" start="4573" end="4621" title="The Covenant, the Sword, and the Arm of the Lord" label="The Covenant, the Sword, and the Arm of the Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="4672" end="4676" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="4685" end="4697" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="4732" end="4738" title="The Simpsons" label="shorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216882" start="4748" end="4770" title="The Tracey Ullman Show" label="The Tracey Ullman Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732306" start="4804" end="4814" title="Good Night (The Simpsons short)" label="Good Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="4823" end="4827" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="4832" end="4842" title="gun turret" label="gun turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713834" start="4843" end="4851" title="USS Iowa turret explosion" label="explodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="4882" end="4886" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q258873" start="4904" end="4909" title="Waco siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322742" start="4917" end="4932" title="Branch Davidian" label="Branch Davidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q128244" start="4945" end="4956" title="Waco, Texas" label="Waco, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="5070" end="5074" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q217528" start="5077" end="5098" title="Oklahoma City bombing" label="Oklahoma City bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q597408" start="5104" end="5137" title="Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building" label="Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="5141" end="5154" title="Oklahoma City" label="Oklahoma City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="5236" end="5240" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="5254" end="5263" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q314701" start="5264" end="5271" title="Decision on the Capital of Germany" label="returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="5284" end="5288" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156912" start="5291" end="5317" title="Air Philippines Flight 541" label="Air Philippines Flight 541"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020674" start="5329" end="5351" title="Samal, Davao del Norte" label="Samal, Davao del Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="5387" end="5391" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q182508" start="5394" end="5429" title="Space Shuttle Endeavour" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Endeavour&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q860236" start="5445" end="5452" title="STS-100" label="STS-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677899" start="5466" end="5475" title="Mobile Servicing System" label="Canadarm2"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="5483" end="5510" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="5513" end="5517" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q666536" start="5549" end="5556" title="Papal conclave, 2005" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="5583" end="5600" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994" start="5603" end="5607" title="2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="5610" end="5622" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453787" start="5634" end="5680" title="First Secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba" label="First Secretary of the Communist Party of Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="5723" end="5727" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q11086137" start="5730" end="5753" title="Boston Marathon bombing" label="Boston Marathon bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11836274" start="5762" end="5779" title="Tamerlan Tsarnaev" label="Tamerlan Tsarnaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q11835959" start="5829" end="5837" title="Dzhokhar Tsarnaev" label="Dzhokhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q54172" start="5908" end="5917" title="Watertown, Massachusetts" label="Watertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="5920" end="5924" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q91129213" start="5927" end="5942" title="2020 Nova Scotia attacks" label="A killing spree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="5946" end="5957" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="6074" end="6078" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814715" start="6091" end="6100" title="Ingenuity (helicopter)" label="Ingenuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460" start="6210" end="6214" title="1452" label="1452"/>
<link wikidata="Q264060" start="6217" end="6229" title="Frederick of Naples" label="Frederick IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772" start="6257" end="6261" title="1593" label="1593"/>
<link wikidata="Q11802483" start="6264" end="6292" title="Sir John Hobart, 2nd Baronet" label="Sir John Hobart, 2nd Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735" start="6340" end="6344" title="1603" label="1603"/>
<link wikidata="Q554702" start="6347" end="6364" title="Michel Le Tellier" label="Michel Le Tellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215099" start="6385" end="6411" title="Minister of Defence (France)" label="French Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776" start="6423" end="6427" title="1613" label="1613"/>
<link wikidata="Q425612" start="6430" end="6444" title="Christoph Bach (musician)" label="Christoph Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6870" start="6473" end="6477" title="1633" label="1633"/>
<link wikidata="Q60099" start="6480" end="6492" title="Willem Drost" label="Willem Drost"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975" start="6519" end="6523" title="1655" label="1655"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949398" start="6526" end="6541" title="George St Lo" label="George St Lo(e)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991" start="6591" end="6595" title="1658" label="1658"/>
<link wikidata="Q64266" start="6598" end="6630" title="Johann Wilhelm, Elector Palatine" label="Johann Wilhelm, Elector Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q112088" start="6650" end="6691" title="Archduchess Maria Anna Josepha of Austria" label="Archduchess Maria Anna Josepha of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582" start="6703" end="6707" title="1665" label="1665"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159370" start="6710" end="6724" title="Jacques Lelong" label="Jacques Lelong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7664" start="6751" end="6755" title="1686" label="1686"/>
<link wikidata="Q333232" start="6758" end="6775" title="Vasily Tatishchev" label="Vasily Tatishchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884" start="6824" end="6828" title="1715" label="1715"/>
<link wikidata="Q463998" start="6831" end="6842" title="James Nares (composer)" label="James Nares"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913" start="6885" end="6889" title="1721" label="1721"/>
<link wikidata="Q354721" start="6892" end="6905" title="Roger Sherman" label="Roger Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977" start="6949" end="6953" title="1734" label="1734"/>
<link wikidata="Q6372413" start="6956" end="6972" title="Karl von Ordóñez" label="Karl von Ordóñez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635" start="7017" end="7021" title="1757" label="1757"/>
<link wikidata="Q335338" start="7024" end="7059" title="Edward Pellew, 1st Viscount Exmouth" label="Edward Pellew, 1st Viscount Exmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639" start="7103" end="7107" title="1758" label="1758"/>
<link wikidata="Q153513" start="7110" end="7148" title="William Carnegie, 7th Earl of Northesk" label="William Carnegie, 7th Earl of Northesk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756" start="7178" end="7182" title="1785" label="1785"/>
<link wikidata="Q713312" start="7185" end="7216" title="Alexandre Pierre François Boëly" label="Alexandre Pierre François Boëly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763" start="7257" end="7261" title="1787" label="1787"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245784" start="7264" end="7274" title="Deaf Smith" label="Deaf Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807" start="7304" end="7308" title="1793" label="1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q183579" start="7311" end="7333" title="Ferdinand I of Austria" label="Ferdinand I of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903" start="7345" end="7349" title="1806" label="1806"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525" start="7352" end="7364" title="Sarah Bagley" label="Sarah Bagley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943" start="7402" end="7406" title="1814" label="1814"/>
<link wikidata="Q482162" start="7409" end="7428" title="Louis Amédée Achard" label="Louis Amédée Achard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579" start="7470" end="7474" title="1831" label="1831"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780149" start="7477" end="7494" title="Mary Louise Booth" label="Mary Louise Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7584" start="7546" end="7550" title="1832" label="1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q127349" start="7553" end="7567" title="José Echegaray" label="José Echegaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="7598" end="7609" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597" start="7630" end="7634" title="1835" label="1835"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712767" start="7637" end="7649" title="Julius Krohn" label="Julius Krohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693" start="7690" end="7694" title="1861" label="1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q67506011" start="7697" end="7712" title="Amalie Andersen (actress)" label="Amalie Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701" start="7743" end="7747" title="1863" label="1863"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862238" start="7750" end="7762" title="Hemmo Kallio" label="Hemmo Kallio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753" start="7789" end="7793" title="1872" label="1872"/>
<link wikidata="Q106209" start="7796" end="7809" title="Alice Salomon" label="Alice Salomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757" start="7845" end="7849" title="1873" label="1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659829" start="7852" end="7865" title="Sydney Barnes" label="Sydney Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761" start="7896" end="7900" title="1874" label="1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q124822" start="7903" end="7914" title="Ernst Rüdin" label="Ernst Rüdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773" start="7974" end="7978" title="1877" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q358855" start="7981" end="7993" title="Ole Evinrude" label="Ole Evinrude"/>
<link wikidata="Q789774" start="8037" end="8051" title="outboard motor" label="outboard motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783" start="8063" end="8067" title="1879" label="1879"/>
<link wikidata="Q633999" start="8070" end="8086" title="Arthur Robertson (athlete)" label="Arthur Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="8115" end="8119" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q156844" start="8122" end="8136" title="Getúlio Vargas" label="Getúlio Vargas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176750" start="8176" end="8195" title="President of Brazil" label="President of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816" start="8207" end="8211" title="1883" label="1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440844" start="8214" end="8227" title="Henry Jameson" label="Henry Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q84292" start="8271" end="8288" title="Richard von Mises" label="Richard von Mises"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821" start="8347" end="8351" title="1885" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771137" start="8354" end="8365" title="Karl Tarvas" label="Karl Tarvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831" start="8397" end="8401" title="1889" label="1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q57814" start="8404" end="8423" title="Otto Georg Thierack" label="Otto Georg Thierack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="8465" end="8469" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q451631" start="8472" end="8487" title="Françoise Rosay" label="Françoise Rosay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839" start="8515" end="8519" title="1892" label="1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q376383" start="8522" end="8542" title="Germaine Tailleferre" label="Germaine Tailleferre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843" start="8584" end="8588" title="1894" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655620" start="8591" end="8608" title="Elizabeth Dilling" label="Elizabeth Dilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847" start="8650" end="8654" title="1897" label="1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177899" start="8657" end="8673" title="Peter de Noronha" label="Peter de Noronha"/>
<link wikidata="Q550149" start="8732" end="8747" title="Jiroemon Kimura" label="Jiroemon Kimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848" start="8813" end="8817" title="1898" label="1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q272213" start="8820" end="8838" title="Constance Talmadge" label="Constance Talmadge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851" start="8881" end="8885" title="1899" label="1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009495" start="8888" end="8907" title="George O&amp;#x27;Brien (actor)" label="George O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100012" start="8943" end="8954" title="Cemal Tollu" label="Cemal Tollu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="8998" end="9002" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q10303539" start="9005" end="9023" title="Iracema de Alencar" label="Iracema de Alencar"/>
<link wikidata="Q302433" start="9067" end="9081" title="Richard Hughes (writer)" label="Richard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q525733" start="9139" end="9154" title="Roland Michener" label="Roland Michener"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="9193" end="9219" title="Governor General of Canada" label="Governor General of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q31801711" start="9239" end="9252" title="Rhea Silberta" label="Rhea Silberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="9333" end="9337" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q467741" start="9340" end="9356" title="Veniamin Kaverin" label="Veniamin Kaverin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="9401" end="9405" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q358505" start="9408" end="9418" title="Eliot Ness" label="Eliot Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056" start="9462" end="9466" title="1908" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791590" start="9469" end="9486" title="Irena Eichlerówna" label="Irena Eichlerówna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="9515" end="9519" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973" start="9522" end="9538" title="Glenn T. Seaborg" label="Glenn T. Seaborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="9571" end="9582" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="9603" end="9607" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q945158" start="9610" end="9623" title="Ken Carpenter (discus thrower)" label="Ken Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092" start="9670" end="9674" title="1917" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q834764" start="9677" end="9688" title="Sven Hassel" label="Sven Hassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="9734" end="9738" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231073" start="9741" end="9751" title="Sol Kaplan" label="Sol Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="9794" end="9798" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q772063" start="9801" end="9814" title="Marvin Mandel" label="Marvin Mandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q693032" start="9853" end="9873" title="Governor of Maryland" label="Governor of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q551836" start="9893" end="9904" title="Julien Ries" label="Julien Ries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578045" start="9942" end="9956" title="Ragnar Ulstein" label="Ragnar Ulstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="10008" end="10012" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767208" start="10015" end="10030" title="Anna Lee Aldred" label="Anna Lee Aldred"/>
<link wikidata="Q111637" start="10067" end="10078" title="Leon Henkin" label="Leon Henkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q595586" start="10117" end="10130" title="Roberto Tucci" label="Roberto Tucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="10191" end="10195" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q57194" start="10198" end="10212" title="Erich Hartmann" label="Erich Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="10250" end="10254" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193862" start="10257" end="10277" title="John Kraaijkamp, Sr." label="John Kraaijkamp, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q727086" start="10310" end="10327" title="Hugh O&amp;#x27;Brian" label="Hugh O&amp;#x27;Brian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="10355" end="10359" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297085" start="10362" end="10373" title="Rawya Ateya" label="Rawya Ateya"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="10418" end="10422" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239872" start="10425" end="10437" title="John Horlock" label="John Horlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q561319" start="10488" end="10507" title="Azlan Shah of Perak" label="Azlan Shah of Perak"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="10555" end="10559" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966201" start="10562" end="10576" title="Walter Stewart (journalist)" label="Walter Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="10620" end="10624" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q272877" start="10627" end="10642" title="Fernando Botero" label="Fernando Botero"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="10686" end="10690" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q229507" start="10693" end="10708" title="Jayne Mansfield" label="Jayne Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="10748" end="10752" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885471" start="10755" end="10769" title="Dickie Goodman" label="Dickie Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="10822" end="10826" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q310343" start="10829" end="10841" title="Dudley Moore" label="Dudley Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q503833" start="10899" end="10920" title="Justin Rigali" label="Justin Francis Rigali"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="10941" end="10945" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q313809" start="10948" end="10964" title="Wilfried Martens" label="Wilfried Martens"/>
<link wikidata="Q213107" start="10991" end="11016" title="Prime Minister of Belgium" label="Prime Minister of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114512" start="11036" end="11047" title="Jack Pardee" label="Jack Pardee"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="11095" end="11099" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q601320" start="11102" end="11119" title="Antonio Carluccio" label="Antonio Carluccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q456373" start="11172" end="11186" title="Elinor Donahue" label="Elinor Donahue"/>
<link wikidata="Q212733" start="11215" end="11229" title="Joseph Estrada" label="Joseph Estrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209571" start="11257" end="11285" title="President of the Philippines" label="President of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="11287" end="11291" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q303680" start="11294" end="11306" title="Stanley Fish" label="Stanley Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="11348" end="11352" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273477" start="11355" end="11364" title="Clay Shaw (politician)" label="Clay Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="11420" end="11424" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918056" start="11427" end="11438" title="Michel Roux" label="Michel Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641411" start="11490" end="11503" title="Bobby Russell" label="Bobby Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="11543" end="11547" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q510991" start="11550" end="11560" title="Alan Price" label="Alan Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="11609" end="11613" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q334376" start="11616" end="11631" title="Margo MacDonald" label="Margo MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="11679" end="11683" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q312561" start="11686" end="11699" title="James Heckman" label="James Heckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="11734" end="11745" title="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q826598" start="11764" end="11778" title="Bernie Worrell" label="Bernie Worrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="11831" end="11835" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q52392" start="11838" end="11847" title="Tim Curry" label="Tim Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="11875" end="11879" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q331931" start="11882" end="11900" title="Jóannes Eidesgaard" label="Jóannes Eidesgaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000921" start="11935" end="11970" title="Prime Minister of the Faroe Islands" label="Prime Minister of the Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="11972" end="11976" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518530" start="11979" end="11991" title="Simon Cowell (conservationist)" label="Simon Cowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="12029" end="12033" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q345221" start="12036" end="12050" title="Trevor Francis" label="Trevor Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="12094" end="12098" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851119" start="12101" end="12112" title="Anne Glover (biologist)" label="Anne Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="12147" end="12151" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q298547" start="12154" end="12167" title="Mukesh Ambani" label="Mukesh Ambani"/>
<link wikidata="Q908931" start="12201" end="12220" title="Reliance Industries Limited" label="Reliance Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="12222" end="12226" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306103" start="12229" end="12242" title="Ara Gevorgyan" label="Ara Gevorgyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q659741" start="12294" end="12305" title="Frank Viola" label="Frank Viola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="12343" end="12347" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409553" start="12350" end="12360" title="Kim Weaver" label="Kim Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="12413" end="12417" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q455880" start="12420" end="12431" title="Suge Knight" label="Suge Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="12460" end="12464" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q434904" start="12467" end="12481" title="Véronique Gens" label="Véronique Gens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="12511" end="12515" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q228645" start="12518" end="12529" title="Ashley Judd" label="Ashley Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q57340" start="12557" end="12567" title="Mswati III" label="Mswati III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023179" start="12581" end="12590" title="Ngwenyama" label="Ngwenyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050" start="12601" end="12609" title="Eswatini" label="Eswatini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="12623" end="12627" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q230758" start="12630" end="12642" title="Kelly Holmes" label="Kelly Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="12689" end="12693" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q483577" start="12696" end="12724" title="Rivaldo Vitor Borba Ferreira" label="Rivaldo Vitor Borba Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="12748" end="12752" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q306403" start="12755" end="12767" title="James Franco" label="James Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739754" start="12831" end="12842" title="Amanda Sage" label="Amanda Sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="12884" end="12888" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q169946" start="12891" end="12902" title="Kate Hudson" label="Kate Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="12922" end="12926" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q192812" start="12929" end="12947" title="Hayden Christensen" label="Hayden Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810994" start="12973" end="12987" title="Lise Klaveness" label="Lise Klaveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q474952" start="13039" end="13068" title="Norwegian Football Federation" label="Norwegian Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q715572" start="13078" end="13091" title="Troy Polamalu" label="Troy Polamalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="13119" end="13123" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221923" start="13126" end="13149" title="Samuel C. Morrison, Jr." label="Samuel C. Morrison, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q16832136" start="13217" end="13225" title="Ali Wong" label="Ali Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="13258" end="13262" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q739917" start="13265" end="13274" title="Joe Mauer" label="Joe Mauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="13302" end="13306" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q242278" start="13309" end="13323" title="Candace Parker" label="Candace Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="13353" end="13357" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q187184" start="13360" end="13368" title="Joe Hart" label="Joe Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q11666" start="13398" end="13413" title="Maria Sharapova" label="Maria Sharapova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="13438" end="13442" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q24004849" start="13445" end="13453" title="Simu Liu" label="Simu Liu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="13471" end="13475" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116248" start="13478" end="13496" title="Jackie Bradley Jr." label="Jackie Bradley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q467044" start="13532" end="13540" title="Kim Chiu" label="Kim Chiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="13580" end="13584" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194911" start="13587" end="13599" title="Kelly Olynyk" label="Kelly Olynyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="13629" end="13633" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q56043305" start="13636" end="13646" title="Loren Gray" label="Loren Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="13690" end="13694" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q107489873" start="13697" end="13712" title="Jackson Merrill" label="Jackson Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="13740" end="13744" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q131460044" start="13747" end="13763" title="The Rizzler" label="Christian Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q23469" start="13823" end="13826" title="843" label="843"/>
<link wikidata="Q169547" start="13829" end="13846" title="Judith of Bavaria (died 843)" label="Judith of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19239" start="13866" end="13870" title="1012" label="1012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262465" start="13873" end="13894" title="Ælfheah of Canterbury" label="Ælfheah of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q19241" start="13935" end="13939" title="1013" label="1013"/>
<link wikidata="Q169640" start="13942" end="13951" title="Hisham II" label="Hisham II"/>
<link wikidata="Q19349" start="13989" end="13993" title="1044" label="1044"/>
<link wikidata="Q714885" start="13996" end="14005" title="Gothelo I, Duke of Lorraine" label="Gothelo I"/>
<link wikidata="Q19369" start="14025" end="14029" title="1054" label="1054"/>
<link wikidata="Q58559" start="14032" end="14038" title="Pope Leo IX" label="Leo IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769" start="14079" end="14083" title="1321" label="1321"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716119" start="14086" end="14097" title="Gerasimus I of Constantinople" label="Gerasimus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375" start="14128" end="14132" title="1390" label="1390"/>
<link wikidata="Q312592" start="14135" end="14144" title="Robert II of Scotland" label="Robert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6124" start="14174" end="14178" title="1405" label="1405"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794997" start="14181" end="14208" title="Thomas West, 1st Baron West" label="Thomas West, 1st Baron West"/>
<link wikidata="Q6344" start="14238" end="14242" title="1431" label="1431"/>
<link wikidata="Q362670" start="14245" end="14255" title="Adolph III, Count of Waldeck" label="Adolph III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613" start="14285" end="14289" title="1560" label="1560"/>
<link wikidata="Q76325" start="14292" end="14310" title="Philip Melanchthon" label="Philip Melanchthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642" start="14354" end="14358" title="1567" label="1567"/>
<link wikidata="Q77234" start="14361" end="14375" title="Michael Stifel" label="Michael Stifel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6707" start="14418" end="14422" title="1578" label="1578"/>
<link wikidata="Q311080" start="14425" end="14439" title="Uesugi Kenshin" label="Uesugi Kenshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757" start="14481" end="14485" title="1588" label="1588"/>
<link wikidata="Q9440" start="14488" end="14502" title="Paolo Veronese" label="Paolo Veronese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758" start="14547" end="14551" title="1608" label="1608"/>
<link wikidata="Q670967" start="14554" end="14590" title="Thomas Sackville, 1st Earl of Dorset" label="Thomas Sackville, 1st Earl of Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q944583" start="14634" end="14653" title="Lord High Treasurer" label="Lord High Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801" start="14665" end="14669" title="1618" label="1618"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787461" start="14672" end="14686" title="Thomas Bastard" label="Thomas Bastard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804" start="14725" end="14729" title="1619" label="1619"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903776" start="14732" end="14744" title="Jagat Gosain" label="Jagat Gosain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847" start="14772" end="14776" title="1629" label="1629"/>
<link wikidata="Q457145" start="14779" end="14802" title="Sigismondo d&amp;#x27;India" label="Sigismondo d&amp;#x27;India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7664" start="14832" end="14836" title="1686" label="1686"/>
<link wikidata="Q952846" start="14839" end="14869" title="Antonio de Solís y Ribadeneyra" label="Antonio de Solís y Ribadeneyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674" start="14915" end="14919" title="1689" label="1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q52937" start="14922" end="14931" title="Christina, Queen of Sweden" label="Christina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972" start="14960" end="14964" title="1733" label="1733"/>
<link wikidata="Q275268" start="14967" end="14985" title="Elizabeth Hamilton, Countess of Orkney" label="Elizabeth Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002" start="15017" end="15021" title="1739" label="1739"/>
<link wikidata="Q927848" start="15024" end="15043" title="Nicholas Saunderson" label="Nicholas Saunderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7675" start="15091" end="15095" title="1768" label="1768"/>
<link wikidata="Q182664" start="15098" end="15107" title="Canaletto" label="Canaletto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703" start="15147" end="15151" title="1776" label="1776"/>
<link wikidata="Q473756" start="15154" end="15165" title="Jacob Emden" label="Jacob Emden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784" start="15202" end="15206" title="1791" label="1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q561101" start="15209" end="15222" title="Richard Price" label="Richard Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937" start="15274" end="15278" title="1813" label="1813"/>
<link wikidata="Q656478" start="15281" end="15294" title="Benjamin Rush" label="Benjamin Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994" start="15339" end="15343" title="1824" label="1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="15346" end="15356" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579" start="15406" end="15410" title="1831" label="1831"/>
<link wikidata="Q65183" start="15413" end="15455" title="Johann Gottlieb Friedrich von Bohnenberger" label="Johann Gottlieb Friedrich von Bohnenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587" start="15504" end="15508" title="1833" label="1833"/>
<link wikidata="Q721275" start="15511" end="15543" title="James Gambier, 1st Baron Gambier" label="James Gambier, 1st Baron Gambier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483986" start="15591" end="15625" title="List of lieutenant governors of Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Commodore Governor of Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619" start="15637" end="15641" title="1840" label="1840"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166327" start="15644" end="15665" title="Jean-Jacques Lartigue" label="Jean-Jacques Lartigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670" start="15694" end="15698" title="1854" label="1854"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273078" start="15701" end="15715" title="Robert Jameson" label="Robert Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808" start="15763" end="15767" title="1881" label="1881"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="15770" end="15787" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="15824" end="15860" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="15872" end="15876" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="15879" end="15893" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840" start="15937" end="15941" title="1893" label="1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q821476" start="15944" end="15957" title="Martin Körber" label="Martin Körber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035" start="16037" end="16041" title="1901" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722883" start="16044" end="16063" title="Alfred Horatio Belo" label="Alfred Horatio Belo"/>
<link wikidata="Q889935" start="16099" end="16122" title="The Dallas Morning News" label="The Dallas Morning News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="16140" end="16144" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387837" start="16147" end="16159" title="Oliver Mowat" label="Oliver Mowat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560704" start="16188" end="16206" title="Premier of Ontario" label="Premier of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544432" start="16215" end="16245" title="Lieutenant Governor of Ontario" label="Lieutenant Governor of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049" start="16257" end="16261" title="1906" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q37463" start="16264" end="16276" title="Pierre Curie" label="Pierre Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="16309" end="16320" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q469884" start="16349" end="16361" title="Spencer Gore (sportsman)" label="Spencer Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="16410" end="16414" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q11293415" start="16417" end="16427" title="Signe Rink" label="Signe Rink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="16485" end="16489" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="16492" end="16514" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="16566" end="16570" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793194" start="16573" end="16591" title="Thomas Playford II" label="Thomas Playford II"/>
<link wikidata="Q676357" start="16629" end="16655" title="Premier of South Australia" label="Premier of South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="16667" end="16671" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q290125" start="16674" end="16686" title="Ephraim Shay" label="Ephraim Shay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070019" start="16720" end="16735" title="Shay locomotive" label="Shay locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="16747" end="16751" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309330" start="16754" end="16785" title="Alexander Alexandrovich Chuprov" label="Alexander Alexandrovich Chuprov"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="16838" end="16842" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546735" start="16845" end="16871" title="Georges-Casimir Dessaulles" label="Georges-Casimir Dessaulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="16920" end="16924" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034158" start="16927" end="16971" title="Martin Conway, 1st Baron Conway of Allington" label="Martin Conway, 1st Baron Conway of Allington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352575" start="17028" end="17050" title="William Morton Wheeler" label="William Morton Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="17099" end="17103" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q107863876" start="17106" end="17118" title="Jack McNeela" label="Jack McNeela"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="17160" end="17164" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q534512" start="17167" end="17189" title="Johanna Müller-Hermann" label="Johanna Müller-Hermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="17220" end="17224" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q356208" start="17227" end="17241" title="Ulrich Salchow" label="Ulrich Salchow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="17283" end="17287" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q561089" start="17290" end="17310" title="Ernst Robert Curtius" label="Ernst Robert Curtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="17361" end="17365" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q108667471" start="17368" end="17380" title="Steve Conway (singer)" label="Steve Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="17408" end="17412" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q468312" start="17415" end="17426" title="Jim Corbett" label="Jim Corbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="17482" end="17486" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876690" start="17489" end="17503" title="Beardsley Ruml" label="Beardsley Ruml"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="17552" end="17556" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q661055" start="17559" end="17569" title="Max Hainle" label="Max Hainle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="17597" end="17601" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q116190" start="17604" end="17616" title="Väinö Tanner" label="Väinö Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q499029" start="17640" end="17674" title="Social Democratic Party of Finland" label="Social Democratic Party of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q738695" start="17680" end="17705" title="Prime Minister of Finland" label="Prime Minister of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="17717" end="17721" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="17724" end="17739" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="17764" end="17785" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="17797" end="17801" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q172564" start="17804" end="17816" title="Luigi Piotti" label="Luigi Piotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="17853" end="17857" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q705852" start="17860" end="17878" title="Percy Lavon Julian" label="Percy Lavon Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="17921" end="17925" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q489782" start="17928" end="17938" title="Kwon Ki-ok" label="Kwon Ki-ok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="17964" end="17968" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q193357" start="17971" end="17988" title="Daphne du Maurier" label="Daphne du Maurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="18033" end="18037" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q7599660" start="18040" end="18053" title="Stanley Hawes" label="Stanley Hawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="18107" end="18111" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q979233" start="18114" end="18128" title="Frankie Howerd" label="Frankie Howerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="18172" end="18176" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q431015" start="18179" end="18191" title="David Koresh" label="David Koresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q366825" start="18233" end="18252" title="George S. Mickelson" label="George S. Mickelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626318" start="18301" end="18325" title="Governor of South Dakota" label="Governor of South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="18337" end="18341" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q46739" start="18344" end="18355" title="Octavio Paz" label="Octavio Paz"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="18397" end="18408" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="18429" end="18433" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q78615" start="18436" end="18456" title="Hermine Braunsteiner" label="Hermine Braunsteiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="18474" end="18476" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="18496" end="18500" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q506312" start="18503" end="18518" title="Louis Applebaum" label="Louis Applebaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987" start="18563" end="18567" title="2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934890" start="18570" end="18583" title="Reginald Rose" label="Reginald Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="18612" end="18616" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q320560" start="18619" end="18635" title="Norris McWhirter" label="Norris McWhirter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="18680" end="18702" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q323207" start="18722" end="18740" title="John Maynard Smith" label="John Maynard Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q44400336" start="18794" end="18804" title="Jenny Pike" label="Jenny Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="18861" end="18865" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q955842" start="18868" end="18891" title="Albert Scott Crossfield" label="Albert Scott Crossfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="18944" end="18948" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q319527" start="18951" end="18969" title="Jean-Pierre Cassel" label="Jean-Pierre Cassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="18995" end="18999" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q140201" start="19002" end="19015" title="J. G. Ballard" label="J. G. Ballard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994" start="19079" end="19083" title="2011" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q234539" start="19086" end="19102" title="Elisabeth Sladen" label="Elisabeth Sladen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="19131" end="19135" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q356986" start="19138" end="19148" title="Levon Helm" label="Levon Helm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="19189" end="19193" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q218311" start="19196" end="19210" title="François Jacob" label="François Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="19243" end="19254" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q320805" start="19283" end="19294" title="Al Neuharth" label="Al Neuharth"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="19354" end="19363" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="19381" end="19385" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179517" start="19388" end="19400" title="Raymond Carr" label="Raymond Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q333700" start="19452" end="19461" title="Roy Mason" label="Roy Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747647" start="19493" end="19523" title="Secretary of State for Defence" label="Secretary of State for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="19535" end="19539" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q335" start="19542" end="19557" title="Patricio Aylwin" label="Patricio Aylwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="19589" end="19593" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q117747447" start="19596" end="19609" title="Lu Chao-Hsuan" label="Lu Chao-Hsuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="19667" end="19671" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="19674" end="19688" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="19716" end="19751" title="Vice President of the United States" label="Vice President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q281908" start="19771" end="19783" title="Jim Steinman" label="Jim Steinman"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="19824" end="19828" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q29441888" start="19831" end="19842" title="Kane Tanaka" label="Kane Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q49622" start="19881" end="19885" title="2023" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q22100580" start="19888" end="19895" title="Moonbin" label="Moonbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22004742" start="19945" end="19957" title="Ron Hamilton (musician)" label="Ron Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="19988" end="19992" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q215263" start="19995" end="20009" title="Daniel Dennett" label="Daniel Dennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="20094" end="20103" title="Calendar of saints" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262465" start="20108" end="20129" title="Ælfheah of Canterbury" label="Ælfheah of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="20131" end="20139" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="20141" end="20149" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3694282" start="20154" end="20170" title="Conrad of Ascoli" label="Conrad of Ascoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q467551" start="20175" end="20188" title="Emma of Lesum" label="Emma of Lesum"/>
<link wikidata="Q739082" start="20192" end="20201" title="Expeditus" label="Expeditus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29511823" start="20205" end="20222" title="Saint George the Confessor" label="George of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q381010" start="20226" end="20231" title="Olaus Petri" label="Olaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q561050" start="20236" end="20252" title="Laurentius Petri" label="Laurentius Petri"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="20254" end="20262" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q58559" start="20267" end="20278" title="Pope Leo IX" label="Pope Leo IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385227" start="20282" end="20288" title="Ursmar" label="Ursmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781902" start="20292" end="20329" title="April 19 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="April 19 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2197" wikidata="Q478829" url="?curid=2197" title="Amstrad CPC">
<text>The Amstrad CPC (short for &quot;Colour Personal Computer&quot;) is a series of 8-bit home computers produced by Amstrad between 1984 and 1990. It was designed to compete in the mid-1980s home computer market dominated by the Commodore 64 and the ZX Spectrum; it successfully established itself primarily in the United Kingdom, France, Spain, and the German-speaking parts of Europe, and also Canada.

The series spawned a total of six distinct models: The &quot;CPC 464&quot;, &quot;CPC 664&quot;, and &quot;CPC 6128&quot; were highly successful competitors in the European home computer market. The later &quot;464 plus&quot; and &quot;6128 plus&quot;, intended to prolong the system&#x27;s lifecycle with hardware updates, were considerably less successful, as was the attempt to repackage the &quot;plus&quot; hardware into a game console as the &quot;GX4000&quot;.

The CPC models&#x27; hardware is based on the Zilog Z80A CPU, complemented with either 64 or 128 KB of RAM. Their computer-in-a-keyboard design prominently features an integrated storage device, either a compact cassette deck or 3-inch floppy disk drive. The main units were only sold bundled with either a colour, green-screen or monochrome monitor that doubles as the main unit&#x27;s power supply. Additionally, a wide range of first and third-party hardware extensions such as external disk drives, printers, and memory extensions, was available.

The CPC series was pitched against other home computers primarily used to play video games and enjoyed a strong supply of game software. The comparatively low price for a complete computer system with dedicated monitor, its high-resolution monochrome text and graphic capabilities and the possibility to run CP/M software also rendered the system attractive for business users, which was reflected by a wide selection of application software.

During its lifetime, the CPC series sold approximately three million units.
==Models==

===The original range===
The philosophy behind the CPC series was twofold, firstly the concept was of an &quot;all-in-one&quot;, where the computer, keyboard and its data storage device were combined in a single unit and sold with its own dedicated display monitor. Most home computers at that time such as ZX Spectrum series, Commodore 64, and BBC Micro relied on the use of the domestic television set and a separately connected tape recorder or disk drive. In itself, the all-in-one concept was not new, having been seen before on business-oriented machines and the Commodore PET.

Secondly, Amstrad founder Alan Sugar wanted the machine to resemble a &quot;real computer, similar to what someone would see being used to check them in at the airport for their holidays&quot;, and for the machine to not look like &quot;a pregnant calculator&quot; – in reference presumably to the ZX81 and ZX Spectrum with their low cost, membrane-type keyboards.

====CPC 464====

The CPC 464 was one of the most successful computers in Europe and sold more than two million units.

The CPC 464 featured 64 KB RAM and an internal cassette deck. It was introduced in June 1984 in the UK. Initial suggested retail prices for the CPC 464 were £249.00/DM899.00 with a green screen and £359.00/DM1398.00 with a colour monitor. Following the introduction of the CPC 6128 in late 1985, suggested retail prices for the CPC 464 were cut by £50.00/DM100.00.

In 1990, the 464plus replaced the CPC 464 in the model line-up, and production of the CPC 464 was discontinued.

====CPC 664====
The CPC 664 features 64 KB RAM and an internal 3-inch floppy disk drive. It was introduced on 25 April 1985 in the UK. Initial suggested retail prices for the CPC 664 were £339.00/DM1198.00 with a green screen and £449.00/DM1998.00 with a colour monitor.

After the successful release of the CPC 464, consumers were constantly asking for two improvements: more memory and an internal disk drive. For Amstrad, the latter was easier to realise. At the deliberately low-key introduction of the CPC 664, the machine was positioned not only as the lowest-cost disk system but even the lowest-cost CP/M 2.2 machine. In the Amstrad CPC product range the CPC 664 complemented the CPC 464 which was neither discontinued nor reduced in price.

Compared to the CPC 464, the CPC 664&#x27;s main unit has been significantly redesigned, not only to accommodate the floppy disk drive but also with a redesigned keyboard area. Touted as &quot;ergonomic&quot; by Amstrad&#x27;s promotional material, the keyboard is noticeably tilted to the front with MSX-style cursor keys above the numeric keypad. Compared to the CPC 464&#x27;s multicoloured keyboard, the CPC 664&#x27;s keys are kept in a much quieter grey and pale blue colour scheme.

The back of the CPC 664 main unit features the same connectors as the CPC 464, with the exception of an additional 12V power lead. Unlike the CPC 464&#x27;s cassette tape drive that could be powered off the main unit&#x27;s 5V voltage, the CPC 664&#x27;s floppy disk drive requires an additional 12V voltage. This voltage had to be separately supplied by an updated version of the bundled green screen/colour monitor (GT-65 and CTM-644 respectively).

The CPC 664 was only produced for approximately six months. In late 1985, when the CPC 6128 was introduced in Europe, Amstrad decided not to keep three models in the line-up, and production of the CPC 664 was discontinued.

====CPC 6128====

The CPC 6128 features 128 KB RAM and an internal 3-inch floppy disk drive. Aside from various hardware and firmware improvements, one of the CPC 6128&#x27;s most prominent features is the compatibility with the CP/M+ operating system that rendered it attractive for business uses.

The CPC 6128 was released on 13 June 1985 and initially only sold in the US. Imported and distributed by Indescomp, Inc. of Chicago, it was the first Amstrad product to be sold in the United States, a market that at the time was traditionally hostile towards European computer manufacturers. Two months later, on 15 August 1985, it arrived in Europe and replaced the CPC 664 in the CPC model line-up. Initial suggested retail prices for the CPC 6128 were US$699.00/£299.00/DM1598.00 with a green screen and US$799.00/£399.00/DM2098.00 with a colour monitor.

In 1990, the 6128plus replaced the CPC 6128 in the model line-up, and production of the CPC 6128 was discontinued.

===The &quot;plus range&quot;===
In 1990, confronted with a changing home computer market, Amstrad decided to refresh the CPC model range by introducing a new range variantly labelled &quot;plus&quot; or &quot;PLUS&quot;, &quot;1990&quot;, or &quot;CPC+ range&quot;. The main goals were numerous enhancements to the existing CPC hardware platform, to restyle the casework to provide a contemporary appearance, and to add native support of cartridge media. The new model palette includes three variants, the &quot;464plus&quot; and &quot;6128plus&quot; computers and the &quot;GX4000&quot; video game console. The &quot;CPC&quot; abbreviation was dropped from the model names.

The redesign significantly enhanced the CPC hardware, mainly to rectify its previous shortcomings as a gaming platform. The redesigned video hardware allows for 16 hardware sprites and soft scrolling, with a colour palette extended from a maximum of 16 colours (plus separately definable border) at one time from a choice of 27, increased to a maximum of 31 (16 for background and 15 for hardware sprites) out of 4096. The enhanced sound hardware offers automatic DMA transfer, allowing more complex sound effects with a significantly reduced processor overhead. Other hardware enhancements include the support of analogue joysticks, 8-bit printers, and ROM cartridges up to 4 Mbits.

The new range of models was intended to be completely backwards compatible with the original CPC models. Its enhanced features are only available after a deliberately obscure unlocking mechanism has been triggered, thus preventing existing CPC software from accidentally invoking them.

Despite the significant hardware enhancements, many viewed it as outdated, being based on an 8-bit CPU, and it failed to attract both customers and software producers who were moving towards systems such as the Amiga and Mega Drive which was launched a few short months after the plus range. The plus range was a commercial failure, and production was discontinued shortly after its introduction in 1990.

====464 plus, 6128 plus====

The &quot;464 plus&quot; and &quot;6128 plus&quot; models were intended as &quot;more sophisticated and stylish&quot; replacements of the CPC 464 and CPC 6128. Based on the redesigned plus hardware platform, they share the same base characteristics as their predecessors: The 464 plus is equipped with 64 KB RAM and a cassette tape drive, the 6128 plus features 128 KB RAM and a 3&quot; floppy disk drive. Both models share a common case layout with a keyboard taken over from the CPC 6128 model, and the respective mass storage drive inserted in a case breakout.

In order to simplify the EMC screening process, the edge connectors of the previous models have been replaced with micro-ribbon connectors as previously used on the German Schneider CPC 6128. As a result, a wide range of extensions for the original CPC range are connector-incompatible with the 464 plus and 6128 plus. In addition, the 6128plus does not have a tape socket for an external tape drive.

The plus range is not equipped with an on-board ROM, and thus the 464 plus and the 6128 plus do not contain a firmware. Instead, Amstrad provided the firmware for both models via the ROM extension facility, contained on the included &quot;Burnin&#x27; Rubber and Locomotive BASIC&quot; cartridge. This resulted in reduced hardware localization cost (only some select key caps and case labels had to be localized) with the added benefit of a rudimentary copy protection mechanism (without a firmware present, the machine itself could not copy a game cartridge&#x27;s content). As the enhanced &quot;V4&quot; firmware&#x27;s structural differences causes problems with some CPC software directly calling firmware functions by their memory addresses, Amstrad separately sold a cartridge containing the original CPC 6128&#x27;s &quot;V3&quot; firmware.

Both the 464 plus and the 6128 plus were introduced to the public in September 1990. Initial suggested retail prices were / with a monochrome monitor and / with a colour monitor for the 464 plus, and / with a monochrome monitor and / with a colour monitor for the 6128plus.

====GX4000====
Developed as part of the &quot;plus range&quot;, the GX4000 was Amstrad&#x27;s short-lived attempt to enter the video game consoles market. Sharing the plus range&#x27;s enhanced hardware characteristics, it represents the bare minimum variant of the range without a keyboard or support for mass storage devices. It came bundled with 2 paddle controllers and the racing game &quot;Burnin&#x27; Rubber&quot;.

===Special models and clones===

====CPC 472====

During the August holidays of 1985, Spain briefly introduced an import tax of 15 000 pesetas () on computers containing 64 KB or less of RAM (Royal Decree 1215/1985 and 1558/1985), and a new law (Royal Decree 1250/1985) mandated that all computers sold in Spain must have a Spanish keyboard. To circumvent this, Amstrad&#x27;s Spanish distributor &quot;Indescomp&quot; (later to become &quot;Amstrad Spain&quot;) created and distributed the &quot;CPC 472&quot;, a modified version of the CPC 464. Its main differences are a small additional daughter board containing a CPC 664 ROM chip and an 8 KB memory chip, and a keyboard with a ñ key (although some of them were temporarily manufactured without the ñ key). The sole purpose of the 8 KB memory chip (which is not electrically connected to the machine, so consequently rendered unusable) is to increase the machine&#x27;s total memory specs to 72 KB in order to circumvent the import tax. Some months later, Spain joined the European Communities by the Treaty of Accession 1985 and the import tax was suppressed, so Amstrad added the ñ key for the 464 and production of the CPC 472 was discontinued.

====KC compact====
The &#x27; (&quot;&quot; - which means &quot;small computer&quot; - being a rather literal German translation of the English &quot;microcomputer&quot;) is a clone of the Amstrad CPC built by East Germany&#x27;s &#x27;, part of &quot;&quot;, in October 1989. Although the machine included various substitutes and emulations of an Amstrad CPC&#x27;s hardware, the machine is largely compatible with Amstrad CPC software. It is equipped with 64 KB of memory and a CPC 6128&#x27;s firmware customized to the modified hardware, including a copy of Locomotive BASIC 1.1 modified in the startup banner only. The expansion port is a K 1520 bus slot. The KC compact is the last 8-bit computer introduced in East Germany. Due to the German reunification happening at the time of the release, only a very small number of systems were sold. The KC compact can be emulated by free software &quot;JKCEMU&quot;.

====Aleste 520EX====
In 1993, Omsk, Russia based company Patisonic released the Aleste 520EX, a computer highly compatible with the Amstrad CPC 6128. It could also be switched into an MSX mode. An expansion board named &quot;Magic Sound&quot; allowed to play Scream Tracker files.

==Reception==

&quot;Your Computer&quot; concluded that the CPC 464 had &quot;Superior graphics and sound, an excellent Basic coupled with a flexible operating system&quot; and that Amstrad&#x27;s target sales of 200,000 by the end of 1984 were realistic.

A &quot;BYTE&quot; columnist in January 1985 called the CPC 464 &quot;the closest yet to filling&quot; his criteria for a useful home computer, including good keyboard, 80-column text, inexpensive disk drive, and support for a mainstream operating system like CP/M.

==Hardware==

===Processor===
The entire CPC series is based on the Zilog Z80; a processor, clocked at 4 MHz.

In order to avoid the CPU and the video logic simultaneously accessing the shared main memory and causing video corruption (&quot;snowing&quot;), CPU memory access is constrained to occur on microsecond boundaries. This effectively pads every machine cycle to four clock cycles, causing a minor loss of processing power and resulting in what Amstrad estimated to be an &quot;effective clock rate&quot; of &quot;approximately 3.3 MHz&quot;.

===Memory===
Amstrad CPCs are equipped with either 64 (CPC 464, CPC 664, 464plus, GX4000) or 128 (CPC 6128, 6128plus) KB of RAM. This base memory can be extended by up to 512 KB using memory expansions sold by third-party manufacturers, and by up to 4096 KB using experimental methods developed by hardware enthusiasts. Because the Z80 processor is only able to directly address 64 KB of memory, additional memory from the 128 KB models and memory expansions is made available using bank switching.

===Video===

Underlying a CPC&#x27;s video output is the unusual pairing of a CRTC (Motorola 6845 or compatible) with a custom-designed gate array to generate a pixel display output. CPC 6128s later in production as well as the models from the plus range integrate both the CRTC and the gate array&#x27;s functions with the system&#x27;s ASIC.

Three built-in display resolutions are available: 160×200 pixels with 16 colours (&quot;Mode 0&quot;, 20 text columns), 320×200 pixels with 4 colours (&quot;Mode 1&quot;, 40 text columns), and 640×200 pixels with 2 colours (&quot;Mode 2&quot;, 80 text columns). Increased screen size can be achieved by reprogramming the CRTC.

The original CPC video hardware supports a colour palette of 27 colours, generated from RGB colour space with each colour component assigned as either off, half on, or on (3 level RGB palette). The plus range extended the palette to 4096 colours, also generated from RGB with 4 bits each for red, green and blue (12-bit RGB).
With the exception of the GX4000, all CPC models lack an RF television or composite video output and instead shipped with a 6-pin RGB DIN connector, also used by Acorn computers, to connect the supplied Amstrad monitor. This connector delivers a 1v p-p analogue RGB with a 50 Hz composite sync signal that, if wired correctly, can drive a 50 Hz SCART television. External adapters for RF television were available as a first-party hardware accessory.

===Audio===
The CPC uses the General Instrument AY-3-8912 sound chip, providing three channels, each configurable to generate square waves, white noise or both. A small array of hardware volume envelopes are available.

Output is provided in mono by a small (4 cm) built-in loudspeaker with volume control, driven by an internal amplifier. Stereo output is provided through a headphones jack.

It is possible to play back digital sound samples at a resolution of approximately 5-bit by sending a stream of values to the sound chip. This technique is very processor-intensive and hard to combine with any other processing. Examples are the title screens or other non-playable scenes of games like &quot;Chase H.Q.&quot;, &quot;Meltdown&quot;, and &quot;RoboCop&quot;. The later Plus models incorporated a DMA engine in order to offload this processing.

===Floppy disk drive===

Amstrad uses Matsushita&#x27;s 3&quot; floppy disk drive [ref: CPCWiki], which was compatible with Hitachi&#x27;s existing 3&quot; floppy disk format. The chosen drive (built-in for later models) is a single-sided 40-track unit that requires the user to remove and flip the disk to access the other side. Each side has its own independent write-protect switch. The sides are termed &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot;, with each one commonly formatted to 180 KB (in AMSDOS format, comprising 2 KB directory and 178 KB storage) for a total of 360 KB per disk.

The interface with the drives is an NEC 765 FDC, used for the same purpose in the IBM PC/XT, PC/AT and PS/2 machines. Its features are not fully used in order to cut costs, namely DMA transfers and support for single density disks; they were formatted as double density using modified frequency modulation.

Discs were shipped in a paper sleeve or a hard plastic case resembling a compact disc &quot;jewel&quot; case. The casing is thicker and more rigid than that of 3.5 inch diskettes, and designed to be mailed without any additional packaging. A sliding metal cover to protect the media surface is internal to the casing and latched, unlike the simple external sliding cover of Sony&#x27;s version. They were significantly more expensive than both 5.25 inch and 3.5 inch alternatives. This, combined with their low nominal capacities and their essentially proprietary nature, led to the format being discontinued shortly after the CPC itself was discontinued.

Apart from Amstrad&#x27;s other 3-inch machines (the PCW and the ZX Spectrum +3), the few other computer systems to use them included the Sega SF-7000 and CP/M systems such as the Tatung Einstein and Osborne machines. They also found use on embedded systems.

The Shugart-standard interface means that Amstrad CPC machines are able to use standard 3&quot;, 3½&quot; or 5¼&quot; drives as their second drive. Programs such as ROMDOS and ParaDOS extend the standard AMSDOS system to provide support for double-sided, 80-track formats, enabling up to 800 KB to be stored on a single disk.

The 3-inch disks themselves are usually known as &quot;discs&quot; on the CPC, following the spelling on the machine&#x27;s plastic casing and conventional British English spelling.

===Expansion===

The hardware and firmware was designed to be able to access software provided on external ROMs. Each ROM has to be a 16 KB block and is switched in and out of the memory space shared with the video RAM. The Amstrad firmware is deliberately designed so that new software could be easily accessed from these ROMs. Popular applications were marketed on ROM, particularly word processing and programming utility software (examples are Protext and Brunword of the former, and the MAXAM assembler of the latter type).

Such extra ROM chips do not plug directly into the CPC itself, but into extra plug-in &quot;rom boxes&quot; which contain sockets for the ROM chips and a minimal amount of decoding circuitry for the main machine to be able to switch between them. These boxes were either marketed commercially or could be built by competent hobbyists and they attached to the main expansion port at the back of the machine. Software on ROM loads much faster than from disc or tape and the machine&#x27;s boot-up sequence was designed to evaluate ROMs it found and optionally hand over control of the machine to them. This allows significant customisation of the functionality of the machine, something that enthusiasts exploited for various purposes. However, the typical users would probably not be aware of this added ROM functionality unless they read the CPC press, as it is not described in the user manual and was hardly ever mentioned in marketing literature. It is, however, documented in the official Amstrad firmware manual.

The machines also feature a 9-pin Atari joystick port that will either directly take one joystick, or two joysticks by use of a splitter cable.

==Peripherals==

===RS232 serial adapters===
Amstrad issued two RS-232-C D25 serial interfaces, attached to the expansion connector on the rear of the machine, with a through-connector for the CPC 464 disk drive or other peripherals.

The original interface came with a &quot;Book of Spells&quot; for facilitating data transfer between other systems using a proprietary protocol in the device&#x27;s own ROM, as well as terminal software to connect to British Telecom&#x27;s Prestel service. A separate version of the ROM was created for the U.S. market due to the use of the commands &quot;|SUCK&quot; and &quot;|BLOW&quot;, which were considered unacceptable there.

Software and hardware limitations in this interface led to its replacement with an Amstrad-branded version of a compatible alternative by Pace. Serial interfaces were also available from third-party vendors such as KDS Electronics and Cirkit.

==Software==

===BASIC and operating system===

Like most home computers at the time, the CPC has its OS and a BASIC interpreter built in as ROM. It uses Locomotive BASIC - an improved version of Locomotive Software&#x27;s Z80 BASIC for the BBC Micro co-processor board. It is particularly notable for providing easy access to the machine&#x27;s video and audio resources in contrast to the POKE commands required on generic Microsoft implementations. Other unusual features include timed event handling with the AFTER and EVERY commands, and text-based windowing.

===CP/M===
Digital Research&#x27;s CP/M operating system was supplied with the 664 and 6128 disk-based systems, and the DDI-1 disk expansion unit for the 464. 64k machines shipped with CP/M 2.2 alone, while the 128k machines also include CP/M 3.1. The compact CP/M 2.2 implementation is largely stored on the boot sectors of a 3&quot; disk in what was called &quot;System format&quot;; typing |CPM from Locomotive BASIC would load code from these sectors, making it a popular choice for custom game loading routines. The CP/M 3.1 implementation is largely in a separate file which is in turn loaded from the boot sector.
Much public domain CP/M software was made available for the CPC, from word-processors such as VDE to complete bulletin board systems such as ROS.

===Other languages===
Although it was possible to obtain compilers for Locomotive BASIC, C and Pascal, the majority of the CPC&#x27;s software was written in native Z80 assembly language. Popular assemblers were Hisoft&#x27;s Devpac, Arnor&#x27;s Maxam, and (in France) DAMS. Disk-based CPC (not Plus) systems shipped with an interpreter for the educational language LOGO, booted from CP/M 2.2 but largely CPC-specific with much code resident in the AMSDOS ROM; 6128 machines also include a CP/M 3.1, non-ROM version. A C compiler was also written and made available for the European market through Tandy Europe, by Micro Business products.

===&quot;Roland&quot;===

In an attempt to give the CPC a recognisable mascot, a number of games by Amstrad&#x27;s in-house software publisher Amsoft have been tagged with the &quot;Roland&quot; name. However, as the games had not been designed around the Roland character and only had the branding added later, the character design varies immensely, from a spiky-haired blonde teenager (&quot;Roland Goes Digging&quot;) to a white cube with legs (&quot;Roland Goes Square Bashing&quot;) or a mutant flea (&quot;Roland in the Caves&quot;). The only two games with similar gameplay and main character design are &quot;Roland in Time&quot; and its sequel &quot;Roland in Space&quot;. The Roland character was named after Roland Perry, one of the lead designers of the original CPC range.

==Schneider Computer Division==

In order to market its computers in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland where Amstrad did not have any distribution structures, Amstrad entered a partnership with &quot;Schneider Rundfunkwerke AG&quot;, a German company that - very much like Amstrad itself - was previously only known for value-priced audio products. In 1984, Schneider&#x27;s &quot;Schneider Computer Division&quot; daughter company was created specifically for the task, and the complete Amstrad CPC line-up was branded and sold as &quot;Schneider CPC&quot;.

Although they are based on the same hardware, the Schneider CPC models differ from the Amstrad CPC models in several details. Most prominently, the Schneider CPC 464 and CPC 664 keyboards featured grey instead of coloured keys, but still in the original British keyboard layout. To achieve a German &quot;QWERTZ&quot; keyboard layout, Schneider marketed a small software program to reassign the keys as well as sticker labels for the keys. In order to conform with stricter German EMC regulations, the complete Schneider CPC line-up is equipped with an internal metal shielding. For the same reason, the Schneider CPC 6128 features micro ribbon type connectors instead of edge connectors. Both the greyscale keyboard and the micro ribbon connectors found their way up into the design of later Amstrad CPC models.

In 1988, after Schneider refused to market Amstrad&#x27;s AT-compatible computer line, the cooperation ended. Schneider went on to sell the remaining stock of Schneider CPC models and used their now well-established market position to introduce its own PC designs. With the formation of its German daughter company &quot;Amstrad GmbH&quot; to distribute its product lines including the CPC 464 and CPC 6128, Amstrad attempted but ultimately failed to establish their own brand in the German-speaking parts of Europe.

==Community==
The Amstrad CPC enjoyed a strong and long lifetime, mainly due to the machines use for businesses as well as gaming. Dedicated programmers continued working on the CPC range, even producing graphical user interface (GUI) operating systems such as SymbOS. Internet sites devoted to the CPC have appeared from around the world featuring forums, news, hardware, software, programming and games. CPC Magazines appeared during the 1980s including publications in countries such as Britain, France, Spain, Germany, Denmark, Australia, and Greece. Titles included the official Amstrad Computer User publication, as well as independent titles like &quot;Amstrad Action&quot;, &quot;Amtix!&quot;, &quot;Computing with the Amstrad CPC&quot;, &quot;CPC Attack&quot;, Australia&#x27;s &quot;The Amstrad User&quot;, France&#x27;s &quot;Amstrad Cent Pour Cent&quot; and &quot;Amstar&quot;. Following the CPC&#x27;s end of production, Amstrad gave permission for the CPC ROMs to be distributed freely as long as the copyright message is not changed and that it is acknowledged that Amstrad still holds copyright, giving emulator authors the possibility to ship the CPC firmware with their programs.

==Influence on other Amstrad machines==
Amstrad followed their success with the CPC 464 by launching the Amstrad PCW word-processor range, another Z80-based machine with a 3&quot; disk drive and software by Locomotive Software. The PCW was originally developed to be partly compatible with an improved version of the CPC (&quot;ANT&quot;, or Arnold Number Two - the CPC&#x27;s development codename was Arnold). However, Amstrad decided to focus on the PCW, and the ANT project never came to market.

On 7 April 1986, Amstrad announced it had bought from Sinclair Research &quot;...the worldwide rights to sell and manufacture all existing and future Sinclair computers and computer products, together with the Sinclair brand name and those intellectual property rights where they relate to computers and computer-related products.&quot; which included the ZX Spectrum, for £5 million. This included Sinclair&#x27;s unsold stock of Sinclair QLs and Spectrums. Amstrad made more than £5 million on selling these surplus machines alone. Amstrad launched two new variants of the Spectrum: the ZX Spectrum +2, based on the ZX Spectrum 128, with a built-in tape drive (like the CPC 464) and, the following year, the ZX Spectrum +3, with a built-in floppy disk drive (similar to the CPC 664 and 6128), taking the 3&quot; discs that Amstrad CPC machines used.

== Production Timeline ==
==See also==
* Amstrad CPC character set
* Amstrad CP/M Plus character set
* List of Amstrad CPC emulators
* List of Amstrad CPC games
* GX4000
* SymbOS (multitasking operating system)

==Notes and references==
==External links==

* CPC-Wiki (CPC specific Wiki containing further information)
* Unofficial Amstrad WWW Resource
* New OS for the CPC</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q478829" start="4" end="15" title="Amstrad CPC" label="Amstrad CPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="80" end="85" title="8-bit" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="86" end="99" title="home computer" label="home computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q478825" start="113" end="120" title="Amstrad" label="Amstrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="226" end="238" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="247" end="258" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862171" start="463" end="470" title="Amstrad CPC 464" label="CPC 464"/>
<link wikidata="Q203315" start="917" end="927" title="Zilog Z80A" label="Zilog Z80A"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="928" end="931" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="974" end="977" title="Random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="1731" end="1735" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="2262" end="2273" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="2282" end="2294" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q749976" start="2300" end="2309" title="BBC Micro" label="BBC Micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="2344" end="2354" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q213777" start="2386" end="2399" title="tape recorder" label="tape recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046817" start="2403" end="2413" title="disk storage" label="disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q946661" start="2524" end="2537" title="Commodore PET" label="Commodore PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q336520" start="2566" end="2576" title="Alan Sugar" label="Alan Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q263250" start="2838" end="2842" title="ZX81" label="ZX81"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="2847" end="2858" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q510176" start="3072" end="3085" title="cassette deck" label="cassette deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="3190" end="3192" title="Deutsche Mark" label="DM"/>
<link wikidata="Q853547" start="4555" end="4558" title="MSX" label="MSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="5545" end="5553" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="7236" end="7252" title="Sprite (computer graphics)" label="hardware sprites"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="7536" end="7548" title="DMA transfer" label="DMA transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q633454" start="7726" end="7739" title="ROM cartridge" label="ROM cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="7749" end="7753" title="megabit" label="Mbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="7811" end="7831" title="backwards compatible" label="backwards compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="8255" end="8260" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="8265" end="8275" title="Mega Drive" label="Mega Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q747288" start="9069" end="9072" title="Electromagnetic compatibility" label="EMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="9629" end="9632" title="read only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15738686" start="9899" end="9914" title="copy protection" label="copy protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q449573" start="10922" end="10939" title="paddle controller" label="paddle controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q476" start="11678" end="11679" title="ñ" label="ñ"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="12023" end="12043" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q9360737" start="12051" end="12075" title="Treaty of Accession 1985" label="Treaty of Accession 1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="12409" end="12421" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753474" start="12761" end="12777" title="Locomotive BASIC" label="Locomotive BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12843" end="12853" title="VEB Robotron#K 1520_bus_standard" label="K 1520 bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="12941" end="12961" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q898" start="13146" end="13158" title="Omsk" label="Omsk, Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q853547" start="13300" end="13303" title="MSX" label="MSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860793" start="13375" end="13389" title="Scream Tracker" label="Scream Tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023075" start="13419" end="13432" title="Your Computer (British magazine)" label="Your Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018709" start="13663" end="13667" title="BYTE" label="BYTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q203315" start="13990" end="13999" title="Zilog Z80" label="Zilog Z80"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="14027" end="14030" title="Hertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q842015" start="14224" end="14235" title="microsecond" label="microsecond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14276" end="14283" title="processing cycle" label="machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q426882" start="14298" end="14309" title="clock cycle" label="clock cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q806652" start="14957" end="14971" title="bank switching" label="bank switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852898" start="15052" end="15056" title="Cathode Ray Tube Controller" label="CRTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708459" start="15058" end="15071" title="Motorola 6845" label="Motorola 6845"/>
<link wikidata="Q114901" start="15110" end="15120" title="gate array" label="gate array"/>
<link wikidata="Q217302" start="15312" end="15316" title="Application-specific integrated circuit" label="ASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357944" start="15690" end="15704" title="Palette (computing)" label="colour palette"/>
<link wikidata="Q166194" start="15735" end="15738" title="RGB" label="RGB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15819" end="15838" title="List of monochrome and RGB color formats#3-level RGB" label="3 level RGB palette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15960" end="15970" title="List of monochrome and RGB color formats#12-bit RGB" label="12-bit RGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563565" start="16030" end="16043" title="RF modulator" label="RF television"/>
<link wikidata="Q185644" start="16047" end="16062" title="composite video" label="composite video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133767" start="16107" end="16120" title="DIN connector" label="DIN connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q831468" start="16318" end="16323" title="SCART" label="SCART"/>
<link wikidata="Q300264" start="16454" end="16482" title="General Instrument AY-3-8910" label="General Instrument AY-3-8912"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418253" start="16483" end="16493" title="sound chip" label="sound chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="16754" end="16763" title="amplifier" label="amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q34678" start="16765" end="16771" title="Stereophonic sound" label="Stereo"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="16801" end="16811" title="headphones" label="headphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q210868" start="16847" end="16868" title="sampling (signal processing)" label="digital sound samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q90994" start="17127" end="17137" title="Chase H.Q." label="Chase H.Q."/>
<link wikidata="Q15036797" start="17151" end="17159" title="Meltdown (8-bit video game)" label="Meltdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985756" start="17177" end="17184" title="RoboCop (1988 video game)" label="RoboCop"/>
<link wikidata="Q53247" start="17316" end="17333" title="Panasonic" label="Matsushita&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q53238" start="17402" end="17409" title="Hitachi" label="Hitachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460212" start="17426" end="17452" title="Compact Floppy" label="3&amp;quot; floppy disk format"/>
<link wikidata="Q577303" start="17765" end="17771" title="AMSDOS" label="AMSDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q741867" start="17903" end="17906" title="Floppy disk controller" label="FDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q34349" start="17945" end="17950" title="IBM Personal Computer XT" label="PC/XT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141670" start="17952" end="17957" title="PC/AT" label="PC/AT"/>
<link wikidata="Q284518" start="17962" end="17966" title="IBM Personal System/2" label="PS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="18039" end="18042" title="Direct memory access" label="DMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251401" start="18069" end="18083" title="single density" label="single density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251401" start="18114" end="18128" title="double density" label="double density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942166" start="18135" end="18164" title="modified frequency modulation" label="modified frequency modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="18240" end="18252" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q478833" start="18877" end="18880" title="Amstrad PCW" label="PCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="18889" end="18903" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum +3"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="18962" end="18966" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759524" start="19004" end="19019" title="Tatung Einstein" label="Tatung Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455678" start="19024" end="19031" title="Osborne Computer Corporation" label="Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504672" start="19088" end="19095" title="Shugart bus" label="Shugart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745425" start="19567" end="19591" title="British English spelling" label="British English spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906508" start="21177" end="21196" title="Atari joystick port" label="Atari joystick port"/>
<link wikidata="Q191895" start="21352" end="21360" title="RS-232" label="RS-232-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045191" start="21361" end="21364" title="D-subminiature" label="D25"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="21658" end="21666" title="protocol (computing)" label="protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="21708" end="21716" title="computer terminal" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044564" start="21763" end="21770" title="Prestel" label="Prestel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121914" start="22095" end="22099" title="Pace Micro Technology" label="Pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="22303" end="22305" title="operating system" label="OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q98099116" start="22312" end="22329" title="BASIC interpreter" label="BASIC interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="22342" end="22345" title="read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753474" start="22355" end="22371" title="Locomotive BASIC" label="Locomotive BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q749976" start="22442" end="22451" title="BBC Micro" label="BBC Micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q382691" start="22592" end="22596" title="PEEK and POKE" label="POKE"/>
<link wikidata="Q185608" start="22778" end="22794" title="Digital Research" label="Digital Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="22802" end="22806" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="23393" end="23406" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="23624" end="23625" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="23630" end="23636" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="23704" end="23721" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q201436" start="23902" end="23906" title="Logo programming language" label="LOGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748798" start="24320" end="24326" title="Amsoft" label="Amsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360144" start="24359" end="24365" title="Roland (game character)" label="Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q369685" start="24689" end="24708" title="La Pulga" label="Roland in the Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247551" start="25164" end="25190" title="Schneider Rundfunkwerke AG" label="Schneider Rundfunkwerke AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q149289" start="25829" end="25835" title="QWERTZ" label="QWERTZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q747288" start="26005" end="26008" title="Electromagnetic compatibility" label="EMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16676348" start="26156" end="26168" title="micro ribbon" label="micro ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972118" start="26196" end="26210" title="edge connector" label="edge connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="27060" end="27084" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077493" start="27117" end="27123" title="SymbOS" label="SymbOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402519" start="27266" end="27275" title="Computer magazine" label="Magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="27379" end="27386" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="27403" end="27409" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748866" start="27440" end="27461" title="Amstrad Computer User" label="Amstrad Computer User"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748865" start="27516" end="27530" title="Amstrad Action" label="Amstrad Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q697168" start="27544" end="27550" title="Amtix!" label="Amtix!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013620" start="27608" end="27618" title="CPC Attack" label="CPC Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="27975" end="27983" title="emulator" label="emulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q478833" start="28160" end="28171" title="Amstrad PCW" label="Amstrad PCW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797658" start="28262" end="28281" title="Locomotive Software" label="Locomotive Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409" start="28609" end="28626" title="Sinclair Research" label="Sinclair Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="28911" end="28922" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q602253" start="28986" end="28997" title="Sinclair QL" label="Sinclair QL"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="29144" end="29158" title="ZX Spectrum +2" label="ZX Spectrum +2"/>
<link wikidata="Q149757" start="29206" end="29210" title="compact audio cassette" label="tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="29265" end="29279" title="ZX Spectrum +3" label="ZX Spectrum +3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="29297" end="29308" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q96371990" start="29449" end="29474" title="Amstrad CPC character set" label="Amstrad CPC character set"/>
<link wikidata="Q30675535" start="29477" end="29508" title="Amstrad CP/M Plus character set" label="Amstrad CP/M Plus character set"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29511" end="29540" title="List of computer system emulators#Amstrad CPC" label="List of Amstrad CPC emulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244004" start="29543" end="29568" title="List of Amstrad CPC games" label="List of Amstrad CPC games"/>
<link wikidata="Q981935" start="29571" end="29577" title="GX4000" label="GX4000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077493" start="29580" end="29586" title="SymbOS" label="SymbOS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2198" wikidata="Q317494" url="?curid=2198" title="Abdulaziz al-Omari">
<text>Abdulaziz al-Omari (, , also transliterated as Alomari or al-Umari; 28 May 1979 – 11 September 2001) was a Saudi imam and terrorist who was one of five hijackers of American Airlines Flight 11 as part of the September 11 attacks in 2001.

Prior to the attacks, al-Omari was an imam at his mosque in Saudi Arabia&#x27;s al-Qassim province. He arrived in the United States in June 2001 on a tourist visa, obtained through the Visa Express program. On September 11, 2001, al-Omari boarded American Airlines Flight 11 and assisted in the hijacking of the plane, which was crashed into the North Tower of the World Trade Center, as part of the coordinated attacks.

==Early life and career==
Abdulaziz al-Omari (or Alomari) was born on 28 May 1979 in a poor Arab family. He was born in Aseer, Saudi Arabia and was a fellow countryman of brothers Wail al-Shehri and Waleed al-Shehri, fellow hijackers in the September 11 attacks. It is alleged he graduated with honors from high school. He attained a degree from Imam Muhammad ibn Saud Islamic University, got married, and had a daughter briefly before the attacks. He taught as an imam at his mosque in al-Qassim province, which was the &quot;heartland&quot; of Wahhabism, a strict form of Islam. At the mosque, which experts refer to as a &quot;terrorist factory&quot;, he was possibly taught by the radical cleric Sulayman al Alwan.

According to Walid bin Attash, al-Omari was one of a group of future hijackers who provided security at Kandahar airport after their basic training at an al-Qaeda camp. During the 2000 Al Qaeda Summit in Kuala Lumpur, American authorities state that immigration records show that a person named Abdulaziz al-Omari was visiting the country, although they say they are not sure that this was the same person.

==September 11 attacks==
=== Planning ===

==== Early 2001 ====
al-Omari eventually became involved in the planning for the September 11 attacks on the United States, an idea formulated by Osama bin Laden. The attacks involved hijacking commercial airplanes and crashing them into buildings; al-Omari would hijack American Airlines Flight 11, which would crash into the World Trade Center in New York City. At the time of the hijacking, al-Omari was 22. In the autumn of 2001, after the attacks, al Jazeera television broadcast a tape they claim was made by him. The speaker made a farewell suicide video. In it he read, &quot;I am writing this with my full conscience and I am writing this in expectation of the end, which is near... God praise everybody who trained and helped me, namely the leader Sheikh Osama bin Laden.&quot;

A person with al-Omari&#x27;s name visited the Philippines twice in February 2001. al-Omari and hijacker Salem al-Hazmi entered the United States through a Dubai flight on June 29, 2001, landing in New York City. al-Omari had used the controversial Visa Express program to gain entry. The two were probably picked up by Salem&#x27;s brother, Nawaf al-Hazmi, on the 30th; this is assumed because of a recorded traffic accident by Nawaf on George Washington Bridge that day. al-Omari likely stayed with several other hijackers in Paterson, New Jersey (where he rented a mailbox), before moving to his own place in Vero Beach, Florida with his wife and three children. On his rental agreement form for that house, al-Omari gave two license-plates authorized to park in his space, one of which was registered to Mohamed Atta, the attacks&#x27; mastermind.

al-Omari attended the FlightSafety academy in Vero Beach with fellow hijackers Mohand al-Shehri and Saeed al-Ghamdi. He also obtained a fake United States ID card from All Services Plus in Passaic County, New Jersey, which was in the business of selling fake documents; another was given to Khalid al-Mihdhar. The employee who gave them the IDs claimed he had no idea they were &quot;anything more [than ordinary] customers&quot;. Atta bought tickets for Flight 11 for himself and al-Omari on August 28. On September 6, al-Omari and fellow hijacker Satam al-Suqami flew from Florida to Boston to stay at the Park Inn Hotel.

==== September 10 ====
On September 10, 2001, Atta picked up al-Omari from the Park Inn Hotel, and the two drove to South Portland, Maine, in a rented Nissan Altima. Some sources state there is no evidence as to why they went to Portland, whereas ABC News says it was a last-minute decision by Atta to stagger the Flight 11 hijackers&#x27; entrances into Logan International Airport on the 11th. Multiple people have claimed to see Atta and other hijackers in Portland that summer, but the FBI has found no evidence of this. On the 10th, Atta and al-Omari purchased a room (233) at the town&#x27;s Comfort Inn. They did not ask for a wake-up call. Their luggage included a folding knife, &quot;a videocassette [about] a Boeing 757 flight simulator, pepper spray, Atta’s will, [and Atta&#x27;s] handwritten instructions to his 18 fellow hijackers&quot;; American Airlines Flight 11 was a Boeing 767. 

They stayed in their hotel room for two hours, until 8 p.m., when al-Omari made a four-minute phone call from a nearby Pizza Hut&#x27;s pay phone to a phone belonging to Marwan al-Shehhi, who would hijack United Airlines Flight 175. Five minutes later, at a restaurant named Pizzeria Uno, the two withdrew $80 from an ATM. They then drove back to the Pizza Hut, where a second pay phone call was placed at 8:50. They decided to go to Walmart, but got lost and went to a gas station to ask for directions. In a video recorded at the gas station, Atta has a piece of paper in his hand and shows it to al-Omari, and then they leave. At the Walmart, the two purchased a six-volt battery converter for an unknown reason. Staff of the Walmart said that weeks earlier, Atta had bought a box cutter there, but this is uncorroborated. The two then returned to the Comfort Inn, where they stayed for hours.

=== Day of the attacks ===
At 5:33 a.m. on September 11, al-Omari and Atta checked out of the hotel. al-Omari made another cash withdrawal at the Pizzeria Uno ATM, and then the two went to Portland International Jetport. At around 5:40, the two spoke with a ticket agent, who raised no suspicions about them. Both men boarded their flight, which landed in Logan International Airport at 6:45. Eight other hijackers were waiting at the airport. It is unknown why this connecting flight through Portland happened, especially because the two almost missed their flight at Logan. Their flight, American 11, was supposed to fly to Los Angeles.

Atta and al-Omari then boarded Flight 11 with fellow hijackers Satam al-Suqami, Wail al-Shehri, and Waleed al-Shehri. The other hijackers at the airport went on United Airlines Flight 175. al-Omari&#x27;s passport, which would identify him as a hijacker to investigators later, was in the two men&#x27;s aforementioned luggage; this luggage was accidentally left at Portland International Airport, failing to make it onto the connecting flight to Logan. The two men probably decided they did not need the luggage&#x27;s folding knife and pepper spray in their attacks. Atta and al-Omari had seats next to each other in first class, row 8, on Flight 11. The flight left the Logan runway at 7:59. The hijackers took over the plane starting at 8:14, when multiple passengers were maced and stabbed. Atta then commanded the plane&#x27;s controls, and at 8:37, the plane began a rapid descent. At 8:46, it was crashed into the World Trade Center&#x27;s North Tower, and everyone onboard was killed. Floors 93 to 99 were impacted, and many inside died.

==Aftermath==
Controversy over the identity of al-Omari erupted shortly after the attacks. At first, the FBI had named Abdul Rahman al-Omari, a pilot for Saudi Arabian Airlines, as the pilot of Flight 11. It was quickly shown that this person was still alive, and the FBI issued an apology. It was also quickly determined that Mohamed Atta was the pilot among the hijackers. The FBI then named Abdulaziz al-Omari as a hijacker.
A man with the same name as those given by the FBI turned up alive in Saudi Arabia, saying that he had studied at the University of Denver and his passport was stolen there in 1995. The name, origin, birth date, and occupation were released by the FBI, but the picture was not of him. &quot;I couldn&#x27;t believe it when the FBI put me on their list&quot;, he said. &quot;They gave my name and my date of birth, but I am not a suicide bomber. I am here. I am alive. I have no idea how to fly a plane. I had nothing to do with this.&quot;

The FBI gave a press conference on October 5, 2001, where they gave details regarding Atta and the real al-Omari&#x27;s movements on September 10 and 11.

==See also==
* PENTTBOM
* Hijackers in the 11 September attacks

==References==
==External links==
* The Final 9/11 Commission Report
* portal.telegraph.co.uk (Article which reports that the Saudi Arabian Airlines pilot named Omari was not involved with the terrorist attacks)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q317494" start="0" end="18" title="Abdulaziz al-Omari" label="Abdulaziz al-Omari"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="29" end="43" title="transliteration" label="transliterated"/>
<link wikidata="Q317494" start="47" end="54" title="Abdulaziz al-Omari" label="Alomari"/>
<link wikidata="Q317494" start="58" end="66" title="Abdulaziz al-Omari" label="al-Umari"/>
<link wikidata="Q125482" start="113" end="117" title="imam" label="imam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="152" end="161" title="Hijackers in the September 11 attacks#Hijackers" label="hijackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11694" start="165" end="192" title="American Airlines Flight 11" label="American Airlines Flight 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="208" end="228" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105411" start="319" end="337" title="Al-Qassim Province" label="al-Qassim province"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="357" end="370" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918599" start="424" end="436" title="Visa policy of the United States" label="Visa Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q11694" start="486" end="513" title="American Airlines Flight 11" label="American Airlines Flight 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="604" end="622" title="World Trade Center (1973-2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q779855" start="781" end="786" title="ʽAsir Province" label="Aseer"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="788" end="800" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414493" start="841" end="855" title="Wail al-Shehri" label="Wail al-Shehri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529866" start="860" end="876" title="Waleed al-Shehri" label="Waleed al-Shehri"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="902" end="922" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3716653" start="1007" end="1048" title="Imam Muhammad ibn Saud Islamic University" label="Imam Muhammad ibn Saud Islamic University"/>
<link wikidata="Q125482" start="1126" end="1130" title="imam" label="imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="1138" end="1144" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105411" start="1148" end="1166" title="Al-Qassim Province" label="al-Qassim province"/>
<link wikidata="Q163140" start="1207" end="1216" title="Wahhabism" label="Wahhabism"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="1354" end="1360" title="Clergy" label="cleric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364237" start="1361" end="1378" title="Sulaiman Al-Alwan" label="Sulayman al Alwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13566073" start="1394" end="1410" title="Walid bin Attash" label="Walid bin Attash"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="1485" end="1493" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441035" start="1561" end="1581" title="Kuala Lumpur al-Qaeda Summit" label="2000 Al Qaeda Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="1585" end="1597" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="1978" end="1993" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11694" start="2103" end="2130" title="American Airlines Flight 11" label="American Airlines Flight 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235" start="2159" end="2177" title="World Trade Center (1973–2001)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704134" start="2285" end="2295" title="Al Jazeera Media Network" label="al Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="2590" end="2596" title="Sheikh" label="Sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567259" start="2726" end="2740" title="Salem al-Hazmi" label="Salem al-Hazmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="2777" end="2782" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297353" start="2963" end="2977" title="Nawaf al-Hazmi" label="Nawaf al-Hazmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q125821" start="3059" end="3083" title="George Washington Bridge" label="George Washington Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="3149" end="3169" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q969026" start="3233" end="3252" title="Vero Beach, Florida" label="Vero Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q110067" start="3429" end="3441" title="Mohamed Atta" label="Mohamed Atta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699532" start="3553" end="3569" title="Mohand al-Shehri" label="Mohand al-Shehri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050406" start="3574" end="3589" title="Saeed al-Ghamdi" label="Saeed al-Ghamdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q495974" start="3663" end="3689" title="Passaic County, New Jersey" label="Passaic County, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719766" start="3765" end="3782" title="Khalid al-Mihdhar" label="Khalid al-Mihdhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471414" start="4023" end="4038" title="Satam al-Suqami" label="Satam al-Suqami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000166" start="4215" end="4229" title="South Portland, Maine" label="South Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203558" start="4241" end="4263" title="Mohamed Atta&amp;#x27;s Nissan" label="a rented Nissan Altima"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="4346" end="4354" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q671475" start="4454" end="4481" title="Logan International Airport" label="Logan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4697" end="4708" title="Comfort Inn" label="Comfort Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364888" start="4733" end="4745" title="wake-up call" label="wake-up call"/>
<link wikidata="Q11294186" start="4795" end="4808" title="videocassette" label="videocassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418" start="4819" end="4829" title="Boeing 757" label="Boeing 757"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="4986" end="4996" title="Boeing 767" label="Boeing 767"/>
<link wikidata="Q900977" start="5136" end="5145" title="Payphone" label="pay phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q700838" start="5170" end="5186" title="Marwan al-Shehhi" label="Marwan al-Shehhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11705" start="5205" end="5231" title="United Airlines Flight 175" label="United Airlines Flight 175"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="5670" end="5674" title="volt" label="volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q324963" start="5675" end="5692" title="Power inverter" label="battery converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23769" start="5780" end="5790" title="box cutter" label="box cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432470" start="6087" end="6117" title="Portland International Jetport" label="Portland International Jetport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959248" start="6156" end="6168" title="ticket agent" label="ticket agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q541179" start="7740" end="7762" title="Saudi Arabian Airlines" label="Saudi Arabian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q110067" start="7913" end="7925" title="Mohamed Atta" label="Mohamed Atta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="8061" end="8064" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="8084" end="8096" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q519427" start="8132" end="8152" title="University of Denver" label="University of Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q43812" start="8161" end="8169" title="passport" label="passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147093" start="8725" end="8733" title="PENTTBOM" label="PENTTBOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709182" start="8736" end="8773" title="Hijackers in the September 11 attacks" label="Hijackers in the 11 September attacks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2201" wikidata="Q103854" url="?curid=2201" title="Aage Bohr">
<text>Aage Niels Bohr (; 19 June 1922 – 8 September 2009) was a Danish nuclear physicist who shared the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1975 with Ben Roy Mottelson and James Rainwater &quot;for the discovery of the connection between collective motion and particle motion in atomic nuclei and the development of the theory of the structure of the atomic nucleus based on this connection&quot;. His father was Niels Bohr.

Starting from Rainwater&#x27;s concept of an irregular-shaped liquid drop model of the nucleus, Bohr and Mottelson developed a detailed theory that was in close agreement with experiments.

Since his father, Niels Bohr, had won the prize in 1922, he and his father are one of the six pairs of fathers and sons who have both won the Nobel Prize and one of the four pairs who have both won the Nobel Prize in Physics.

== Early life and education==
Bohr was born in Copenhagen on 19 June 1922, the fourth of six sons of the physicist Niels Bohr and his wife Margrethe Bohr (née Nørlund). His oldest brother, Christian, died in a boating accident in 1934, and his youngest, Harald, was severely disabled and placed away from the home in Copenhagen at the age of four. He would later die from childhood meningitis. Of the others, Hans became a physician; Erik, a chemical engineer; and Ernest, a lawyer and Olympic athlete who played field hockey for Denmark at the 1948 Summer Olympics in London. The family lived at the Institute of Theoretical Physics at the University of Copenhagen, now known as the Niels Bohr Institute, where he grew up surrounded by physicists who were working with his father, such as Hans Kramers, Oskar Klein, Yoshio Nishina, Wolfgang Pauli and Werner Heisenberg. In 1932, the family moved to the Carlsberg Æresbolig, a mansion donated by Carl Jacobsen, the heir to Carlsberg breweries, to be used as an honorary residence by the Dane who had made the most prominent contribution to science, literature, or the arts.

Bohr went to high school at Sortedam Gymnasium in Copenhagen. In 1940, shortly after the German occupation of Denmark in April, he entered the University of Copenhagen, where he studied physics. He assisted his father, helping draft correspondence and articles related to epistemology and physics. In September 1943, word reached his family that the Nazis considered them to be Jewish, because Bohr&#x27;s grandmother, Ellen Adler Bohr, had been Jewish, and that they therefore were in danger of being arrested. The Danish resistance helped the family escape by sea to Sweden. Bohr arrived there in October 1943, and then flew to Britain on a de Havilland Mosquito operated by British Overseas Airways Corporation. The Mosquitoes were unarmed high-speed bomber aircraft that had been converted to carry small, valuable cargoes or important passengers. By flying at high speed and high altitude, they could cross German-occupied Norway, and yet avoid German fighters. Bohr, equipped with parachute, flying suit and oxygen mask, spent the three-hour flight lying on a mattress in the aircraft&#x27;s bomb bay.

On arrival in London, Bohr rejoined his father, who had flown to Britain the week before. He officially became a junior researcher at the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, but actually served as personal assistant and secretary to his father. The two worked on Tube Alloys, the British atomic bomb project. On 30 December 1943, they made the first of a number of visits to the United States, where his father was a consultant to the Manhattan Project. Due to his father&#x27;s fame, they were given false names; Bohr became James Baker, and his father, Nicholas Baker. In 1945, the director of the Los Alamos Laboratory, J. Robert Oppenheimer, asked them to review the design of the modulated neutron initiator. They reported that it would work. That they had reached this conclusion put Enrico Fermi&#x27;s concerns about the viability of the design to rest. The initiators performed flawlessly in the bombs used in the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945.

== Career ==
In August 1945, with the war ended, Bohr returned to Denmark, where he resumed his university education, graduating with a master&#x27;s degree in 1946, with a thesis concerned with some aspects of atomic stopping power problems. In early 1948, Bohr became a member of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. While paying a visit to Columbia University, he met Isidor Isaac Rabi, who sparked in him an interest in recent discoveries related to the hyperfine structure of deuterium. This led to Bohr becoming a visiting fellow at Columbia from January 1949 to August 1950. While in the United States, Bohr married Marietta Soffer on 11 March 1950. They had three children: Vilhelm, Tomas and Margrethe.

By the late 1940s it was known that the properties of atomic nuclei could not be explained by then-current models such as the liquid drop model developed by Niels Bohr amongst others. The shell model, developed in 1949 by Maria Goeppert Mayer and others, allowed some additional features to be explained, in particular the so-called magic numbers. However, there were also properties that could not be explained, including the non-spherical distribution of charge in certain nuclei. In a 1950 paper, James Rainwater of Columbia University suggested a variant of the drop model of the nucleus that could explain a non-spherical charge distribution. Rainwater&#x27;s model postulated a nucleus like a balloon with balls inside that distort the surface as they move about. He discussed the idea with Bohr, who was visiting Columbia at the time, and had independently conceived the same idea, and had, about a month after Rainwater&#x27;s submission, submitted for publication a paper that discussed the same problem, but along more general lines. Bohr imagined a rotating, irregular-shaped nucleus with a form of surface tension. Bohr developed the idea further, in 1951 publishing a paper that comprehensively treated the relationship between oscillations of the surface of the nucleus and the movement of the individual nucleons.

Upon his return to Copenhagen in 1950, Bohr began working with Ben Roy Mottelson to compare the theoretical work with experimental data. In three papers, that were published in 1952 and 1953, Bohr and Mottelson demonstrated close agreement between theory and experiment; for example, showing that the energy levels of certain nuclei could be described by a rotation spectrum. They were thereby able to reconcile the shell model with Rainwater&#x27;s concept. This work stimulated many new theoretical and experimental studies. Bohr, Mottelson and Rainwater were jointly awarded the 1975 Nobel Prize in Physics &quot;for the discovery of the connection between collective motion and particle motion in atomic nuclei and the development of the theory of the structure of the atomic nucleus based on this connection&quot;. Because his father had been awarded the prize in 1922, Bohr became one of only four pairs of fathers and sons to win the Nobel Prize in Physics.

Only after doing his Nobel Prize-winning research did Bohr receive his doctorate from the University of Copenhagen, in 1954, writing his thesis on &quot;Rotational States of Atomic Nuclei&quot;. Bohr became a professor at the University of Copenhagen in 1956, and, following his father&#x27;s death in 1962, succeeded him as director of the Niels Bohr Institute, a position he held until 1970. He remained active there until he retired in 1992. He was also a member of the board of the Nordic Institute for Theoretical Physics from its inception in 1957, and was its director from 1975 to 1981. In addition to the Nobel Prize, he won the Dannie Heineman Prize for Mathematical Physics in 1960, the Atoms for Peace Award in 1969, H. C. Ørsted Medal in 1970, Rutherford Medal and Prize in 1972, John Price Wetherill Medal in 1974, and the Ole Rømer medal in 1976. Bohr and Mottelson continued to work together, publishing a two-volume monograph, &quot;Nuclear Structure&quot;. The first volume, &quot;Single-Particle Motion,&quot; appeared in 1969; the second, &quot;Nuclear Deformations,&quot; in 1975.

In 1972 Bohr was awarded an honorary degree, doctor philos. honoris causa, at the Norwegian Institute of Technology, later part of Norwegian University of Science and Technology. He was a member of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters from 1980. Bohr was also an elected member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the American Philosophical Society, and the United States National Academy of Sciences.

In 1981, Bohr became a founding member of the World Cultural Council.

Bohr&#x27;s wife Marietta died on 2 October 1978. In 1981, he married Bente Scharff Meyer (1926–2011). His son, Tomas Bohr, is a professor of physics at the Technical University of Denmark, working in the area of fluid dynamics. Aage Bohr died in Copenhagen on 9 September 2009. He was survived by his second wife and children.

Bohr&#x27;s Nobel Prize medal was sold at auction in November 2011. It was subsequently sold at auction in April 2019 for $90,000.

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
*

== External links ==
* including the Nobel Lecture, 11 December 1975: &quot;Rotational Motion in Nuclei&quot;
* Oral History interview transcript with Aage Bohr 23 &amp; 30 January 1963, American Institute of Physics, Niels Bohr Library and Archives</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q103854" start="0" end="15" title="Aage Bohr" label="Aage Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="65" end="82" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="98" end="120" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q107423" start="134" end="151" title="Ben Mottelson" label="Ben Roy Mottelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q190745" start="156" end="171" title="James Rainwater" label="James Rainwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="263" end="276" title="atomic nuclei" label="atomic nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="397" end="407" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="472" end="489" title="Semi-empirical mass formula#The liquid drop model and its analysis" label="liquid drop model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="874" end="884" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="942" end="952" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q22231147" start="966" end="980" title="Margrethe Bohr" label="Margrethe Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505347" start="1292" end="1298" title="Ernest Bohr" label="Ernest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="1340" end="1352" title="field hockey" label="field hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8403" start="1372" end="1392" title="1948 Summer Olympics" label="1948 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="1468" end="1492" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q263761" start="1511" end="1531" title="Niels Bohr Institute" label="Niels Bohr Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q451225" start="1617" end="1629" title="Hans Kramers" label="Hans Kramers"/>
<link wikidata="Q251524" start="1631" end="1642" title="Oskar Klein" label="Oskar Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q561569" start="1644" end="1658" title="Yoshio Nishina" label="Yoshio Nishina"/>
<link wikidata="Q65989" start="1660" end="1674" title="Wolfgang Pauli" label="Wolfgang Pauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="1679" end="1696" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Werner Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567053" start="1773" end="1786" title="Carl Jacobsen" label="Carl Jacobsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q113215" start="1800" end="1819" title="Carlsberg Group" label="Carlsberg breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q819136" start="2041" end="2069" title="Denmark in World War II" label="German occupation of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="2224" end="2236" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q708767" start="2468" end="2485" title="Danish resistance movement" label="Danish resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q514188" start="2504" end="2517" title="Rescue of the Danish Jews" label="escape by sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q221344" start="2595" end="2616" title="de Havilland Mosquito" label="de Havilland Mosquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q846885" start="2629" end="2665" title="British Overseas Airways Corporation" label="British Overseas Airways Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q819274" start="2864" end="2886" title="German occupation of Norway" label="German-occupied Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q797813" start="3050" end="3058" title="bomb bay" label="bomb bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513783" start="3199" end="3247" title="Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (United Kingdom)" label="Department of Scientific and Industrial Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137385" start="3338" end="3349" title="Tube Alloys" label="Tube Alloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="3363" end="3374" title="atomic bomb" label="atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="3510" end="3527" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q27832090" start="3675" end="3696" title="Los Alamos Laboratory" label="Los Alamos Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="3698" end="3719" title="J. Robert Oppenheimer" label="J. Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889759" start="3760" end="3787" title="modulated neutron initiator" label="modulated neutron initiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8753" start="3865" end="3877" title="Enrico Fermi" label="Enrico Fermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="3998" end="4039" title="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q908474" start="4268" end="4289" title="Stopping power (particle radiation)" label="atomic stopping power"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="4343" end="4371" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="4375" end="4396" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="4422" end="4441" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q165969" start="4450" end="4467" title="Isidor Isaac Rabi" label="Isidor Isaac Rabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413102" start="4537" end="4556" title="hyperfine structure" label="hyperfine structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="4560" end="4569" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="4846" end="4859" title="atomic nuclei" label="atomic nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4918" end="4935" title="Semi-empirical mass formula#The liquid drop model and its analysis" label="liquid drop model"/>
<link wikidata="Q600617" start="4980" end="4991" title="Nuclear shell model" label="shell model"/>
<link wikidata="Q57100" start="5014" end="5034" title="Maria Goeppert-Mayer" label="Maria Goeppert Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11606" start="5125" end="5138" title="Magic number (physics)" label="magic numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190745" start="5292" end="5307" title="James Rainwater" label="James Rainwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q102165" start="6111" end="6118" title="nucleon" label="nucleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q107423" start="6185" end="6202" title="Ben Mottelson" label="Ben Roy Mottelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="6709" end="6731" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q950917" start="7574" end="7614" title="Nordic Institute for Theoretical Physics" label="Nordic Institute for Theoretical Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164475" start="7726" end="7772" title="Dannie Heineman Prize for Mathematical Physics" label="Dannie Heineman Prize for Mathematical Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q757645" start="7786" end="7807" title="Atoms for Peace Award" label="Atoms for Peace Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992959" start="7817" end="7835" title="H. C. Ørsted Medal" label="H. C. Ørsted Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769551" start="7845" end="7871" title="Rutherford Medal and Prize" label="Rutherford Medal and Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q15821575" start="7881" end="7907" title="John Price Wetherill Medal" label="John Price Wetherill Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="8021" end="8030" title="monograph" label="monograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="8219" end="8234" title="honorary degree" label="honorary degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416348" start="8273" end="8306" title="Norwegian Institute of Technology" label="Norwegian Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q314536" start="8322" end="8368" title="Norwegian University of Science and Technology" label="Norwegian University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423356" start="8393" end="8433" title="Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters" label="Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="8484" end="8521" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="8527" end="8557" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="8581" end="8609" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q15278864" start="8658" end="8680" title="World Cultural Council" label="World Cultural Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269766" start="8840" end="8871" title="Technical University of Denmark" label="Technical University of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="8896" end="8910" title="fluid dynamics" label="fluid dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q120399976" start="9024" end="9041" title="Nobel Prize medal" label="Nobel Prize medal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2202" wikidata="Q134787" url="?curid=2202" title="Analytic geometry">
<text>In mathematics, analytic geometry, also known as coordinate geometry or Cartesian geometry, is the study of geometry using a coordinate system. This contrasts with synthetic geometry.

Analytic geometry is used in physics and engineering, and also in aviation, rocketry, space science, and spaceflight. It is the foundation of most modern fields of geometry, including algebraic, differential, discrete and computational geometry.

Usually the Cartesian coordinate system is applied to manipulate equations for planes, straight lines, and circles, often in two and sometimes three dimensions. Geometrically, one studies the Euclidean plane (two dimensions) and Euclidean space. As taught in school books, analytic geometry can be explained more simply: it is concerned with defining and representing geometric shapes in a numerical way and extracting numerical information from shapes&#x27; numerical definitions and representations. That the algebra of the real numbers can be employed to yield results about the linear continuum of geometry relies on the Cantor–Dedekind axiom.

==History==

===Ancient Greece===
The Greek mathematician Menaechmus solved problems and proved theorems by using a method that had a strong resemblance to the use of coordinates and it has sometimes been maintained that he had introduced analytic geometry.

Apollonius of Perga, in &quot;On Determinate Section&quot;, dealt with problems in a manner that may be called an analytic geometry of one dimension; with the question of finding points on a line that were in a ratio to the others. Apollonius in the &quot;Conics&quot; further developed a method that is so similar to analytic geometry that his work is sometimes thought to have anticipated the work of Descartes by some 1800 years. His application of reference lines, a diameter and a tangent is essentially no different from our modern use of a coordinate frame, where the distances measured along the diameter from the point of tangency are the abscissas, and the segments parallel to the tangent and intercepted between the axis and the curve are the ordinates. He further developed relations between the abscissas and the corresponding ordinates that are equivalent to rhetorical equations (expressed in words) of curves. However, although Apollonius came close to developing analytic geometry, he did not manage to do so since he did not take into account negative magnitudes and in every case the coordinate system was superimposed upon a given curve &quot;a posteriori&quot; instead of &quot;a priori&quot;. That is, equations were determined by curves, but curves were not determined by equations. Coordinates, variables, and equations were subsidiary notions applied to a specific geometric situation.

===Persia===
The 11th-century Persian mathematician Omar Khayyam saw a strong relationship between geometry and algebra and was moving in the right direction when he helped close the gap between numerical and geometric algebra with his geometric solution of the general cubic equations, but the decisive step came later with Descartes. Omar Khayyam is credited with identifying the foundations of algebraic geometry, and his book &quot;Treatise on Demonstrations of Problems of Algebra&quot; (1070), which laid down the principles of analytic geometry, is part of the body of Persian mathematics that was eventually transmitted to Europe. Because of his thoroughgoing geometrical approach to algebraic equations, Khayyam can be considered a precursor to Descartes in the invention of analytic geometry.

===Western Europe===

Analytic geometry was independently invented by René Descartes and Pierre de Fermat, although Descartes is sometimes given sole credit. &quot;Cartesian geometry&quot;, the alternative term used for analytic geometry, is named after Descartes.

Descartes made significant progress with the methods in an essay titled &quot;La Géométrie (Geometry)&quot;, one of the three accompanying essays (appendices) published in 1637 together with his &quot;Discourse on the Method for Rightly Directing One&#x27;s Reason and Searching for Truth in the Sciences&quot;, commonly referred to as &quot;Discourse on Method&quot;.

&quot;La Geometrie&quot;, written in his native French tongue, and its philosophical principles, provided a foundation for calculus in Europe. Initially the work was not well received, due, in part, to the many gaps in arguments and complicated equations. Only after the translation into Latin and the addition of commentary by van Schooten in 1649 (and further work thereafter) did Descartes&#x27;s masterpiece receive due recognition.

Pierre de Fermat also pioneered the development of analytic geometry. Although not published in his lifetime, a manuscript form of &quot;Ad locos planos et solidos isagoge&quot; (Introduction to Plane and Solid Loci) was circulating in Paris in 1637, just prior to the publication of Descartes&#x27; &quot;Discourse&quot;. Clearly written and well received, the &quot;Introduction&quot; also laid the groundwork for analytical geometry. The key difference between Fermat&#x27;s and Descartes&#x27; treatments is a matter of viewpoint: Fermat always started with an algebraic equation and then described the geometric curve that satisfied it, whereas Descartes started with geometric curves and produced their equations as one of several properties of the curves. As a consequence of this approach, Descartes had to deal with more complicated equations and he had to develop the methods to work with polynomial equations of higher degree. It was Leonhard Euler who first applied the coordinate method in a systematic study of space curves and surfaces.

==Coordinates==

In analytic geometry, the plane is given a coordinate system, by which every point has a pair of real number coordinates. Similarly, Euclidean space is given coordinates where every point has three coordinates. The value of the coordinates depends on the choice of the initial point of origin. There are a variety of coordinate systems used, but the most common are the following:

===Cartesian coordinates (in a plane or space)===

The most common coordinate system to use is the Cartesian coordinate system, where each point has an &quot;x&quot;-coordinate representing its horizontal position, and a &quot;y&quot;-coordinate representing its vertical position. These are typically written as an ordered pair (&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;). This system can also be used for three-dimensional geometry, where every point in Euclidean space is represented by an ordered triple of coordinates (&quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;, &quot;z&quot;).

===Polar coordinates (in a plane)===

In polar coordinates, every point of the plane is represented by its distance &quot;r&quot; from the origin and its angle &quot;θ&quot;, with &quot;θ&quot; normally measured counterclockwise from the positive &quot;x&quot;-axis. Using this notation, points are typically written as an ordered pair (&quot;r&quot;, &quot;θ&quot;). One may transform back and forth between two-dimensional Cartesian and polar coordinates by using these formulae: formula_1 This system may be generalized to three-dimensional space through the use of cylindrical or spherical coordinates.

===Cylindrical coordinates (in a space)===

In cylindrical coordinates, every point of space is represented by its height &quot;z&quot;, its radius &quot;r&quot; from the &quot;z&quot;-axis and the angle &quot;θ&quot; its projection on the &quot;xy&quot;-plane makes with respect to the horizontal axis.

===Spherical coordinates (in a space)===

In spherical coordinates, every point in space is represented by its distance &quot;ρ&quot; from the origin, the angle &quot;θ&quot; its projection on the &quot;xy&quot;-plane makes with respect to the horizontal axis, and the angle &quot;φ&quot; that it makes with respect to the &quot;z&quot;-axis. The names of the angles are often reversed in physics.

==Equations and curves==

In analytic geometry, any equation involving the coordinates specifies a subset of the plane, namely the solution set for the equation, or locus. For example, the equation &quot;y&quot; = &quot;x&quot; corresponds to the set of all the points on the plane whose &quot;x&quot;-coordinate and &quot;y&quot;-coordinate are equal. These points form a line, and &quot;y&quot; = &quot;x&quot; is said to be the equation for this line. In general, linear equations involving &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; specify lines, quadratic equations specify conic sections, and more complicated equations describe more complicated figures.

Usually, a single equation corresponds to a curve on the plane. This is not always the case: the trivial equation &quot;x&quot; = &quot;x&quot; specifies the entire plane, and the equation &quot;x&quot;2 + &quot;y&quot;2 = 0 specifies only the single point (0, 0). In three dimensions, a single equation usually gives a surface, and a curve must be specified as the intersection of two surfaces (see below), or as a system of parametric equations. The equation &quot;x&quot;2 + &quot;y&quot;2 = &quot;r&quot;2 is the equation for any circle centered at the origin (0, 0) with a radius of r.

===Lines and planes===

Lines in a Cartesian plane, or more generally, in affine coordinates, can be described algebraically by &quot;linear&quot; equations. In two dimensions, the equation for non-vertical lines is often given in the &quot;slope-intercept form&quot;:
formula_2
where:
* &quot;m&quot; is the slope or gradient of the line.
* &quot;b&quot; is the y-intercept of the line.
* &quot;x&quot; is the independent variable of the function &quot;y&quot; = &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;).

In a manner analogous to the way lines in a two-dimensional space are described using a point-slope form for their equations, planes in a three dimensional space have a natural description using a point in the plane and a vector orthogonal to it (the normal vector) to indicate its &quot;inclination&quot;.

Specifically, let formula_3 be the position vector of some point formula_4, and let formula_5 be a nonzero vector. The plane determined by this point and vector consists of those points formula_6, with position vector formula_7, such that the vector drawn from formula_8 to formula_6 is perpendicular to formula_10. Recalling that two vectors are perpendicular if and only if their dot product is zero, it follows that the desired plane can be described as the set of all points formula_7 such that
formula_12
(The dot here means a dot product, not scalar multiplication.)
Expanded this becomes
formula_13
 This is just a linear equation:
formula_14
Conversely, it is easily shown that if &quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, &quot;c&quot; and &quot;d&quot; are constants and &quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, and &quot;c&quot; are not all zero, then the graph of the equation
formula_15
 This familiar equation for a plane is called the &quot;general form&quot; of the equation of the plane.

In three dimensions, lines can &quot;not&quot; be described by a single linear equation, so they are frequently described by parametric equations:
formula_16
formula_17
formula_18
where:
* &quot;x&quot;, &quot;y&quot;, and &quot;z&quot; are all functions of the independent variable &quot;t&quot; which ranges over the real numbers.
* (&quot;x&quot;0, &quot;y&quot;0, &quot;z&quot;0) is any point on the line.
* &quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, and &quot;c&quot; are related to the slope of the line, such that the vector (&quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, &quot;c&quot;) is parallel to the line.

===Conic sections===
In the Cartesian coordinate system, the graph of a quadratic equation in two variables is always a conic section – though it may be degenerate, and all conic sections arise in this way. The equation will be of the form
formula_19
As scaling all six constants yields the same locus of zeros, one can consider conics as points in the five-dimensional projective space formula_20

The conic sections described by this equation can be classified using the discriminant

formula_21
If the conic is non-degenerate, then:
* if formula_22, the equation represents an ellipse;
** if formula_23 and formula_24, the equation represents a circle, which is a special case of an ellipse;
* if formula_25, the equation represents a parabola;
* if formula_26, the equation represents a hyperbola;
** if we also have formula_27, the equation represents a rectangular hyperbola.

===Quadric surfaces===

A quadric, or quadric surface, is a &quot;2&quot;-dimensional surface in 3-dimensional space defined as the locus of zeros of a quadratic polynomial. In coordinates , the general quadric is defined by the algebraic equation

formula_28

Quadric surfaces include ellipsoids (including the sphere), paraboloids, hyperboloids, cylinders, cones, and planes.

==Distance and angle==

In analytic geometry, geometric notions such as distance and angle measure are defined using formulas. These definitions are designed to be consistent with the underlying Euclidean geometry. For example, using Cartesian coordinates on the plane, the distance between two points (&quot;x&quot;1, &quot;y&quot;1) and (&quot;x&quot;2, &quot;y&quot;2) is defined by the formula
formula_29
which can be viewed as a version of the Pythagorean theorem. Similarly, the angle that a line makes with the horizontal can be defined by the formula
formula_30
where &quot;m&quot; is the slope of the line.

In three dimensions, distance is given by the generalization of the Pythagorean theorem:
formula_31
while the angle between two vectors is given by the dot product. The dot product of two Euclidean vectors A and B is defined by
formula_32
where &quot;θ&quot; is the angle between A and B.

==Transformations==
Transformations are applied to a parent function to turn it into a new function with similar characteristics.

The graph of formula_33 is changed by standard transformations as follows:
* Changing formula_34 to formula_35 moves the graph to the right formula_36 units.
* Changing formula_37 to formula_38 moves the graph up formula_39 units.
* Changing formula_34 to formula_41 stretches the graph horizontally by a factor of formula_42. (think of the formula_34 as being dilated)
* Changing formula_37 to formula_45 stretches the graph vertically.
* Changing formula_34 to formula_47 and changing formula_37 to formula_49 rotates the graph by an angle formula_50.

There are other standard transformation not typically studied in elementary analytic geometry because the transformations change the shape of objects in ways not usually considered. Skewing is an example of a transformation not usually considered.
For more information, consult the Wikipedia article on affine transformations.

For example, the parent function formula_51 has a horizontal and a vertical asymptote, and occupies the first and third quadrant, and all of its transformed forms have one horizontal and vertical asymptote, and occupies either the 1st and 3rd or 2nd and 4th quadrant. In general, if formula_52, then it can be transformed into formula_53. In the new transformed function, formula_54 is the factor that vertically stretches the function if it is greater than 1 or vertically compresses the function if it is less than 1, and for negative formula_54 values, the function is reflected in the formula_34-axis. The formula_42 value compresses the graph of the function horizontally if greater than 1 and stretches the function horizontally if less than 1, and like formula_54, reflects the function in the formula_37-axis when it is negative. The formula_39 and formula_36 values introduce translations, formula_36, vertical, and formula_39 horizontal. Positive formula_36 and formula_39 values mean the function is translated to the positive end of its axis and negative meaning translation towards the negative end.

Transformations can be applied to any geometric equation whether or not the equation represents a function.
Transformations can be considered as individual transactions or in combinations.

Suppose that formula_33 is a relation in the formula_67 plane. For example,
formula_68
is the relation that describes the unit circle.

==Finding intersections of geometric objects ==

For two geometric objects P and Q represented by the relations formula_69 and formula_70 the intersection is the collection of all points formula_71 which are in both relations.

For example, formula_6 might be the circle with radius 1 and center formula_73: formula_74 and formula_75 might be the circle with radius 1 and center formula_76. The intersection of these two circles is the collection of points which make both equations true. Does the point formula_73 make both equations true? Using formula_73 for formula_71, the equation for formula_75 becomes formula_81 or formula_82 which is true, so formula_73 is in the relation formula_75. On the other hand, still using formula_73 for formula_71 the equation for formula_6 becomes formula_88 or formula_89 which is false. formula_73 is not in formula_6 so it is not in the intersection.

The intersection of formula_6 and formula_75 can be found by solving the simultaneous equations:

formula_94
formula_95

Traditional methods for finding intersections include substitution and elimination.

Substitution: Solve the first equation for formula_37 in terms of formula_34 and then substitute the expression for formula_37 into the second equation:

formula_94
formula_100

We then substitute this value for formula_101 into the other equation and proceed to solve for formula_34:
formula_103
formula_104
formula_105
formula_106

Next, we place this value of formula_34 in either of the original equations and solve for formula_37:

formula_109
formula_110
formula_111

So our intersection has two points:
formula_112

Elimination: Add (or subtract) a multiple of one equation to the other equation so that one of the variables is eliminated. For our current example, if we subtract the first equation from the second we get formula_113. The formula_101 in the first equation is subtracted from the formula_101 in the second equation leaving no formula_37 term. The variable formula_37 has been eliminated. We then solve the remaining equation for formula_34, in the same way as in the substitution method:

formula_119
formula_105
formula_106

We then place this value of formula_34 in either of the original equations and solve for formula_37:
formula_109
formula_125
formula_111

So our intersection has two points:
formula_127

For conic sections, as many as 4 points might be in the intersection.

===Finding intercepts===

One type of intersection which is widely studied is the intersection of a geometric object with the formula_34 and formula_37 coordinate axes.

The intersection of a geometric object and the formula_37-axis is called the formula_37-intercept of the object.
The intersection of a geometric object and the formula_34-axis is called the formula_34-intercept of the object.

For the line formula_134, the parameter formula_42 specifies the point where the line crosses the formula_37 axis. Depending on the context, either formula_42 or the point formula_138 is called the formula_37-intercept.

==Geometric axis==

Axis in geometry is the perpendicular line to any line, object or a surface.

Also for this may be used the common language use as a: normal (perpendicular) line, otherwise in engineering as &quot;axial line&quot;.

In geometry, a normal is an object such as a line or vector that is perpendicular to a given object. For example, in the two-dimensional case, the normal line to a curve at a given point is the line perpendicular to the tangent line to the curve at the point.

In the three-dimensional case a surface normal, or simply normal, to a surface at a point &quot;P&quot; is a vector that is perpendicular to the tangent plane to that surface at &quot;P&quot;. The word &quot;normal&quot; is also used as an adjective: a line normal to a plane, the normal component of a force, the normal vector, etc. The concept of normality generalizes to orthogonality.

==Spherical and nonlinear planes and their tangents==
Tangent is the linear approximation of a spherical or other curved or twisted line of a function.

===Tangent lines and planes===

In geometry, the tangent line (or simply tangent) to a plane curve at a given point is the straight line that &quot;just touches&quot; the curve at that point. Informally, it is a line through a pair of infinitely close points on the curve. More precisely, a straight line is said to be a tangent of a curve at a point on the curve if the line passes through the point on the curve and has slope where &quot;f&quot;″ is the derivative of &quot;f&quot;. A similar definition applies to space curves and curves in &quot;n&quot;-dimensional Euclidean space.

As it passes through the point where the tangent line and the curve meet, called the point of tangency, the tangent line is &quot;going in the same direction&quot; as the curve, and is thus the best straight-line approximation to the curve at that point.

Similarly, the tangent plane to a surface at a given point is the plane that &quot;just touches&quot; the surface at that point. The concept of a tangent is one of the most fundamental notions in differential geometry and has been extensively generalized; see Tangent space.

==See also==
* Applied geometry
* Cross product
* Rotation of axes
* Translation of axes
* Vector space

==Notes==
==References==

===Books===
* 
* John Casey (1885) Analytic Geometry of the Point, Line, Circle, and Conic Sections, link from Internet Archive.
* Mikhail Postnikov (1982) Lectures in Geometry Semester I Analytic Geometry via Internet Archive

===Articles===
* 
* 

==External links==
* Coordinate Geometry topics with interactive animations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q134787" start="16" end="33" title="Analytic geometry" label="analytic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q134787" start="49" end="68" title="Analytic geometry" label="coordinate geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q134787" start="72" end="90" title="Analytic geometry" label="Cartesian geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="108" end="116" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210" start="125" end="142" title="coordinate system" label="coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q249148" start="164" end="182" title="synthetic geometry" label="synthetic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="214" end="221" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="226" end="237" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q765633" start="251" end="259" title="aviation" label="aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="261" end="269" title="Aerospace engineering" label="rocketry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195766" start="271" end="284" title="space science" label="space science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916" start="290" end="301" title="spaceflight" label="spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="369" end="378" title="Algebraic geometry" label="algebraic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="380" end="392" title="Differential geometry" label="differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q906377" start="394" end="402" title="Discrete geometry" label="discrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q874709" start="407" end="429" title="computational geometry" label="computational geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860722" start="1057" end="1078" title="Cantor–Dedekind axiom" label="Cantor–Dedekind axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1119" end="1124" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q451566" start="1139" end="1149" title="Menaechmus" label="Menaechmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180109" start="1340" end="1359" title="Apollonius of Perga" label="Apollonius of Perga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1370" end="1392" title="Apollonius of Perga#De Sectione Determinata" label="On Determinate Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="1743" end="1752" title="Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35900" start="2805" end="2817" title="Omar Khayyam" label="Omar Khayyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186649" start="2962" end="2979" title="geometric algebra" label="geometric algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q203565" start="3023" end="3037" title="cubic equation" label="cubic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="3150" end="3168" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="3627" end="3641" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q75655" start="3646" end="3662" title="Pierre de Fermat" label="Pierre de Fermat"/>
<link wikidata="Q210113" start="3901" end="3913" title="La Géométrie" label="La Géométrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q731224" start="4165" end="4184" title="Discourse on Method" label="Discourse on Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4241" end="4247" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="4316" end="4324" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4481" end="4486" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q767210" start="4521" end="4533" title="Frans van Schooten" label="van Schooten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="5576" end="5590" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="5727" end="5732" title="Euclidean plane" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q44946" start="5778" end="5783" title="point (geometry)" label="point"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="5798" end="5809" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="5834" end="5849" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="6182" end="6209" title="Cartesian coordinate system" label="Cartesian coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q191290" start="6399" end="6411" title="ordered pair" label="ordered pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="6526" end="6541" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q600590" start="6563" end="6577" title="Tuple" label="ordered triple"/>
<link wikidata="Q62494" start="6682" end="6699" title="polar coordinates" label="polar coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="6795" end="6800" title="angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211851" start="7210" end="7221" title="Cylindrical coordinates" label="cylindrical"/>
<link wikidata="Q203218" start="7225" end="7234" title="Spherical coordinates" label="spherical"/>
<link wikidata="Q211851" start="7296" end="7319" title="cylindrical coordinates" label="cylindrical coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q173817" start="7390" end="7396" title="radius" label="radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="7447" end="7452" title="angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="7709" end="7714" title="angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11345" start="8005" end="8013" title="equation" label="equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="8052" end="8058" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751685" start="8084" end="8096" title="solution set" label="solution set"/>
<link wikidata="Q211548" start="8118" end="8123" title="locus (mathematics)" label="locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="8326" end="8330" title="line (geometry)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q41299" start="8494" end="8512" title="quadratic equation" label="quadratic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="8522" end="8535" title="conic section" label="conic section"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="8649" end="8654" title="curve" label="curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505239" start="8925" end="8932" title="Surface (mathematics)" label="surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q185837" start="8971" end="8983" title="Intersection (set theory)" label="intersection"/>
<link wikidata="Q35889" start="9031" end="9050" title="parametric equation" label="parametric equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="9232" end="9247" title="Cartesian plane" label="Cartesian plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q382698" start="9271" end="9289" title="affine coordinates" label="affine coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q484637" start="9438" end="9458" title="slope-intercept form" label="slope-intercept form"/>
<link wikidata="Q275447" start="9506" end="9511" title="slope" label="slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q275447" start="9515" end="9523" title="slope" label="gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q287239" start="9560" end="9571" title="y-intercept" label="y-intercept"/>
<link wikidata="Q320723" start="9608" end="9628" title="independent variable" label="independent variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q273176" start="9943" end="9956" title="normal vector" label="normal vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="10532" end="10543" title="dot product" label="dot product"/>
<link wikidata="Q484637" start="10622" end="10637" title="linear equation" label="linear equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35889" start="11108" end="11127" title="parametric equation" label="parametric equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="11495" end="11501" title="vector (geometric)" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="11602" end="11629" title="Cartesian coordinate system" label="Cartesian coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="11635" end="11640" title="Graph of a function" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q41299" start="11646" end="11664" title="quadratic equation" label="quadratic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q877775" start="11944" end="11960" title="projective space" label="projective space"/>
<link wikidata="Q192487" start="12047" end="12059" title="discriminant" label="discriminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="12154" end="12161" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="12222" end="12228" title="circle" label="circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48297" start="12312" end="12320" title="parabola" label="parabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q165301" start="12365" end="12374" title="hyperbola" label="hyperbola"/>
<link wikidata="Q165301" start="12433" end="12454" title="hyperbola" label="rectangular hyperbola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505239" start="12543" end="12550" title="Surface (mathematics)" label="surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q211548" start="12589" end="12594" title="locus (mathematics)" label="locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214604" start="12598" end="12603" title="root of a function" label="zeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q50695" start="12609" end="12629" title="quadratic polynomial" label="quadratic polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q50698" start="12686" end="12704" title="algebraic equation" label="algebraic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190046" start="12743" end="12752" title="ellipsoid" label="ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="12769" end="12775" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q192768" start="12778" end="12788" title="paraboloid" label="paraboloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q505628" start="12791" end="12802" title="hyperboloid" label="hyperboloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q34132" start="12805" end="12813" title="cylinder (geometry)" label="cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42344" start="12816" end="12821" title="cones" label="cones"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="12827" end="12833" title="plane (geometry)" label="planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q126017" start="12908" end="12916" title="distance" label="distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="12921" end="12926" title="angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q976981" start="12953" end="12960" title="formula" label="formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q162886" start="13031" end="13049" title="Euclidean geometry" label="Euclidean geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="13070" end="13091" title="Cartesian coordinates" label="Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="13285" end="13304" title="Pythagorean theorem" label="Pythagorean theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q275447" start="13433" end="13438" title="slope" label="slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="13605" end="13616" title="dot product" label="dot product"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="13719" end="13724" title="angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q382497" start="14732" end="14754" title="affine transformations" label="affine transformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="19461" end="19469" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q205034" start="19526" end="19539" title="perpendicular" label="perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q131251" start="19678" end="19690" title="tangent line" label="tangent line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505239" start="19790" end="19797" title="Surface (mathematics)" label="surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="19828" end="19834" title="vector (geometry)" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q205034" start="19843" end="19856" title="perpendicular" label="perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q909601" start="19864" end="19877" title="Tangent space" label="tangent plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="19972" end="19976" title="line (geometry)" label="line"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="19989" end="19994" title="plane (geometry)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="20022" end="20027" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q215067" start="20093" end="20106" title="orthogonality" label="orthogonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="20297" end="20305" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="20355" end="20360" title="curve" label="curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q44946" start="20372" end="20377" title="Point (geometry)" label="point"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="20385" end="20398" title="straight line" label="straight line"/>
<link wikidata="Q193885" start="20497" end="20513" title="infinitesimal" label="infinitely close"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="20718" end="20728" title="derivative" label="derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="20779" end="20790" title="space curve" label="space curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="20832" end="20847" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505239" start="21140" end="21147" title="Surface (mathematics)" label="surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q222032" start="21172" end="21177" title="Plane (mathematics)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="21302" end="21323" title="differential geometry" label="differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q909601" start="21366" end="21379" title="Tangent space" label="Tangent space"/>
<link wikidata="Q33521" start="21397" end="21413" title="Applied geometry" label="Applied geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q178192" start="21416" end="21429" title="Cross product" label="Cross product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370311" start="21432" end="21448" title="Rotation of axes" label="Rotation of axes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25080698" start="21451" end="21470" title="Translation of axes" label="Translation of axes"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="21473" end="21485" title="Vector space" label="Vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699566" start="21530" end="21540" title="John Casey (mathematician)" label="John Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="21624" end="21640" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q450864" start="21644" end="21661" title="Mikhail Postnikov" label="Mikhail Postnikov"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2204" wikidata="Q8196" url="?curid=2204" title="Arabic alphabet">
<text>The Arabic alphabet, or the Arabic abjad, is the Arabic script as specifically codified for writing the Arabic language. It is a unicameral script written from right-to-left in a cursive style, and includes 28 letters, of which most have contextual letterforms. Unlike the modern Latin alphabet, the script has no concept of letter case. The Arabic alphabet is considered an abjad, with only consonants required to be written; due to its optional use of diacritics to notate vowels, it is considered an impure abjad.

==Letters==

The basic Arabic alphabet contains 28 letters. Forms using the Arabic script to write other languages added and removed letters: for example ⟨پ⟩ is often used to represent in adaptations of the Arabic script. Unlike Greek-derived alphabets, Arabic has no distinct upper and lower case letterforms.

Many letters look similar but are distinguished from one another by dots () above or below their central part (). These dots are an integral part of a letter, since they distinguish between letters that represent different sounds. For example, the Arabic letters , , and have the same basic shape, but with one dot added below, two dots added above, and three dots added above respectively. The letter also has the same form in initial and medial forms, with one dot added above, though it is somewhat different in its isolated and final forms. Historically, they were often omitted, in a writing style called rasm.

Both printed and written Arabic are cursive, with most letters within a word directly joined to adjacent letters.

===Alphabetical order===
There are two main collating sequences (&#x27;alphabetical orderings&#x27;) for the Arabic alphabet: , and .

The Hija&#x27;i order ( ) is the more common order and it is used when sorting lists of words and names, such as in phonebooks, classroom lists, and dictionaries. 

The original order ( ) derives from that used by the Phoenician alphabet and therefore resembles the sequence of letters in Hebrew and Greek. Letters are also assigned numerical values (abjad numerals) for purposes of numerology, as is done in Hebrew gematria and Greek isopsephy. Letters in the Hija&#x27;i order are not considered to have numerical values.

==== Hija&#x27;i ====
Modern dictionaries and reference books use the Hija&#x27;i alphabetical order instead of the Abjadi alphabetical order, in which letters are arranged mainly by similarity of shape. The Hija&#x27;i order is never used as numerals.

A different order was used in the Maghreb but is now considered obsolete. The sequence is:

The al-Iklīl order, now obsolete, also arranged letters mainly by shape. It was first used in the 10th-century work &quot;Kitāb al-Iklīl&quot;. The sequence is:


==== Abjadi ====
The Abjadi order is not a simple correspondence with the earlier north Semitic alphabetic order, as it has a position corresponding to the Aramaic letter &quot;samek&quot; , which has no cognate letter in the Arabic alphabet historically. The abjadi order is the usual Arabic order in dictionaries and reference books of the late 1st millennium to the early 2nd millennium.

The loss of was compensated for by:

* In the Mashriqi abjad sequence, the letter took the place of , and the letter took place of &quot;šīn&quot; .
* In the Maghrebi abjad sequence, the letter &quot;ṣāḏē&quot; was split into two independent Arabic letters, and , with the latter taking the place of .

The six other letters that do not correspond to any north Semitic letter are placed at the end.

This is commonly vocalized as follows:

Another vocalization is:


This can be vocalized as:

===Letter forms===

The Arabic alphabet is always cursive and letters vary in shape depending on their position within a word. Letters can exhibit up to four distinct forms corresponding to an initial, medial (middle), final, or isolated position (IMFI). While some letters show considerable variations, others remain almost identical across all four positions. Generally, letters in the same word are linked together on both sides by short horizontal lines, but six letters () can only be linked to their preceding letter. In addition, some letter combinations are written as ligatures (special shapes), notably , which is the only mandatory ligature (the unligated combination is considered difficult to read).

====Table of basic letters====
Notes
* See the article &quot;Romanization of Arabic&quot; for details on various transliteration schemes. Arabic language speakers may usually not follow a standardized scheme when transcribing words or names. Some Arabic letters which do not have an equivalent in English (such as ط) are often spelled as numbers when Romanized. Also names are regularly transcribed as pronounced locally, not as pronounced in Literary Arabic (if they were of Arabic origin).
* Regarding pronunciation, the phonemic values given are those of Modern Standard Arabic, which is taught in schools and universities. In practice, pronunciation may vary considerably from region to region. For more details concerning the pronunciation of Arabic, consult the articles &quot;Arabic phonology&quot; and &quot;varieties of Arabic&quot;.
* The names of the Arabic letters can be thought of as abstractions of an older version where they were meaningful words in the Proto-Semitic language. 
* Six letters () do not have a distinct medial form and have to be written with their final form without being connected to the next letter. Their initial form matches the isolated form. The following letter is written in its initial form, or isolated form if it is the final letter in the word.
* The letter originated in the Phoenician alphabet as a consonant-sign indicating a glottal stop. Today it has lost its function as a consonant, and, together with and , is a &quot;mater lectionis&quot;, a consonant sign standing in for a long vowel (see below), or as support for certain diacritics ( and &quot;&quot;).
* Arabic currently uses a punctuation mark called the () to denote the glottal stop , written alone or with a carrier:
** alone: 
** with a carrier: (above or under an ), (above a ), (above a dotless or ).

:In academic work, the hamza is transliterated with the modifier letter right half ring (ʾ) or () on Wiktionary, while the modifier letter left half ring (ʿ) or () on Wiktionary, transliterates the letter &quot;&quot; (), which represents a different sound, not found in English.
:The hamza has a single form, since it is never linked to a preceding or following letter. However, it is sometimes combined with a , , or , and in that case the carrier behaves like an ordinary , , or , check the table below:

==== Hamza forms ====
The Hamza (glottal stop) can be written either alone, as if it were a letter, or with a carrier, when it becomes a diacritic. () indicates a long + sound as in &quot;sorry&quot;, while the other Hamzas indicate the glottal stop in different positions of the word as in and , the writing of the Hamza is based on a set of rules, For the writing rule of each form, check Hamza&quot;.&quot;

====Modified letters====
The following are not individual letters, but rather different contextual variants of some of the Arabic letters.

===Long vowels===
In the fully vocalized Arabic text found in texts such as the Quran, a long following a consonant other than a &quot;&quot; is written with a short sign () on the consonant plus an after it; long is written as a sign for short () plus a ; and long as a sign for short () plus a . Briefly, = ; = ; and = . Long following a may be represented by an or by a free followed by an (two consecutive s are never allowed in Arabic).

The table below shows vowels placed above or below a dotted circle replacing a primary consonant letter or a &quot;&quot; sign. For clarity in the table, the primary letters on the left used to mark these long vowels are shown only in their isolated form. Most consonants do connect to the left with , and written then with their medial or final form. Additionally, the letter in the last row may connect to the letter on its left, and then will use a medial or initial form. Use the table of primary letters to look at their actual glyph and joining types.

In unvocalized text (one in which the short vowels are not marked), the long vowels are represented by the vowel in question: , , or . Long vowels written in the middle of a word of unvocalized text are treated like consonants with a (see below) in a text that has full diacritics. Here also, the table shows long vowel letters only in isolated form for clarity.

Combinations and are always pronounced and respectively. The exception is the suffix in verb endings where is silent, resulting in or . In addition, when transliterating names and loanwords, Arabic language speakers write out most or all the vowels as long ( with , and with , and and with ), meaning it approaches a true alphabet.

===Diphthongs===
The diphthongs and are represented in vocalized text as follows:
A final &quot;is usually&quot; written at the end of words for &quot;nisba&quot; ( &#x27;) which is a common suffix to form adjectives of relation or pertinence. The suffix is &#x27; for masculine ( &#x27; for feminine); for example &#x27; &quot;socialist&quot;, it is also used for a singulative ending that applies to human or other sentient beings as in &quot;jundiyy&quot; &quot;a soldier&quot;. However nowadays this final is mostly pronounced with a long () &#x27; as in &#x27; instead of &#x27; . A similar mistake happens at the end of some third person plural verbs as in &#x27; &quot;they ran&quot; which is pronounced nowadays as &quot;&quot; . 

=== Ligatures ===

The use of ligature in Arabic is common. There is one compulsory ligature, that for ل + ا, which exists in two forms. All other ligatures, of which there are many, are optional.

A more complex ligature that combines as many as seven distinct components is commonly used to represent the word . The only ligature within the primary range of Arabic script in Unicode (U+06xx) is + . This is the only one compulsory for fonts and word-processing. Other ranges are for compatibility to older standards and contain other ligatures, which are optional.

Note: Unicode also has in its Presentation Form B FExx range a code for this ligature. If your browser and font are configured correctly for Arabic, the ligature displayed above should be identical to this one, codice_1
== Diacritics ==

Users of Arabic usually write long vowels but omit short ones, so readers must utilize their knowledge of the language in order to supply the missing vowels. However, in the education system and particularly in classes on Arabic grammar these vowels are used since they are crucial to the grammar. An Arabic sentence can have a completely different meaning by a subtle change of the vowels. This is why in an important text such as the the three basic vowel signs are mandated, like the Arabic diacritics and other types of marks, like the cantillation signs.

===Short vowels===
In the Arabic handwriting of everyday use, in general publications, and on street signs, short vowels are typically not written. On the other hand, copies of the cannot be endorsed by the religious institutes that review them unless the diacritics are included. Children&#x27;s books, elementary school texts, and Arabic-language grammars in general will include diacritics to some degree. These are known as &quot;vocalized&quot; texts.

Short vowels may be written with diacritics placed above or below the consonant that precedes them in the syllable, called . All Arabic vowels, long and short, follow a consonant; in Arabic, words like &quot;Ali&quot; or &quot;alif&quot;, for example, start with a consonant: , .

=== Nunation ===
Nunation ( ) is the addition of a final   to a noun or adjective. The vowel before it indicates grammatical case. In written Arabic nunation is indicated by doubling the vowel diacritic at the end of the word; e.g. &quot;thank you&quot;. 
=== Gemination ===
Gemination is the doubling of a consonant. Instead of writing the letter twice, Arabic places a &quot;W&quot;-shaped sign called , above it. Note that if a vowel occurs between the two consonants the letter will simply be written twice. The diacritic only appears where the consonant at the end of one syllable is identical to the initial consonant of the following syllable. (The generic term for such diacritical signs is ), &quot;e. g.&quot;, (with full diacritics: ) is a Form I verb meaning &quot;to study&quot;, whereas (with full diacritics: ) is the corresponding Form II verb, with the middle consonant doubled, meaning &quot;to teach&quot;.

===Vowel omission===
An Arabic syllable can be open (ending with a vowel) or closed (ending with a consonant):
* open: CV [consonant-vowel] (long or short vowel)
* closed: CVC (short vowel only)

A normal text is composed only of a series of consonants plus vowel-lengthening letters; thus, the word &quot;qalb&quot;, &quot;heart&quot;, is written &quot;qlb&quot;, and the word &quot;qalaba&quot; &quot;he turned around&quot;, is also written &quot;qlb&quot;. To write &quot;qalaba&quot; without this ambiguity, we could indicate that the &quot;l&quot; is followed by a short &quot;a&quot; by writing a &quot;fatḥah&quot; above it. 

To write &quot;qalb&quot;, we would instead indicate that the &quot;l&quot; is followed by no vowel by marking it with a diacritic called &quot;sukūn&quot; (), like this: . This is one step down from full vocalization, where the vowel after the &quot;q&quot; would also be indicated by a &quot;fatḥah&quot;: .

The &quot;Qurʾān&quot; is traditionally written in full vocalization.

The long &quot;i&quot; sound in some editions of the &quot;Qur’ān&quot; is written with a &quot;kasrah&quot; followed by a diacritic-less &quot;y&quot;, and long &quot;u&quot; by a &quot;ḍammah&quot; followed by a bare &quot;w&quot;. In others, these &quot;y&quot; and &quot;w&quot; carry a &quot;sukūn&quot;. Outside of the &quot;Qur’ān&quot;, the latter convention is extremely rare, to the point that &quot;y&quot; with &quot;sukūn&quot; will be unambiguously read as the diphthong , and &quot;w&quot; with &quot;sukūn&quot; will be read .

For example, the letters can be read like English &quot;meel&quot; or &quot;mail&quot;, or (theoretically) also like &quot;mayyal&quot; or &quot;mayil&quot;. But if a &quot;sukūn&quot; is added on the &quot;y&quot; then the &quot;m&quot; cannot have a &quot;sukūn&quot; (because two letters in a row cannot be &quot;sukūn&quot;ated), cannot have a &quot;ḍammah&quot; (because there is never an &quot;uy&quot; sound in Arabic unless there is another vowel after the &quot;y&quot;), and cannot have a &quot;kasrah&quot; (because &quot;kasrah&quot; before &quot;sukūn&quot;ated &quot;y&quot; is never found outside the &quot;Qur’ān&quot;), so it &quot;must&quot; have a &quot;fatḥah&quot; and the only possible pronunciation is (meaning mile, or even e-mail). By the same token, m-y-t with a &quot;sukūn&quot; over the &quot;y&quot; can be &quot;mayt&quot; but not &quot;mayyit&quot; or &quot;meet&quot;, and m-w-t with a &quot;sukūn&quot; on the &quot;w&quot; can only be &quot;mawt&quot;, not &quot;moot&quot; (&quot;iw&quot; is impossible when the &quot;w&quot; closes the syllable).

Vowel marks are always written as if the &quot;i‘rāb&quot; vowels were in fact pronounced, even when they must be skipped in actual pronunciation. So, when writing the name &quot;Aḥmad&quot;, it is optional to place a &quot;sukūn&quot; on the &quot;ḥ&quot;, but a &quot;sukūn&quot; is forbidden on the &quot;d&quot;, because it would carry a &quot;ḍammah&quot; if any other word followed, as in &quot;Aḥmadu zawjī&quot; &quot;Ahmad is my husband&quot;.

Another example: the sentence that in correct literary Arabic must be pronounced &quot;Aḥmadu zawjun shirrīr&quot; &quot;Ahmad is a wicked husband&quot;, is usually pronounced (due to influence from vernacular Arabic varieties) as &quot;Aḥmad zawj shirrīr&quot;. Yet, for the purposes of Arabic grammar and orthography, is treated as if it were not mispronounced and as if yet another word followed it, i.e., if adding any vowel marks, they must be added as if the pronunciation were &quot;Aḥmadu zawjun sharrīrun&quot; with a &quot;tanwīn&quot; &#x27;un&#x27; at the end. So, it is correct to add an &quot;un&quot; &quot;tanwīn&quot; sign on the final &quot;r&quot;, but actually pronouncing it would be a hypercorrection. Also, it is never correct to write a &quot;sukūn&quot; on that &quot;r&quot;, even though in actual pronunciation it is (and in correct Arabic MUST be) &quot;sukūn&quot;ed.

Of course, if the correct &quot;i‘rāb&quot; is a &quot;sukūn&quot;, it may be optionally written.
The &quot;sukūn&quot; is also used for transliterating words into the Arabic script. The English name &quot;Mark&quot; is written , for example, might be written with a &quot;sukūn&quot; above the to signify that there is no vowel sound between that letter and the .

=== Additional Diacritics ===
These diacritics are uncommon in modern publications but are often used in Quran and some manuscripts.

ٰThe alif khanjariyyah (, &#x27;dagger ’alif&#x27;) is written as short vertical stroke on top of a letter. It indicates a long sound for which &quot;&quot; is normally not written. For example: (&#x27;) or (&#x27;).

The Wasla or (, &#x27;hamza of connection&#x27;) is a variant of the letter &quot;hamza&quot; () resembling part of the letter  () that is rarely placed over the letter  ( &quot;ʾalif al-waṣl&quot; ()) to form () at the beginning of the word (). It indicates that the  is not pronounced as a glottal stop (written as the &quot;hamza&quot;), but that the word is connected to the previous word (like liaison in French). Outside of vocalised liturgical texts, the is usually not written. e.g. Abdullah can be written with hamzat al-wasl on the first letter of the word but it is mostly written without it .

==Additional letters==
===Regional variations===
Some letters take a traditionally different form in specific regions:

===Non-standard letters===
Some modified letters are used to represent non-native sounds to Modern Standard Arabic. These letters are used as an optional alternative in transliterated names, loanwords and dialectal words. The usage of these letters depends on the writer and their country of origin and their usage is not mandatory.

The phoneme (considered a standard pronunciation of in Egypt, Oman, and coastal Yemen) has the highest number of variations when writing loanwords or foreign proper nouns in Literary Arabic, and it can be written with either the standard letters , , , and or with the non-standard letters (used only in Tunisia and Algeria), (used only in Morocco), and (used mainly in Iraq) for example &quot;Golf&quot; pronounced can be written , , , , , or depending on the writer and their country of origin. On the other hand, is considered a native phoneme in most Arabic dialects, either as a reflex of as in lower Egypt, parts of Oman and parts of Yemen (e.g. ) or as a reflex of as in most of the Arabian peninsula, Iraq, Sudan, and parts of Egypt, Levant and North Africa (e.g. ).
Note: The sounds and are non-native to most Arabic dialects (excl. Anatolian Arabic where &quot;Wolf&quot; is pronounced vīp instead of Standard Arabic ), while , and appear as a native phoneme or allophone in many dialects.

===Used in languages other than Arabic===
== Numerals ==


There are two main kinds of numerals used along with Arabic text; Western Arabic numerals and Eastern Arabic numerals. In most of present-day North Africa, the usual Western Arabic numerals are used. Like Western Arabic numerals, in Eastern Arabic numerals, the units are always right-most, and the highest value left-most. Eastern Arabic numbers are written from left to right.

===Letters as numerals===
In addition, the Arabic alphabet can be used to represent numbers (Abjad numerals). This usage is based on the order of the alphabet. is 1, is 2, is 3, and so on until = 10, = 20, = 30, ..., = 200, ..., = 1000. This is sometimes used to produce chronograms.

== History ==
The Arabic alphabet can be traced back to the Nabataean script used to write Nabataean Aramaic. A transitional phase, between the Nabataean Aramaic script and a subsequent, recognizably Arabic script, is known as Nabataean Arabic. The pre-Islamic phase of the script as it existed in the fifth and sixth centuries, once it had become recognizably similar to the script as it came to be known in the Islamic era, is known as Paleo-Arabic.

The first known text in the Arabic alphabet is a late fourth-century inscription from 50 km east of in Jordan, but the Zabad trilingual inscription is the earliest dated Arabic text from 512, and was discovered in Syria. Nevertheless, the epigraphic record is extremely sparse. Later, dots were added above and below the letters to differentiate them. (The Aramaic language had fewer phonemes than the Arabic, and some originally distinct Aramaic letters had become indistinguishable in shape, so that in the early writings 14 distinct letter-shapes had to do duty for 28 sounds; cf. the similarly ambiguous Book Pahlavi.)

The first surviving document that definitely uses these dots is also the first surviving Arabic papyrus (PERF 558), dated April 643, although they did not become obligatory until much later. Important texts were and still are frequently memorized, especially in Qurʾan memorization.

Later still, vowel marks and the hamza were introduced, beginning some time in the latter half of the 7th century, preceding the first invention of Syriac and Tiberian vocalizations. Initially, this was done by a system of red dots, said to have been commissioned in the Umayyad era by Abu al-Aswad al-Du&#x27;ali, a dot above = , a dot below = , a dot on the line = , and doubled dots indicated nunation. However, this was cumbersome and easily confusable with the letter-distinguishing dots, so about 100 years later, the modern system was adopted. The system was finalized around 786 by al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Farahidi.

=== Other tributes and alphabets written in Arabic dialects ===
Arabic dialects were written in different alphabets before the spread of the Arabic alphabet currently in use. The most important of these alphabets and inscriptions are the Safaitic inscriptions, amounting to 30,000 inscriptions discovered in the Levant desert.

There are about 3,700 inscriptions in Hismaic in central Jordan and northwest of the Arabian Peninsula, and Nabataean inscriptions, the most important of which are the Umm al-Jimal I inscription and the Numara inscription. 

=== Arabic printing ===
Medieval Arabic blockprinting flourished from the 10th century until the 14th. It was devoted to tiny texts, which were usually used in amulets.

In 1514, following Johannes Gutenberg&#x27;s invention of the printing press in 1450, Gregorio de Gregorii, a Venetian, published an entire book of hours in Arabic script; it was entitled &quot;Kitab Salat al-Sawa&#x27;i&quot; and was intended for eastern Christian communities. Between 1580 and 1586, type designer Robert Granjon designed Arabic typefaces for Cardinal Ferdinando de&#x27; Medici, and the Medici Oriental Press published many Christian prayer and scholarly Arabic texts in the late 16th century.

Maronite monks at Monastery of Qozhaya on Mount Lebanon published the first Arabic books to use movable type in the Middle East. The monks employed Garshuni, the practice of writing Arabic using the Syriac script, usually by Christians.

Although Napoleon generally receives credit for introducing the printing press to Egypt during his invasion of the country in 1798, and though he did indeed bring printing presses and Arabic presses to print the French occupation&#x27;s official newspaper &quot;Al-Tanbiyyah&quot; &quot;The Courier,&quot; printing in the Arabic language had started several centuries earlier. A goldsmith (like Gutenberg) designed and implemented an Arabic script movable type printing press in the Middle East. The Lebanese Melkite monk Abdallah Zakher set up an Arabic printing press using movable type at the monastery of Saint John at the town of Dhour El Shuwayr in Mount Lebanon, the first homemade press in Lebanon using Arabic script. He cut the type molds and founded the typeface. The first book came off his press in 1734; this press continued in use until 1899.

== Computers ==
The Arabic alphabet can be encoded using several character sets, including ISO-8859-6, Windows-1256 and Unicode, the latter of which contains the &quot;Arabic segment&quot;, entries U+0600 to U+06FF. However, none of the sets indicates the form that each character should take in context. It is left to the rendering engine to select the proper glyph to display for each character.

Each letter has a position-independent encoding in Unicode, and the rendering software can infer the correct glyph form (initial, medial, final or isolated) from its joining context. That is the current recommendation. However, for compatibility with previous standards, the initial, medial, final and isolated forms can also be encoded separately.

===Unicode===

As of Unicode , the Arabic script is contained in the following blocks:
* Arabic (0600–06FF, 256 characters)
* Arabic Supplement (0750–077F, 48 characters)
* Arabic Extended-A (08A0–08FF, 96 characters)
* Arabic Extended-B (0870–089F, 42 characters)
* Arabic Extended-C (10EC0–10EFF, 7 characters)
* Arabic Presentation Forms-A (FB50–FDFF, 631 characters)
* Arabic Presentation Forms-B (FE70–FEFF, 141 characters)
* Rumi Numeral Symbols (10E60–10E7F, 31 characters)
* Indic Siyaq Numbers (1EC70–1ECBF, 68 characters)
* Ottoman Siyaq Numbers (1ED00–1ED4F, 61 characters)
* Arabic Mathematical Alphabetic Symbols (1EE00—1EEFF, 143 characters)

The basic Arabic range encodes the standard letters and diacritics but does not encode contextual forms (U+0621-U+0652 being directly based on ISO 8859-6). It also includes the most common diacritics and Arabic-Indic digits. U+06D6 to U+06ED encode Qur&#x27;anic annotation signs such as &quot;end of &quot;ayah&quot;&quot; ۝ۖ and &quot;start of &quot;rub el hizb&quot;&quot; ۞. The Arabic supplement range encodes letter variants mostly used for writing African (non-Arabic) languages. The Arabic Extended-A range encodes additional Qur&#x27;anic annotations and letter variants used for various non-Arabic languages.

The Arabic Presentation Forms-A range encodes contextual forms and ligatures of letter variants needed for Persian, Urdu, Sindhi and Central Asian languages. The Arabic Presentation Forms-B range encodes spacing forms of Arabic diacritics, and more contextual letter forms. The Arabic Mathematical Alphabetical Symbols block encodes characters used in Arabic mathematical expressions.

See also the notes of the section on modified letters.

===Keyboards===

Keyboards designed for different nations have different layouts, so proficiency in one style of keyboard, such as Iraq&#x27;s, does not transfer to proficiency in another, such as Saudi Arabia&#x27;s. Differences can include the location of non-alphabetic characters.

All Arabic keyboards allow typing Roman characters, e.g., for the URL in a web browser. Thus, each Arabic keyboard has both Arabic and Roman characters marked on the keys. Usually, the Roman characters of an Arabic keyboard conform to the QWERTY layout, but in North Africa, where French is the most common language typed using the Roman characters, the Arabic keyboards are AZERTY.

To encode a particular written form of a character, there are extra code points provided in Unicode which can be used to express the exact written form desired. The range &quot;Arabic presentation forms A&quot; (U+FB50 to U+FDFF) contain ligatures while the range &quot;Arabic presentation forms B&quot; (U+FE70 to U+FEFF) contains the positional variants. These effects are better achieved in Unicode by using the &quot;zero-width joiner&quot; and &quot;zero-width non-joiner&quot;, as these presentation forms are deprecated in Unicode and should generally only be used within the internals of text-rendering software; when using Unicode as an intermediate form for conversion between character encodings; or for backwards compatibility with implementations that rely on the hard-coding of glyph forms.

Finally, the Unicode encoding of Arabic is in &quot;logical order&quot;, that is, the characters are entered, and stored in computer memory, in the order that they are written and pronounced without worrying about the direction in which they will be displayed on paper or on the screen. Again, it is left to the rendering engine to present the characters in the correct direction, using Unicode&#x27;s bi-directional text features. In this regard, if the Arabic words on this page are written left to right, it is an indication that the Unicode rendering engine used to display them is out of date.

There are competing online tools, e.g. Yamli editor, which allow entry of Arabic letters without having Arabic support installed on a PC, and without knowledge of the layout of the Arabic keyboard.

===Handwriting recognition===
The first software program of its kind in the world that identifies Arabic handwriting in real time was developed by researchers at Ben-Gurion University (BGU).

The prototype enables the user to write Arabic words by hand on an electronic screen, which then analyzes the text and translates it into printed Arabic letters in a thousandth of a second. The error rate is less than three percent, according to Dr. Jihad El-Sana, from BGU&#x27;s department of computer sciences, who developed the system along with master&#x27;s degree student Fadi Biadsy.

==== Variations ====

== See also ==
* Ancient South Arabian script
* Algerian braille
* Arabic braille
* Arabic calligraphy
* Arabic chat alphabet
* Arabic letter frequency
* Arabic numerals
* ArabTeX – provides Arabic support for TeX and LaTeX
* History of the Arabic alphabet
* Modern Arabic mathematical notation
* Romanization of Arabic
==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8196" start="4" end="19" title="Arabic alphabet" label="Arabic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8196" start="28" end="40" title="Arabic alphabet" label="Arabic abjad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828555" start="49" end="62" title="Arabic script" label="Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="104" end="110" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4004706" start="129" end="146" title="unicase" label="unicameral script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079418" start="179" end="186" title="cursive" label="cursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="280" end="294" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="325" end="336" title="letter case" label="letter case"/>
<link wikidata="Q185087" start="375" end="380" title="abjad" label="abjad"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="392" end="401" title="consonant" label="consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q185087" start="503" end="515" title="impure abjad" label="impure abjad"/>
<link wikidata="Q9788" start="569" end="576" title="letter (alphabet)" label="letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839562" start="747" end="752" title="Archaic Greek alphabets" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="795" end="815" title="letter case" label="upper and lower case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260436" start="1440" end="1444" title="rasm" label="rasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079418" start="1483" end="1490" title="cursive" label="cursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953108" start="1606" end="1625" title="collation" label="collating sequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="1915" end="1934" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Phoenician alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="1986" end="1992" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="1997" end="2002" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q308487" start="2048" end="2062" title="abjad numerals" label="abjad numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q140732" start="2080" end="2090" title="numerology" label="numerology"/>
<link wikidata="Q840378" start="2113" end="2121" title="gematria" label="gematria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539504" start="2132" end="2141" title="isopsephy" label="isopsephy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="2510" end="2517" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q125494903" start="2684" end="2710" title="Al-Iklil" label="&amp;quot;Kitāb al-Iklīl&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q42425147" start="2908" end="2913" title="samek" label="samek"/>
<link wikidata="Q503282" start="3169" end="3177" title="Mashriq" label="Mashriqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862729" start="3260" end="3263" title="Shin (letter)" label="šīn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="3281" end="3289" title="Maghreb" label="Maghrebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525407" start="3317" end="3333" title="Tsade (letter)" label="&amp;quot;ṣāḏē&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972005" start="3865" end="3869" title="IMFI" label="IMFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q188725" start="4194" end="4203" title="ligature (typography)" label="ligatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349106" start="4392" end="4414" title="Romanization of Arabic" label="Romanization of Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56467" start="4774" end="4789" title="Modern Standard Arabic" label="Literary Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086110" start="5114" end="5130" title="Arabic phonology" label="Arabic phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422423" start="5147" end="5166" title="varieties of Arabic" label="varieties of Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658554" start="5302" end="5315" title="Proto-Semitic" label="Proto-Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q761278" start="5804" end="5819" title="mater lectionis" label="mater lectionis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82622" start="5970" end="5986" title="Punctuation" label="punctuation mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q178034" start="6015" end="6027" title="glottal stop" label="glottal stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889430" start="6207" end="6238" title="modifier letter right half ring" label="modifier letter right half ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q151" start="6252" end="6262" title="Wiktionary" label="Wiktionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q22930005" start="6274" end="6304" title="modifier letter left half ring" label="modifier letter left half ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862723" start="6362" end="6362" title="Ayin" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q775724" start="6796" end="6805" title="Arabic diacritics" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7050" end="7055" title="Hamza#Arabic &amp;quot;seat&amp;quot; rules" label="Hamza"/>
<link wikidata="Q252454" start="7345" end="7345" title="hamza" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1551635" start="7768" end="7768" title="Shadda" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="8930" end="8940" title="diphthongs" label="diphthongs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9060" end="9065" title="Arabic nouns and adjectives#Nisba" label="nisba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488994" start="9326" end="9334" title="sentient" label="sentient"/>
<link wikidata="Q188725" start="9679" end="9687" title="Typographical ligature" label="ligature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9688" end="9697" title="#Ligatures 2" label="in Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q751827" start="10009" end="10033" title="Arabic script in Unicode" label="Arabic script in Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="10223" end="10230" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110362" start="10485" end="10496" title="vowel length" label="long vowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990884" start="10995" end="11013" title="Cantillation" label="cantillation signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q775724" start="11450" end="11459" title="Arabic diacritics" label="vocalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="11819" end="11823" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="11827" end="11836" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="11868" end="11884" title="grammatical case" label="grammatical case"/>
<link wikidata="Q852201" start="12030" end="12040" title="Gemination" label="Gemination"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="12713" end="12721" title="syllable" label="syllable"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="13437" end="13446" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="13637" end="13643" title="Qurʾān" label="Qurʾān"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="14173" end="14182" title="diphthong" label="diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2229326" start="15374" end="15379" title="’I‘rab" label="i‘rāb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17329" end="17329" title="Aleph#Arabic" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q449667" start="17401" end="17406" title="Wasla" label="Wasla"/>
<link wikidata="Q252454" start="17419" end="17424" title="hamza" label="hamza"/>
<link wikidata="Q252454" start="17479" end="17484" title="hamza" label="hamza"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525407" start="17524" end="17524" title="Tsade" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q15033" start="17566" end="17566" title="Aleph" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q15033" start="17665" end="17665" title="Aleph" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1377126" start="17796" end="17803" title="Liaison (French)" label="liaison"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="17807" end="17813" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q775724" start="17827" end="17836" title="Vocalised Arabic" label="vocalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="18850" end="18854" title="Golf" label="Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q97353934" start="19298" end="19314" title="Anatolian Arabic" label="Anatolian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29961325" start="19582" end="19605" title="Western Arabic numerals" label="Western Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q61744" start="19610" end="19633" title="Eastern Arabic numerals" label="Eastern Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q308487" start="19989" end="20003" title="Abjad numerals" label="Abjad numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q161108" start="20167" end="20177" title="chronogram" label="chronogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q855624" start="20241" end="20257" title="Nabataean script" label="Nabataean script"/>
<link wikidata="Q36178" start="20272" end="20289" title="Nabataean Aramaic" label="Nabataean Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30130163" start="20408" end="20424" title="Nabataean Arabic" label="Nabataean Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124683392" start="20619" end="20631" title="Paleo-Arabic" label="Paleo-Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="20737" end="20743" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124683348" start="20753" end="20781" title="Zabad inscription" label="Zabad trilingual inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="20848" end="20853" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="20873" end="20883" title="epigraphy" label="epigraphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771716" start="21242" end="21254" title="Book Pahlavi" label="Book Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="21354" end="21361" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119010" start="21363" end="21371" title="PERF 558" label="PERF 558"/>
<link wikidata="Q625163" start="21520" end="21539" title="hafiz (Quran)" label="Qurʾan memorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q26567" start="21690" end="21696" title="Syriac alphabet" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q21283070" start="21701" end="21722" title="Tiberian vocalization" label="Tiberian vocalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="21813" end="21820" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q337029" start="21828" end="21855" title="Abu al-Aswad al-Du&amp;#x27;ali" label="Abu al-Aswad al-Du&amp;#x27;ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q633306" start="21938" end="21946" title="nunation" label="nunation"/>
<link wikidata="Q293515" start="22132" end="22163" title="al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Farahidi" label="al-Khalil ibn Ahmad al-Farahidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q472586" start="22404" end="22412" title="Safaitic" label="Safaitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q339162" start="22478" end="22491" title="Syrian Desert" label="Levant desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948260" start="22532" end="22539" title="Hismaic" label="Hismaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12248840" start="22697" end="22715" title="Namara inscription" label="Numara inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q96407844" start="22743" end="22772" title="tarsh" label="Medieval Arabic blockprinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="22879" end="22885" title="amulet" label="amulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8958" start="22908" end="22926" title="Johannes Gutenberg" label="Johannes Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q727715" start="23029" end="23042" title="book of hours" label="book of hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349396" start="23083" end="23109" title="Kitab salat al-sawai" label="Kitab Salat al-Sawa&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q321678" start="23205" end="23219" title="Robert Granjon" label="Robert Granjon"/>
<link wikidata="Q297483" start="23259" end="23285" title="Ferdinando I de&amp;#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany" label="Ferdinando de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463246" start="23295" end="23316" title="Medici Oriental Press" label="Medici Oriental Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988656" start="23403" end="23411" title="Maronite" label="Maronite"/>
<link wikidata="Q542263" start="23421" end="23441" title="Monastery of Qozhaya" label="Monastery of Qozhaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q333711" start="23445" end="23458" title="Mount Lebanon" label="Mount Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494558" start="23551" end="23559" title="Garshuni" label="Garshuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q26567" start="23602" end="23615" title="Syriac script" label="Syriac script"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="23650" end="23658" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="23705" end="23719" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q426853" start="24089" end="24101" title="movable type" label="movable type"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="24102" end="24116" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009948" start="24141" end="24157" title="Lebanese Melkite Christians" label="Lebanese Melkite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664676" start="24163" end="24178" title="Abdallah Zakher" label="Abdallah Zakher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737478" start="24276" end="24292" title="Dhour El Shuwayr" label="Dhour El Shuwayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q184759" start="24565" end="24578" title="character set" label="character set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401708" start="24591" end="24601" title="ISO-8859-6" label="ISO-8859-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q825466" start="24603" end="24615" title="Windows-1256" label="Windows-1256"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="24620" end="24627" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q176953" start="24823" end="24839" title="rendering (computer graphics)" label="rendering engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36975" start="24861" end="24866" title="glyph" label="glyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512806" start="25328" end="25334" title="Unicode block" label="blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512821" start="25338" end="25344" title="Arabic (Unicode block)" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526125" start="25375" end="25392" title="Arabic Supplement" label="Arabic Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493787" start="25422" end="25439" title="Arabic Extended-A" label="Arabic Extended-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q108546194" start="25469" end="25486" title="Arabic Extended-B" label="Arabic Extended-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q113956924" start="25516" end="25533" title="Arabic Extended-C" label="Arabic Extended-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232840" start="25564" end="25591" title="Arabic Presentation Forms-A" label="Arabic Presentation Forms-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310880" start="25622" end="25649" title="Arabic Presentation Forms-B" label="Arabic Presentation Forms-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494044" start="25680" end="25700" title="Rumi Numeral Symbols" label="Rumi Numeral Symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q55252983" start="25732" end="25751" title="Indic Siyaq Numbers" label="Indic Siyaq Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q63155456" start="25783" end="25804" title="Ottoman Siyaq Numbers" label="Ottoman Siyaq Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493794" start="25836" end="25874" title="Arabic Mathematical Alphabetic Symbols" label="Arabic Mathematical Alphabetic Symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401708" start="26049" end="26059" title="ISO 8859-6" label="ISO 8859-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q61744" start="26110" end="26129" title="Arabic-Indic digits" label="Arabic-Indic digits"/>
<link wikidata="Q188219" start="26213" end="26217" title="ayah" label="ayah"/>
<link wikidata="Q93863" start="26258" end="26269" title="Rub El Hizb" label="rub el hizb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="26642" end="26646" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26949" end="26965" title="#Modified letters" label="modified letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="27329" end="27340" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q253" start="27493" end="27499" title="QWERTY" label="QWERTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="27515" end="27527" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="27535" end="27541" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q149023" start="27629" end="27635" title="AZERTY" label="AZERTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q614232" start="28059" end="28076" title="zero-width joiner" label="zero-width joiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q863569" start="28093" end="28114" title="zero-width non-joiner" label="zero-width non-joiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q856986" start="28846" end="28865" title="bi-directional text" label="bi-directional text"/>
<link wikidata="Q737332" start="29405" end="29426" title="Ben-Gurion University" label="Ben-Gurion University"/>
<link wikidata="Q446074" start="29867" end="29895" title="Ancient South Arabian script" label="Ancient South Arabian script"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724073" start="29898" end="29914" title="Algerian braille" label="Algerian braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212449" start="29917" end="29931" title="Arabic braille" label="Arabic braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905394" start="29934" end="29952" title="Arabic calligraphy" label="Arabic calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339258" start="29955" end="29975" title="Arabic chat alphabet" label="Arabic chat alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783416" start="29978" end="30001" title="Arabic letter frequency" label="Arabic letter frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q29961325" start="30004" end="30019" title="Arabic numerals" label="Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q623620" start="30022" end="30029" title="ArabTeX" label="ArabTeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301" start="30060" end="30063" title="TeX" label="TeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310" start="30068" end="30073" title="LaTeX" label="LaTeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q617458" start="30076" end="30106" title="History of the Arabic alphabet" label="History of the Arabic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888554" start="30109" end="30144" title="Modern Arabic mathematical notation" label="Modern Arabic mathematical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349106" start="30147" end="30169" title="Romanization of Arabic" label="Romanization of Arabic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2207" wikidata="Q2849311" url="?curid=2207" title="Angels in art">
<text>Angels have appeared in works of art since early Christian art, and they have been a popular subject for Byzantine and European paintings and sculpture.
Normally given wings in art, angels are usually intended, in both Christian and Islamic art, to be beautiful, though several depictions go for more awe-inspiring or frightening attributes, notably in the depiction of the living creatures (which have bestial characteristics), ophanim (which are wheels) and cherubim (which have mosaic features); As a matter of theology, they are spiritual beings who do not eat or excrete and are genderless. Many historical depictions of angels may appear to the modern eye to be gendered as either male or female by their dress or actions, but until the 19th century, even the most female looking will normally lack breasts, and the figures should normally be considered as genderless. In 19th-century art, especially funerary art, this traditional convention is sometimes abandoned. The lack of gender was to enable these winged creatures to be relatable to both genders.

==Christian art==
===In the early Church===
Specific ideas regarding how to portray angels began to develop in the early Church. Since angels are defined as pure spirits, the lack of a defined form has allowed artists wide latitude for creativity. Daniel 8:15 describes Gabriel as appearing in the &quot;likeness of man&quot; and in Daniel 9:21 he is referred to as &quot;the man Gabriel.&quot; Such anthropomorphic descriptions of an angel are consistent with previous descriptions of angels, as in Genesis 19:5. They were usually depicted in the form of young men.

The earliest known Christian image of an angel, in the &quot;Cubicolo dell&#x27;Annunziazione&quot; in the Catacomb of Priscilla, which is dated to the middle of the third century, is a depiction of the Annunciation in which Gabriel is portrayed without wings. Representations of angels on sarcophagi and on objects such as lamps and reliquaries of that period also show them without wings, as for example the angel in the &quot;Sacrifice of Isaac&quot; scene in the Sarcophagus of Junius Bassus.

In a third-century fresco of the Hebrew children in the furnace, in the cemetery of St. Priscilla, a dove takes the place of the angel, while a fourth-century representation of the same subject, in the coemeterium maius, substitutes the Hand of God for the heavenly messenger.

The earliest known representation of angels with wings is on what is called the Prince&#x27;s Sarcophagus, discovered at Sarigüzel, near Istanbul, in the 1930s, and attributed to the time of Theodosius I (379–395). Flying winged angels, very often in pairs flanking a central figure or subject, are derivations in visual terms from pairs of winged Victories in classical art.

In this same period, Saint John Chrysostom explained the significance of angels&#x27; wings: &quot;They manifest a nature&#x27;s sublimity. That is why Gabriel is represented with wings. Not that angels have wings, but that you may know that they leave the heights and the most elevated dwelling to approach human nature. Accordingly, the wings attributed to these powers have no other meaning than to indicate the sublimity of their nature.&quot;

From then on Christian art generally represented angels with wings, as in the cycle of mosaics in the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore (432–440). Multi-winged angels, often with only their face and wings showing, drawn from the higher grades of angels, especially cherubim and seraphim, are derived from Persian art, and are usually shown only in heavenly contexts, as opposed to performing tasks on Earth. They often appear in the pendentives of domes or semi-domes of churches.

===Byzantine art===

Angels appear in Byzantine art in mosaics and icons. Artists found some of their inspiration from winged Greek figures such as &quot;Victory&quot;. They also drew from imperial iconography. Court eunuchs could rise to positions of authority in the Empire. They performed ceremonial functions and served as trusted messengers. Amelia R. Brown points out that legislation under Justinian indicates that many of them came from the Caucasus, having light eyes, hair, and skin, as well as the &quot;comely features and fine bodies&quot; desired by slave traders. Those &quot;castrated in childhood developed a distinctive skeletal structure, lacked full masculine musculature, body hair and beards...&quot; As officials, they would wear a white tunic decorated with gold. Brown suggests that &quot;Byzantine artists drew, consciously or not, on this iconography of the court eunuch&quot;.

Daniel 10: 5–6 describes an angel as clothed in linen and girt with gold. Angels, especially the archangel Michael, who were depicted as military-style agents of God, came to be shown wearing Late Antique military uniform. This could be either the normal military dress, with a tunic to about the knees, armour breastplate and pteruges, but also often the specific dress of the bodyguard of the Byzantine Emperor, with a long tunic and the &quot;loros&quot;, a long gold and jewelled pallium restricted to the Imperial family and their closest guards, and in icons to archangels. The basic military dress it is still worn in pictures into the Baroque period and beyond in the West, and up to the present day in Eastern Orthodox icons. Other angels came to be conventionally depicted in long robes.

===Medieval art===
Medieval depictions of angels borrow from the Byzantine. In the French &quot;Hours of Anne of Brittany&quot;, Gabriel wears a dalmatic. In the later Middle Ages they often wear the vestments of a deacon, a cope over a dalmatic, especially Gabriel in Annunciation scenes – for example &quot;The Annunciation&quot; by Jan van Eyck. This indicated that, for all their powers, they could not perform the Eucharist, and were in this respect outranked by every priest, reinforcing the prestige of the clergy. In Early Christian art white robes were almost invariably adopted, sometimes bound with the &quot;golden girdle&quot; of Revelation. During the mediæval period senior angels were often clad in every brilliant colour, while junior ranks wore white. Early Renaissance painters such as Jan van Eyck and Fra Angelico painted angels with multi-colored wings. Depictions of angels came to combine medieval notions of beauty with feminine ideals of grace and beauty, as in da Panicale&#x27;s 1435 &quot;Baptism of Christ&quot;.

===Renaissance art===

The classical &quot;erotes&quot; or &quot;putto&quot; re-appeared in art during the Italian Renaissance in both religious and mythological art, and is often known in English as a cherub, the singular of cherubim, actually one of the higher ranks in the Christian angelic hierarchy. They normally appear in groups and are generally given wings in religious art, and are sometimes represented as just a winged head. They generally are just in attendance, except that they may be amusing Christ or John the Baptist as infants in scenes of the Holy Family.

The classic example of Renaissance art showing Erotes is the depiction of Eros and Cupid. In the Greek mythology, Eros and his Roman counterpart Cupid, are winged and have arrows they use to manipulate people to fall in love.

===Victorian art===
In the late 19th century artists&#x27; model Jane Burden Morris came to embody an ideal of beauty for Pre-Raphaelite painters. With the use of her long dark hair and features made somewhat more androgynous, they created a prototype Victorian angel which would appear in paintings and stained glass windows. Roger Homan notes that Edward Burne-Jones and others used her image often and in different ways, creating a new type of angel.

===Modern art===
Angels continued to be depicted in the 20th century. One example is the large mosaic mural &quot;Angels of the Heavenly Host&quot; in St Paul&#x27;s, Bow Common, created during 1963–68 by Charles Lutyens.

==Islamic art==
 Angels in Islamic art often appear in illustrated manuscripts of Muhammad&#x27;s life. Other common depictions of angels in Islamic art include angels with Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden, angels discerning the saved from the damned on the Day of Judgement, and angels as a repeating motif in borders or textiles. Islamic depictions of angels resemble winged Christian angels, although Islamic angels are typically shown with multicolored wings. Angels, such as the archangel Gabriel, are typically depicted as masculine, which is consistent with God&#x27;s rejection of feminine depictions of angels in several verses of Quran. Nevertheless, later depictions of angels in Islamic art are more feminine and androgynous.

===Angels in manuscripts===
The 13th-century book &quot;Ajā&#x27;ib al-makhlūqāt wa gharā&#x27;ib al-mawjūdāt&quot; &quot;(The Wonders of Creation)&quot; by Zakariya al-Qazwini describes Islamic angelology, and is often illustrated with many images of angels. The angels are typically depicted with bright, vivid colors, giving them unusual liveliness and other-worldly translucence. While some angels are referred to as &quot;Guardians of the Kingdom of God,&quot; others are associated with hell. An undated manuscript of &quot;The Wonders of Creation&quot; from the Bavarian State Library in Munich includes depictions of angels both alone and alongside humans and animals. Angels are also illustrated in Timurid and Ottoman manuscripts, such as &quot;The Timurid Book of the Prophet Muhammad’s Ascension&quot; () and the &quot;Siyer-i Nebi&quot;.

====Angels in heaven and hell====
The Qur’an makes multiple references to angels. These angels take on both active and passive roles in Quranic stories. In the story of the creation of Adam, God announces to the angels that he intends to create man. The angels act as witnesses to this announcement and subsequent creation of Adam. Although there are many versions of the story, Islamic sources relate that God used the creation of Adam as a punishment or test for the angels. Therefore, the role of angels is often described as in opposition to man.

Another angel-like creature mentioned in the Qu’ran (4:97, 32:11) is the &quot;zabāniya.&quot; A &quot;zabāniya&quot; is a black angel of hell that brings souls of sinners down to hell to punish them and can be seen in illustrations of &quot;The Timurid Book of the Prophet Muhammad’s Ascension&quot; (c. 1436 A.D.). There are nineteen &quot;zabāniya,&quot; led by &quot;Mālik&quot;, an angel considered to be the master of fire or the gatekeeper of hell&quot;.&quot; &quot;Mālik&#x27;s&quot; and &quot;zabāniya&#x27;s&quot; categorizations as angels are debated as some believe they are better described as spirits or demons. Actually, portrayal of &quot;Zabaniyya&quot; shares many traits characteristical for demons in Islamic arts. As seen in &quot;The Timurid Book of the Prophet Muhammad’s Ascension,&quot; Muhammad is greeted by &quot;Mālik&quot; and later witnesses the torture of sinners carried out by the &quot;zabāniya.&quot;

Similar, the fallen angel Iblis is shown during his moment of refusal to prostrate himself before the newly created Adam, leading to his banishment to the bottom of hell. He is depicted as a black-skinned monstrous creature with horns and flaming eyes, in contrast to the presentation of the noble angels. Only his wings remain as a sign of his former angelic status, however with burned edges.

====Angels associated with Muhammad====

Although depictions of Muhammad are often forbidden, the few that exist often include images of angels. Specifically, the Archangel Gabriel is frequently shown alongside Muhammad. For example, in &quot;The Timurid Book of the Prophet Muhammad’s Ascension&quot;, the Archangel Gabriel appears to Muhammad in Mecca to announce his ascension. Kneeling before Muhammad, Gabriel is shown with colorful wings and a crown. Later in &quot;The Timurid Book,&quot; Muhammad is shown with Gabriel meeting a group of angels in heaven. In the &quot;Jami&#x27; al-tawarikh&quot;, a Persian history from the 14th century, Muhammad is depicted beside al-Buraq, whose tail is transformed into an angel, while two other angels approach. A 16th-century Ottoman manuscript of &quot;Siyer-i Nebi&quot;, a Turkish epic about the life of Muhammad, also includes many depictions of Muhammad alongside angels.

==Jewish art==
Mainstream Rabbinic Judaism discourages focus from being placed on angels due to fears about idolatry and a desire to curtail any inclinations to polytheism. As such, many Jews do not make or display artworks of angels. However, such art does exist, and has been consistently made throughout Rabbinic history, for example as in the Dura Europos synagogue, where wingless humanoid angels dressed like Persians appear, as well as winged humanoids. Overall, if angel art is popular in a time and place, there will be Jewish art that depicts angels as well. Contemporary resistance and ignorance regarding angels in Judaism, and specifically in Jewish art, may partially stem from the current strong association between angels and Christianity.

Sanoi, Sansoni, and Samanglif (also spelled Senoy, Sansenoy and Semangelof) are three angels that protect newborns. Depictions of them as small, non-human creatures occur on amulets and have had a small resurgence in popularity in recent years. They are associated with the Alphabet of Ben Sira, where they attempt to retrieve Lilith after she flees from Adam. When they cannot, they make her promise not to harm newborns if they are protecting them. The use of their names in amulets for children predates the story, and that was likely intended to explain an existing custom.

Cherubim in their classic Jewish description are typically creatures with features of a human, lion, bird, and cattle in some combination. The variety of imagery here was common in the Ancient Near East, and draws on that of the lamassu. The name cherub may come from that connection. It also draws on the imagery of the sphinx. The descriptions of cherubim overall vary. Similarly, the imagery used for seraphim derives from the uraeus, which appeared in ancient carvings from Judah. It particularly occurred on seals, where it was invoked as a protective symbol.

While winged humanoid angels are strongly associated with Christianity, some academics argue that rather than Judaism occasionally adopting this imagery from Christianity, Christianity adopted it from Judaism. In text, humanoid beings with wings and no other unusual features appear as early as the writing of Zechariah 5:5–11. The most common wings are feathered, but occasionally winged humanoid angels in Jewish art have been depicted with butterfly wings. Winged angels are sometimes also depicted with halos.

Angels are sometimes depicted as birds without human features.

Humanoid angels appear in Ethiopian Jewish art traditions, which are traditionally non-Rabbinic.

Many well-known pop culture depictions of angels in the West come from the work of Jewish writers.

==Precursors==
=== Assyrian ===

The use of winged angels in art spans several millennia and cuts across multiple cultures, with each culture associating these ethereal figures with various aspects. For instance, in the ancient Assyrian culture, there was a protective deity labelled lamassu. A lamassu is a hybrid figure that contains part human on the head, part bovine lion on the body, and enormous wings with feathers, completing the bird aspect of the deity.

=== Ancient Greece ===
Ancient Greek mythology has been an integral part of art, serving as an inspiration to a large number of concepts in art. The culture had a winged figure, Ero, the son of Aphrodite, the goddess of love, who became Cupid in the Roman Empire

The Greek mythology associates Erotes with love and desire. While they are perceived as heavenly creatures, they contain power that can make a person fall in love based on their enchantments. 

The majority of ancient artwork portrayed Eros as being a slender yet well-built man wielding enormous sexual power. While Eros was not a popular figure in the classical period, the arrival of the Hellenistic period raised him back to prominence. The popularization of Erotes arises from the normalization of the Roman counterpart, Cupid, who has a bow and arrow that he uses to make people fall in love. The majority of people who observe Valentines Day have or utilize stories related to Cupid and Eros. 
The classical &quot;erotes&quot; or &quot;putto&quot; re-appeared in art during the Italian Renaissance in both religious and mythological art, and is often known in English as a cherub, the singular of cherubim, actually one of the higher ranks in the Christian angelic hierarchy. They normally appear in groups and are generally given wings in religious art, and are sometimes represented as just a winged head. They generally are just in attendance, except that they may be amusing Christ or John the Baptist as infants in scenes of the Holy Family

The Greek mythology associates Erotes with love and desire. While they are perceived as heavenly creatures, they contain power that can make a person fall in love based on their enchantments. According to Greek mythology, Eros was associated with Gaia, mother earth goddess.

The majority of ancient artwork portrayed Eros as being a slender yet well-built man wielding enormous sexual power. While Eros was not a popular figure in the classical period, the arrival of the Hellenistic period raised him back to prominence. The popularization of Erotes arises from the normalization of the Roman counterpart, Cupid, who has a bow and arrow that he uses to make people fall in love. The majority of people who observe Valentines Day have or utilize stories related to Cupid and Eros. Eros or Cupid uses his arrow to manipulate people through the power of love, making his role as a god an intriguing one. 

==Gallery of angels in Christian art==
==Gallery of angels in Islamic art==
==Gallery of angels in Jewish art==
==See also==

* Archangel Michael in Christian art
* Michael (archangel)
* Gabriel
* Angels in Islam
* Angelus
* Fleur de lys
* List of films about angels
* List of names referring to El
* Seraph

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="0" end="5" title="Angel" label="Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="105" end="114" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="119" end="125" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659388" start="374" end="390" title="Living creatures (Bible)" label="living creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097882" start="429" end="436" title="ophanim" label="ophanim"/>
<link wikidata="Q185569" start="460" end="468" title="cherubim" label="cherubim"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="481" end="487" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083647" start="907" end="919" title="funerary art" label="funerary art"/>
<link wikidata="Q81989" start="1333" end="1340" title="Gabriel" label="Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462868" start="1738" end="1759" title="Catacomb of Priscilla" label="Catacomb of Priscilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="1921" end="1931" title="sarcophagi" label="sarcophagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q722604" start="1965" end="1976" title="reliquaries" label="reliquaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5007906" start="2060" end="2078" title="Sacrifice of Isaac" label="Sacrifice of Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291490" start="2098" end="2126" title="Sarcophagus of Junius Bassus" label="Sarcophagus of Junius Bassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820614" start="2366" end="2377" title="Hand of God (art)" label="Hand of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="2544" end="2552" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="2598" end="2610" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q308902" start="2748" end="2764" title="Victoria (mythology)" label="winged Victories"/>
<link wikidata="Q43706" start="2811" end="2826" title="John Chrysostom" label="John Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="Q186282" start="3335" end="3367" title="Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore" label="Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q185569" start="3497" end="3505" title="cherubim" label="cherubim"/>
<link wikidata="Q194077" start="3510" end="3518" title="seraphim" label="seraphim"/>
<link wikidata="Q734605" start="3665" end="3675" title="pendentive" label="pendentive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12493" start="3680" end="3684" title="dome" label="dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955008" start="3689" end="3698" title="semi-dome" label="semi-dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="4812" end="4824" title="Late Antique" label="Late Antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849299" start="4947" end="4955" title="pteruges" label="pteruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q128866" start="5015" end="5032" title="Byzantine Emperor" label="Byzantine Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681543" start="5066" end="5071" title="loros" label="loros"/>
<link wikidata="Q200691" start="5104" end="5111" title="pallium" label="pallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="5263" end="5270" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="5331" end="5347" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="5348" end="5352" title="icon" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="5634" end="5640" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q849829" start="5644" end="5648" title="cope" label="cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q607913" start="5656" end="5664" title="dalmatic" label="dalmatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81989" start="5677" end="5684" title="Gabriel" label="Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q154326" start="5688" end="5700" title="Annunciation" label="Annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734881" start="5728" end="5744" title="Annunciation (van Eyck, Washington)" label="The Annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q102272" start="5754" end="5766" title="Jan van Eyck" label="Jan van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="5838" end="5847" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q429811" start="5944" end="5963" title="Early Christian art" label="Early Christian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q102272" start="6224" end="6236" title="Jan van Eyck" label="Jan van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664" start="6241" end="6253" title="Fra Angelico" label="Fra Angelico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361380" start="6506" end="6512" title="erotes" label="erotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q284865" start="6528" end="6533" title="putto" label="putto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="6570" end="6589" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q185569" start="6665" end="6671" title="cherub" label="cherub"/>
<link wikidata="Q10822464" start="6739" end="6766" title="Christian angelic hierarchy" label="Christian angelic hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="6981" end="6997" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q618057" start="7026" end="7037" title="Holy Family" label="Holy Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q121973" start="7114" end="7118" title="Eros" label="Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011" start="7123" end="7128" title="Cupid" label="Cupid"/>
<link wikidata="Q269360" start="7332" end="7350" title="Jane Morris" label="Jane Burden Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q184814" start="7389" end="7403" title="Pre-Raphaelite" label="Pre-Raphaelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q216406" start="7617" end="7635" title="Edward Burne-Jones" label="Edward Burne-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595106" start="7873" end="7899" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s, Bow Common" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s, Bow Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221883" start="7927" end="7942" title="Charles Lutyens" label="Charles Lutyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="8138" end="8152" title="Garden of Eden" label="Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="8587" end="8592" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q8083964" start="8808" end="8833" title="ʿAjā&amp;#x27;ib al-makhlūqāt wa gharā&amp;#x27;ib al-mawjūdāt" label="(The Wonders of Creation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q144639" start="8843" end="8862" title="Zakariya al-Qazwini" label="Zakariya al-Qazwini"/>
<link wikidata="Q484195" start="9394" end="9401" title="Timurid Empire" label="Timurid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="9406" end="9413" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442502" start="9517" end="9529" title="Siyer-i Nebi" label="Siyer-i Nebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q310646" start="10169" end="10177" title="Zabaniyya" label="zabāniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q622293" start="10461" end="10466" title="Maalik" label="Mālik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11042" end="11054" title="fallen angel#Islam" label="fallen angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q273101" start="11055" end="11060" title="Iblis" label="Iblis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442502" start="12228" end="12240" title="Siyer-i Nebi" label="Siyer-i Nebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577089" start="12699" end="12721" title="Dura-Europos synagogue" label="Dura Europos synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642339" start="13383" end="13403" title="Alphabet of Ben Sira" label="Alphabet of Ben Sira"/>
<link wikidata="Q180627" start="13436" end="13442" title="Lilith" label="Lilith"/>
<link wikidata="Q185569" start="13688" end="13694" title="Cherub" label="Cherub"/>
<link wikidata="Q616332" start="13917" end="13924" title="lamassu" label="lamassu"/>
<link wikidata="Q151480" start="14009" end="14015" title="sphinx" label="sphinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q756990" start="14118" end="14124" title="uraeus" label="uraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="14201" end="14206" title="Seal (emblem)" label="seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q179769" start="14564" end="14573" title="Book of Zechariah" label="Zechariah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341893" start="14761" end="14766" title="Halo (religious iconography)" label="halos"/>
<link wikidata="Q616332" start="15315" end="15322" title="lamassu" label="lamassu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361380" start="15792" end="15798" title="Erotes" label="Erotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361380" start="16224" end="16230" title="Erotes" label="Erotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361380" start="16482" end="16488" title="erotes" label="erotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q284865" start="16504" end="16509" title="putto" label="putto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="16546" end="16565" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q185569" start="16641" end="16647" title="cherub" label="cherub"/>
<link wikidata="Q10822464" start="16715" end="16742" title="Christian angelic hierarchy" label="Christian angelic hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="16957" end="16973" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q618057" start="17002" end="17013" title="Holy Family" label="Holy Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361380" start="17046" end="17052" title="Erotes" label="Erotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361380" start="17560" end="17566" title="Erotes" label="Erotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785574" start="18048" end="18082" title="Archangel Michael in Christian art" label="Archangel Michael in Christian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="18085" end="18104" title="Michael (archangel)" label="Michael (archangel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q81989" start="18107" end="18114" title="Gabriel" label="Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266031" start="18117" end="18132" title="Angels in Islam" label="Angels in Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q623699" start="18135" end="18142" title="Angelus" label="Angelus"/>
<link wikidata="Q211568" start="18145" end="18157" title="Fleur de lys" label="Fleur de lys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849306" start="18160" end="18186" title="List of films about angels" label="List of films about angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q846467" start="18189" end="18218" title="List of names referring to El" label="List of names referring to El"/>
<link wikidata="Q194077" start="18221" end="18227" title="Seraph" label="Seraph"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2208" wikidata="Q82738" url="?curid=2208" title="Arctic fox">
<text>The Arctic fox (Vulpes lagopus), also known as the white fox, polar fox, or snow fox, is a small species of fox native to the Arctic regions of the Northern Hemisphere and common throughout the Arctic tundra biome. It is well adapted to living in cold environments, and is best known for its thick, warm fur that is also used as camouflage. It has a large and very fluffy tail. In the wild, most individuals do not live past their first year but some exceptional ones survive up to 11 years. Its body length ranges from , with a generally rounded body shape to minimize the escape of body heat.

The Arctic fox preys on many small creatures such as lemmings, voles, ringed seal pups, fish, waterfowl, and seabirds. It also eats carrion, berries, seaweed, and insects and other small invertebrates. Arctic foxes form monogamous pairs during the breeding season and they stay together to raise their young in complex underground dens. Occasionally, other family members may assist in raising their young. Natural predators of the Arctic fox are golden eagles, Arctic wolves, polar bears, wolverines, red foxes, and grizzly bears.

==Behavior==

Arctic foxes must endure a temperature difference of up to between the external environment and their internal core temperature. To prevent heat loss, the Arctic fox curls up tightly tucking its legs and head under its body and behind its furry tail. This position gives the fox the smallest surface area to volume ratio and protects the least insulated areas. Arctic foxes also stay warm by getting out of the wind and residing in their dens. Although the Arctic foxes are active year-round and do not hibernate, they attempt to preserve fat by reducing their locomotor activity. They build up their fat reserves in the autumn, sometimes increasing their body weight by more than 50%. This provides greater insulation during the winter and a source of energy when food is scarce.

===Reproduction===
In the spring, the Arctic fox&#x27;s attention switches to reproduction and a home for their potential offspring. They live in large dens in frost-free, slightly raised ground. These are complex systems of tunnels covering as much as and are often in eskers, long ridges of sedimentary material deposited in formerly glaciated regions. These dens may be in existence for many decades and are used by many generations of foxes.
Arctic foxes tend to select dens that are easily accessible with many entrances, and that are clear from snow and ice making it easier to burrow in. The Arctic fox builds and chooses dens that face southward towards the sun, which makes the den warmer. Arctic foxes prefer large, maze-like dens for predator evasion and a quick escape especially when red foxes are in the area. Natal dens are typically found in rugged terrain, which may provide more protection for the pups. But, the parents will also relocate litters to nearby dens to avoid predators. When red foxes are not in the region, Arctic foxes will use dens that the red fox previously occupied. Shelter quality is more important to the Arctic fox than the proximity of spring prey to a den.

The main prey of the Arctic fox in the tundra are lemmings, which is why the white fox is often called the &quot;lemming fox&quot;. The white fox&#x27;s reproduction rates reflect the lemming population density, which cyclically fluctuates every 3–5 years. When lemmings are abundant, the white fox can give birth to 18 pups, but they often do not reproduce when food is scarce. The &quot;coastal fox&quot; or blue fox lives in an environment where food availability is relatively consistent, and they will have up to 5 pups every year.

Breeding usually takes place in April and May, and the gestation period is about 52 days. Litters may contain as many as 25 (the largest litter size in the order Carnivora). The young emerge from the den when 3 to 4 weeks old and are weaned by 9 weeks of age.

Arctic foxes are primarily monogamous and both parents will care for the offspring. When predators and prey are abundant, Arctic foxes are more likely to be promiscuous (exhibited in both males and females) and display more complex social structures. Larger packs of foxes consisting of breeding or non-breeding males or females can guard a single territory more proficiently to increase pup survival. When resources are scarce, competition increases and the number of foxes in a territory decreases. On the coasts of Svalbard, the frequency of complex social structures is larger than inland foxes that remain monogamous due to food availability. In Scandinavia, there are more complex social structures compared to other populations due to the presence of the red fox. Also, conservationists are supplying the declining population with supplemental food. One unique case, however, is Iceland where monogamy is the most prevalent. The older offspring (1-year-olds) often remain within their parent&#x27;s territory even though predators are absent and there are fewer resources, which may indicate kin selection in the fox.

===Diet===

Arctic foxes generally eat any small animal they can find, including lemmings, voles, other rodents, hares, birds, eggs, fish, and carrion. They scavenge on carcasses left by larger predators such as wolves and polar bears, and in times of scarcity also eat their feces. In areas where they are present, lemmings are their most common prey, and a family of foxes can eat dozens of lemmings each day. In some locations in northern Canada, a high seasonal abundance of migrating birds that breed in the area may provide an important food source. On the coast of Iceland and other islands, their diet consists predominantly of birds. During April and May, the Arctic fox also preys on ringed seal pups when the young animals are confined to a snow den and are relatively helpless. They also consume berries and seaweed, so they may be considered omnivores. This fox is a significant bird-egg predator, consuming eggs of all except the largest tundra bird species.

Arctic foxes survive harsh winters and food scarcity by either hoarding food or storing body fat subcutaneously and viscerally. At the beginning of winter, one Arctic fox has approximately 14740 kJ of energy storage from fat alone. Using the lowest BMR value measured in Arctic foxes, an average sized fox of would need 471 kJ/day during the winter to survive. In Canada, Arctic foxes acquire from snow goose eggs at a rate of 2.7–7.3 eggs/h and store 80–97% of them. Scats provide evidence that they eat the eggs during the winter after caching. Isotope analysis shows that eggs can still be eaten after a year, and the metabolizable energy of a stored goose egg only decreases by 11% after 60 days; a fresh egg has about 816 kJ. Eggs stored in the summer are accessed the following spring prior to reproduction.

==Adaptations==
The Arctic fox lives in some of the most frigid extremes on the planet, but they do not start to shiver until the temperature drops to . Among its adaptations for survival in the cold is its dense, multilayered pelage, which provides excellent insulation. Additionally, the Arctic fox is the only canid whose foot pads are covered in fur. There are two genetically distinct coat color morphs: white and blue. The white morph has seasonal camouflage, white in winter and brown along the back with light grey around the abdomen in summer. The blue morph is often a dark blue, brown, or grey color year-round. Although the blue allele is dominant over the white allele, 99% of the Arctic fox population is the white morph. Two similar mutations to MC1R cause the blue color and the lack of seasonal color change. The fur of the Arctic fox provides the best insulation of any mammal.

The Arctic fox has a low surface area to volume ratio, as evidenced by its generally compact body shape, short muzzle and legs, and short, thick ears. Since less of its surface area is exposed to the Arctic cold, less heat escapes from its body.

===Sensory modalities===
The Arctic fox has a functional hearing range between 125 Hz–16 kHz with a sensitivity that is ≤ 60 dB in air, and an average peak sensitivity of 24 dB at 4 kHz. Overall, the Arctic foxes hearing is less sensitive than the dog and the kit fox. The Arctic fox and the kit fox have a low upper-frequency limit compared to the domestic dog and other carnivores. The Arctic fox can easily hear lemmings burrowing under 4-5 inches of snow. When it has located its prey, it pounces and punches through the snow to catch its prey.

The Arctic fox also has a keen sense of smell. They can smell carcasses that are often left by polar bears anywhere from . It is possible that they use their sense of smell to also track down polar bears. Additionally, Arctic foxes can smell and find frozen lemmings under of snow, and can detect a subnivean seal lair under of snow.

===Physiology===

The Arctic fox contains advantageous genes to overcome extreme cold and starvation periods. Transcriptome sequencing has identified two genes that are under positive selection: Glycolipid transfer protein domain containing 1 (GLTPD1) and V-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog 2 (AKT2). GLTPD1 is involved in the fatty acid metabolism, while AKT2 pertains to the glucose metabolism and insulin signaling.

The average mass specific BMR and total BMR are 37% and 27% lower in the winter than the summer. The Arctic fox decreases its BMR via metabolic depression in the winter to conserve fat storage and minimize energy requirements. According to the most recent data, the lower critical temperature of the Arctic fox is at in the winter and in the summer. It was commonly believed that the Arctic fox had a lower critical temperature below . However, some scientists have concluded that this statistic is not accurate since it was never tested using the proper equipment.

About 22% of the total body surface area of the Arctic fox dissipates heat readily compared to red foxes at 33%. The regions that have the greatest heat loss are the nose, ears, legs, and feet, which is useful in the summer for thermal heat regulation. Also, the Arctic fox has a beneficial mechanism in their nose for evaporative cooling like dogs, which keeps the brain cool during the summer and exercise. The thermal conductivity of Arctic fox fur in the summer and winter is the same; however, the thermal conductance of the Arctic fox in the winter is lower than the summer since fur thickness increases by 140%. In the summer, the thermal conductance of the Arctic foxes body is 114% higher than the winter, but their body core temperature is constant year-round.

One way that Arctic foxes regulate their body temperature is by utilizing a countercurrent heat exchange in the blood of their legs. Arctic foxes can constantly keep their feet above the tissue freezing point () when standing on cold substrates without losing mobility or feeling pain. They do this by increasing vasodilation and blood flow to a capillary rete in the pad surface, which is in direct contact with the snow rather than the entire foot. They selectively vasoconstrict blood vessels in the center of the foot pad, which conserves energy and minimizes heat loss. Arctic foxes maintain the temperature in their paws independently from the core temperature. If the core temperature drops, the pad of the foot will remain constantly above the tissue freezing point.

==Size==
The average head-and-body length of the male is , with a range of , while the female averages with a range of . In some regions, no difference in size is seen between males and females. The tail is about long in both sexes. The height at the shoulder is . On average males weigh , with a range of , while females average , with a range of .

==Taxonomy==
&quot;Vulpes lagopus&quot; is a &#x27;true fox&#x27; belonging to the genus &quot;Vulpes&quot; of the fox tribe Vulpini, which consists of 12 extant species. It is classified under the subfamily Caninae of the canid family Canidae. Although it has previously been assigned to its own monotypic genus &quot;Alopex&quot;, recent genetic evidence now places it in the genus &quot;Vulpes&quot; along with the majority of other foxes.

It was originally described by Carl Linnaeus in the 10th edition of &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; in 1758 as &quot;Canis lagopus&quot;. The type specimen was recovered from Lapland, Sweden. The generic name &quot;vulpes&quot; is Latin for &quot;fox&quot;. The specific name &quot;lagopus&quot; is derived from Ancient Greek λαγώς (&quot;lagōs&quot;, &quot;hare&quot;) and πούς (&quot;pous&quot;, &quot;foot&quot;), referring to the hair on its feet similar to those found in cold-climate species of hares.

Looking at the most recent phylogeny, the Arctic fox and the red fox (&quot;Vulpes vulpes&quot;) diverged approximately 3.17MYA. Additionally, the Arctic fox diverged from its sister group, the kit fox (&quot;Vulpes macrotis&quot;), at about 0.9MYA.

===Origins===
The origins of the Arctic fox have been described by the &quot;out of Tibet&quot; hypothesis. On the Tibetan Plateau, fossils of the extinct ancestral Arctic fox (&quot;Vulpes qiuzhudingi&quot;) from the early Pliocene (5.08–3.6 MYA) were found along with many other precursors of modern mammals that evolved during the Pliocene (5.3–2.6 MYA). It is believed that this ancient fox is the ancestor of the modern Arctic fox. Globally, the Pliocene was about 2–3 °C warmer than today, and the Arctic during the summer in the mid-Pliocene was 8 °C warmer. By using stable carbon and oxygen isotope analysis of fossils, researchers claim that the Tibetan Plateau experienced tundra-like conditions during the Pliocene and harbored cold-adapted mammals that later spread to North America and Eurasia during the Pleistocene Epoch (2.6 million-11,700 years ago).

===Subspecies===

Besides the nominate subspecies, the common Arctic fox, &quot;V. l. lagopus&quot;, four other subspecies of this fox have been described:
* Bering Islands Arctic fox, &quot;V. l. beringensis&quot;
* Greenland Arctic fox, &quot;V. l. foragoapusis&quot;
* Iceland Arctic fox, &quot;V. l. fuliginosus&quot;
* Pribilof Islands Arctic fox, &quot;V. l. pribilofensis&quot;

==Distribution and habitat==

The Arctic fox has a circumpolar distribution and occurs in Arctic tundra habitats in northern Europe, northern Asia, and North America. Its range includes Greenland, Iceland, Fennoscandia, Svalbard, Jan Mayen (where it was hunted to extinction) and other islands in the Barents Sea, northern Russia, islands in the Bering Sea, Alaska, and Canada as far south as Hudson Bay. In the late 19th century, it was introduced into the Aleutian Islands southwest of Alaska. However, the population on the Aleutian Islands is currently being eradicated in conservation efforts to preserve the local bird population. It mostly inhabits tundra and pack ice, but is also present in Canadian boreal forests (northeastern Alberta, northern Saskatchewan, northern Manitoba, Northern Ontario, Northern Quebec, and Newfoundland and Labrador) and the Kenai Peninsula in Alaska. They are found at elevations up to above sea level and have been seen on sea ice close to the North Pole.

The Arctic fox is the only land mammal native to Iceland. It came to the isolated North Atlantic island at the end of the last ice age, walking over the frozen sea. The Arctic Fox Center in Súðavík contains an exhibition on the Arctic fox and conducts studies on the influence of tourism on the population. Its range during the last ice age was much more extensive than it is now, and fossil remains of the Arctic fox have been found over much of northern Europe and Siberia.

The color of the fox&#x27;s coat also determines where they are most likely to be found. The white morph mainly lives inland and blends in with the snowy tundra, while the blue morph occupies the coasts because its dark color blends in with the cliffs and rocks.

===Migrations and travel===
During the winter, 95.5% of Arctic foxes utilize commuting trips, which remain within the fox&#x27;s home range. Commuting trips in Arctic foxes last less than 3 days and occur between 0–2.9 times a month. Nomadism is found in 3.4% of the foxes, and loop migrations (where the fox travels to a new range, then returns to its home range) are the least common at 1.1%. Arctic foxes in Canada that undergo nomadism and migrations voyage from the Canadian archipelago to Greenland and northwestern Canada. The duration and distance traveled between males and females is not significantly different.

Arctic foxes closer to goose colonies (located at the coasts) are less likely to migrate. Meanwhile, foxes experiencing low-density lemming populations are more likely to make sea ice trips. Residency is common in the Arctic fox population so that they can maintain their territories. Migratory foxes have a mortality rate &gt;3 times higher than resident foxes. Nomadic behavior becomes more common as the foxes age.

In July 2019, the Norwegian Polar Institute reported the story of a yearling female which was fitted with a GPS tracking device and then released by their researchers on the east coast of Spitsbergen in the Svalbard group of islands. The young fox crossed the polar ice from the islands to Greenland in 21 days, a distance of . She then moved on to Ellesmere Island in northern Canada, covering a total recorded distance of in 76 days, before her GPS tracker stopped working. She averaged just over a day, and managed as much as in a single day.

==Conservation status==

The Arctic fox has been assessed as least concern on the IUCN Red List since 2004. However, the Scandinavian mainland population is acutely endangered, despite being legally protected from hunting and persecution for several decades. The estimate of the adult population in all of Norway, Sweden, and Finland is fewer than 200 individuals. Of these, especially in Finland, the Arctic fox is even classified as critically endangered, because even though the animal was declared a protected species in Finland in 1940, the population has not recovered despite that. As a result, the populations of Arctic fox have been carefully studied and inventoried in places such as the Vindelfjällens Nature Reserve (Sweden), which has the Arctic fox as its symbol.

The abundance of the Arctic fox tends to fluctuate in a cycle along with the population of lemmings and voles (a 3- to 4-year cycle). The populations are especially vulnerable during the years when the prey population crashes, and uncontrolled trapping has almost eradicated two subpopulations.

The pelts of Arctic foxes with a slate-blue coloration were especially valuable. They were transported to various previously fox-free Aleutian Islands during the 1920s. The program was successful in terms of increasing the population of blue foxes, but their predation of Aleutian Canada geese conflicted with the goal of preserving that species.

The Arctic fox is losing ground to the larger red fox. This has been attributed to climate change—the camouflage value of its lighter coat decreases with less snow cover. Red foxes dominate where their ranges begin to overlap by killing Arctic foxes and their kits. An alternative explanation of the red fox&#x27;s gains involves the gray wolf. Historically, it has kept red fox numbers down, but as the wolf has been hunted to near extinction in much of its former range, the red fox population has grown larger, and it has taken over the niche of top predator. In areas of northern Europe, programs are in place that allow the hunting of red foxes in the Arctic fox&#x27;s previous range.

As with many other game species, the best sources of historical and large-scale population data are hunting bag records and questionnaires. Several potential sources of error occur in such data collections. In addition, numbers vary widely between years due to the large population fluctuations. However, the total population of the Arctic fox must be in the order of several hundred thousand animals.

The world population of Arctic foxes is thus not endangered, but two Arctic fox subpopulations are. One is on Medny Island (Commander Islands, Russia), which was reduced by some 85–90%, to around 90 animals, as a result of mange caused by an ear tick introduced by dogs in the 1970s. The population is currently under treatment with antiparasitic drugs, but the result is still uncertain.

The other threatened population is the one in Fennoscandia (Norway, Sweden, Finland, and Kola Peninsula). This population decreased drastically around the start of the 20th century as a result of extreme fur prices, which caused severe hunting also during population lows. The population has remained at a low density for more than 90 years, with additional reductions during the last decade. The total population estimate for 1997 is around 60 adults in Sweden, 11 adults in Finland, and 50 in Norway. From Kola, there are indications of a similar situation, suggesting a population of around 20 adults. The Fennoscandian population thus numbers around 140 breeding adults. Even after local lemming peaks, the Arctic fox population tends to collapse back to levels dangerously close to nonviability.

The Arctic fox is classed as a &quot;prohibited new organism&quot; under New Zealand&#x27;s Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996, preventing it from being imported into the country.

==See also==
* Arctic rabies virus

==References==
==Further reading==
* Nowak, Ronald M. (2005). &quot;Walker&#x27;s Carnivores of the World&quot;. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press. .

==External links==
* State of the Environment Norway: Arctic fox
* Smithsonian Institution – North American Mammals: Vulpes lagopus
* Photo Gallery by islandsmyndir.is
* https://www.britannica.com/animal/Arctic-fox</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82738" start="4" end="14" title="Arctic fox" label="Arctic fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q82738" start="51" end="60" title="Arctic fox" label="white fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q82738" start="62" end="71" title="Arctic fox" label="polar fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q82738" start="76" end="84" title="Arctic fox" label="snow fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="108" end="111" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="126" end="132" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="148" end="167" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="194" end="207" title="Tundra#Arctic tundra" label="Arctic tundra"/>
<link wikidata="Q101998" start="208" end="213" title="biome" label="biome"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="226" end="233" title="adaptation" label="adapted"/>
<link wikidata="Q190259" start="584" end="593" title="body heat" label="body heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q234150" start="649" end="656" title="lemming" label="lemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952397" start="659" end="663" title="vole" label="vole"/>
<link wikidata="Q203208" start="666" end="677" title="ringed seal" label="ringed seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21651" start="690" end="699" title="waterfowl" label="waterfowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="705" end="712" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="728" end="735" title="carrion" label="carrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="783" end="795" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901585" start="816" end="826" title="Monogamy in animals" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="1043" end="1055" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q216441" start="1058" end="1071" title="arctic wolf" label="Arctic wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="1073" end="1083" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="1086" end="1095" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="1098" end="1105" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="1113" end="1125" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q332784" start="2195" end="2200" title="esker" label="esker"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="2261" end="2270" title="Glacier" label="glaciated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490716" start="3719" end="3735" title="gestation period" label="gestation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="3820" end="3825" title="Order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q25306" start="3826" end="3835" title="Carnivora" label="Carnivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901585" start="3952" end="3962" title="Monogamy in animals" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="4443" end="4451" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="4811" end="4818" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q741598" start="5024" end="5037" title="kin selection" label="kin selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q234150" start="5132" end="5139" title="lemming" label="lemming"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952397" start="5142" end="5146" title="vole" label="vole"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="5164" end="5168" title="hare" label="hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="5171" end="5175" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="5178" end="5182" title="Egg (food)" label="eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="5194" end="5201" title="carrion" label="carrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="5274" end="5284" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="5327" end="5332" title="feces" label="feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q203208" start="5745" end="5756" title="ringed seal" label="ringed seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q164509" start="5906" end="5914" title="omnivore" label="omnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074540" start="6423" end="6433" title="snow goose" label="snow goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="7003" end="7013" title="adaptation" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="7067" end="7073" title="pelage" label="pelage"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="7241" end="7247" title="Polymorphism (biology)" label="morphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770571" start="7285" end="7304" title="seasonal camouflage" label="seasonal camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="7481" end="7487" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173746" start="7601" end="7605" title="MC1R" label="MC1R"/>
<link wikidata="Q766786" start="7762" end="7790" title="surface area to volume ratio" label="surface area to volume ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q351087" start="8041" end="8054" title="hearing range" label="hearing range"/>
<link wikidata="Q252857" start="8979" end="8992" title="Transcriptome" label="Transcriptome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764062" start="8993" end="9003" title="sequencing" label="sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q764759" start="9044" end="9062" title="positive selection" label="positive selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q22034143" start="9064" end="9091" title="Glycolipid transfer protein" label="Glycolipid transfer protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652205" start="9125" end="9170" title="V-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog 2" label="V-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q14860867" start="9205" end="9226" title="fatty acid metabolism" label="fatty acid metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q623293" start="9324" end="9327" title="Basal metabolic rate" label="BMR"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="10278" end="10298" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377893" start="10302" end="10316" title="Arctic fox fur" label="Arctic fox fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q185194" start="11859" end="11865" title="Vulpes" label="Vulpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q227936" start="11883" end="11888" title="tribe (biology)" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30223" start="11889" end="11896" title="Vulpini" label="Vulpini"/>
<link wikidata="Q164280" start="11962" end="11971" title="subfamily (biology)" label="subfamily"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474088" start="11972" end="11979" title="Caninae" label="Caninae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="11993" end="11999" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324" start="12000" end="12007" title="Canidae" label="Canidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="12061" end="12070" title="Monotypic taxon" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="12071" end="12076" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="12104" end="12111" title="genetics" label="genetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="12239" end="12252" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547210" start="12260" end="12303" title="10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="10th edition of &amp;quot;Systema Naturae&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="12346" end="12359" title="type specimen" label="type specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212640" start="12379" end="12386" title="Lapland (Sweden)" label="Lapland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="12388" end="12394" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="12435" end="12440" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="12516" end="12529" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="12562" end="12566" title="hare" label="hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="13079" end="13094" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="13096" end="13102" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q17343027" start="13147" end="13165" title="Vulpes qiuzhudingi" label="Vulpes qiuzhudingi"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="13298" end="13306" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="13564" end="13571" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="13783" end="13800" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene Epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="13873" end="13883" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13992" end="13998" title="Bering Sea#Islands" label="Bering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144173" start="14158" end="14174" title="Pribilof Islands" label="Pribilof Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="14440" end="14448" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q14056" start="14450" end="14459" title="Jan Mayen" label="Jan Mayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q45823" start="14521" end="14532" title="Barents Sea" label="Barents Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q44725" start="14566" end="14576" title="Bering Sea" label="Bering Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="14578" end="14584" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="14613" end="14623" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="14678" end="14694" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378564" start="14887" end="14895" title="pack ice" label="pack ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q69564" start="14929" end="14942" title="taiga" label="boreal forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="14958" end="14965" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="14976" end="14988" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="14999" end="15007" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066392" start="15009" end="15025" title="Northern Ontario" label="Northern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q927561" start="15027" end="15042" title="Nord-du-Québec" label="Northern Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="15048" end="15073" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland and Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q60010" start="15083" end="15098" title="Kenai Peninsula" label="Kenai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q934" start="15204" end="15214" title="North Pole" label="North Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="15299" end="15313" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="North Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="15339" end="15351" title="Last glacial period" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101044" start="15382" end="15403" title="The Arctic Fox Center" label="The Arctic Fox Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q944111" start="15407" end="15414" title="Súðavík" label="Súðavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="15550" end="15557" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="15602" end="15608" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q962986" start="17019" end="17044" title="Norwegian Polar Institute" label="Norwegian Polar Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="17109" end="17112" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q21162" start="17189" end="17200" title="Spitsbergen" label="Spitsbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="17208" end="17216" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="17291" end="17300" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q146841" start="17350" end="17366" title="Ellesmere Island" label="Ellesmere Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="17379" end="17385" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q253677" start="17448" end="17459" title="GPS tracker" label="GPS tracker"/>
<link wikidata="Q211005" start="17609" end="17622" title="least concern" label="least concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="17630" end="17643" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="17983" end="18004" title="Critically Endangered" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777304" start="18246" end="18275" title="Vindelfjällens Nature Reserve" label="Vindelfjällens Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952397" start="18431" end="18435" title="vole" label="vole"/>
<link wikidata="Q34168" start="18571" end="18579" title="Animal trapping" label="trapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="18757" end="18772" title="Aleutian Island" label="Aleutian Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716552" start="18895" end="18916" title="Aleutian cackling goose" label="Aleutian Canada geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="19017" end="19024" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="19054" end="19068" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="19305" end="19314" title="gray wolf" label="gray wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="19404" end="19414" title="extinction" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q19067" start="19520" end="19532" title="Apex predator" label="top predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q251315" start="20176" end="20188" title="Medny Island" label="Medny Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q208268" start="20190" end="20207" title="Commander Islands" label="Commander Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358140" start="20289" end="20294" title="mange" label="mange"/>
<link wikidata="Q604496" start="20502" end="20514" title="Fennoscandia" label="Fennoscandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q165608" start="20545" end="20559" title="Kola Peninsula" label="Kola Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497825" start="21350" end="21397" title="Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996" label="Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974552" start="21467" end="21486" title="Arctic rabies virus" label="Arctic rabies virus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2209" wikidata="Q361790" url="?curid=2209" title="Anglo-Saxon (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Anglo-Saxons]] were Germanic tribes that settled in early medieval England.

These Anglo-Saxons are also referred to under the names of two notable groups of tribes:
*Angles
*Saxons

Anglo-Saxon or Anglo-Saxons may also refer to:

==Historical==
* History of Anglo-Saxon England
* Archaeology of Anglo-Saxon England
* Anglo-Saxon architecture
* Anglo-Saxon art
* Anglo-Saxon brooches
* Burial in Anglo-Saxon England
* Anglo-Saxon burial mounds
* Anglo-Saxon charters
* Christianity in Anglo-Saxon England
* Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
* Coinage in Anglo-Saxon England
* List of Anglo-Saxon deities
* Anglo-Saxon dress
* Anglo-Saxon royal genealogies
* Anglo-Saxon glass
* Government in Anglo-Saxon England
* Anglo-Saxon law
* Anglo-Saxon London
* Anglo-Saxon lyre
* Magic in Anglo-Saxon England
* Anglo-Saxon metrical charms
* Anglo-Saxon mission
* Old English, the earliest historical form of the English language
* Anglo-Saxon paganism
* Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England
* Anglo-Saxon riddles
* Anglo-Saxon runes
* Anglo-Saxon runic rings
* List of Anglo-Saxon saints
* Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain
* Anglo-Saxon turriform churches
* Anglo-Saxon warfare
* Weapons and armour in Anglo-Saxon England
* Witchcraft in Anglo-Saxon England
* Women in Anglo-Saxon society

==Modern==
* Anglo-Saxon model, modern macroeconomic term
* Anglo-Saxon world, modern societies based on or influenced by English customs
* Anglo-Saxon (anthropology) or Nordic race, outdated racial concept
* , one of several ships
* White Anglo-Saxon Protestant, sociological term in the U.S.
* Anglo-Saxons (slur), a derogatory term for English-speaking countries used in Russian propaganda
* Anglo-Saxonism in the 19th century</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q361790" start="0" end="16" title="Anglo-Saxon (disambiguation)" label="[[Anglo-Saxons]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="169" end="175" title="Angles (tribe)" label="Angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="177" end="183" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q361790" start="185" end="196" title="Anglo-Saxon (disambiguation)" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q361790" start="200" end="212" title="Anglo-Saxon (disambiguation)" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="250" end="280" title="History of Anglo-Saxon England" label="History of Anglo-Saxon England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763671" start="283" end="317" title="Archaeology of Anglo-Saxon England" label="Archaeology of Anglo-Saxon England"/>
<link wikidata="Q537454" start="320" end="344" title="Anglo-Saxon architecture" label="Anglo-Saxon architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q958255" start="347" end="362" title="Anglo-Saxon art" label="Anglo-Saxon art"/>
<link wikidata="Q64029410" start="365" end="385" title="Anglo-Saxon brooches" label="Anglo-Saxon brooches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998801" start="388" end="417" title="Burial in Anglo-Saxon England" label="Burial in Anglo-Saxon England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763672" start="420" end="445" title="Anglo-Saxon burial mounds" label="Anglo-Saxon burial mounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543944" start="448" end="468" title="Anglo-Saxon charters" label="Anglo-Saxon charters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436989" start="471" end="506" title="Christianity in Anglo-Saxon England" label="Christianity in Anglo-Saxon England"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="509" end="530" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141567" start="533" end="563" title="Coinage in Anglo-Saxon England" label="Coinage in Anglo-Saxon England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065198" start="566" end="593" title="List of Anglo-Saxon deities" label="List of Anglo-Saxon deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763673" start="596" end="613" title="Anglo-Saxon dress" label="Anglo-Saxon dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q26235332" start="616" end="645" title="Anglo-Saxon royal genealogies" label="Anglo-Saxon royal genealogies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763675" start="648" end="665" title="Anglo-Saxon glass" label="Anglo-Saxon glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q122423514" start="668" end="701" title="Government in Anglo-Saxon England" label="Government in Anglo-Saxon England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039571" start="704" end="719" title="Anglo-Saxon law" label="Anglo-Saxon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q338466" start="722" end="740" title="Anglo-Saxon London" label="Anglo-Saxon London"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359629" start="743" end="759" title="Anglo-Saxon lyre" label="Anglo-Saxon lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730926" start="762" end="790" title="Magic in Anglo-Saxon England" label="Magic in Anglo-Saxon England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763670" start="793" end="820" title="Anglo-Saxon metrical charms" label="Anglo-Saxon metrical charms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087692" start="823" end="842" title="Anglo-Saxon mission" label="Anglo-Saxon mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="845" end="856" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q537514" start="913" end="933" title="Anglo-Saxon paganism" label="Anglo-Saxon paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565585" start="936" end="972" title="Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England" label="Prosopography of Anglo-Saxon England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763682" start="975" end="994" title="Anglo-Saxon riddles" label="Anglo-Saxon riddles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712936" start="997" end="1014" title="Anglo-Saxon runes" label="Anglo-Saxon runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616598" start="1017" end="1040" title="Anglo-Saxon runic rings" label="Anglo-Saxon runic rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736147" start="1043" end="1069" title="List of Anglo-Saxon saints" label="List of Anglo-Saxon saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435247" start="1072" end="1105" title="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain" label="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763683" start="1108" end="1138" title="Anglo-Saxon turriform churches" label="Anglo-Saxon turriform churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065199" start="1141" end="1160" title="Anglo-Saxon warfare" label="Anglo-Saxon warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821558" start="1163" end="1204" title="Weapons and armour in Anglo-Saxon England" label="Weapons and armour in Anglo-Saxon England"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027903" start="1207" end="1240" title="Witchcraft in Anglo-Saxon England" label="Witchcraft in Anglo-Saxon England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763684" start="1243" end="1271" title="Women in Anglo-Saxon society" label="Women in Anglo-Saxon society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054209" start="1286" end="1303" title="Anglo-Saxon model" label="Anglo-Saxon model"/>
<link wikidata="Q541576" start="1333" end="1350" title="Anglo-Saxon world" label="Anglo-Saxon world"/>
<link wikidata="Q714773" start="1413" end="1439" title="Anglo-Saxon (anthropology)" label="Anglo-Saxon (anthropology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q256898" start="1507" end="1535" title="White Anglo-Saxon Protestant" label="White Anglo-Saxon Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q117871613" start="1569" end="1588" title="Anglo-Saxons (slur)" label="Anglo-Saxons (slur)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85727707" start="1668" end="1702" title="Anglo-Saxonism in the 19th century" label="Anglo-Saxonism in the 19th century"/>
</links>
</doc>
