<doc id="358" wikidata="Q262" url="?curid=358" title="Algeria">
<text>Algeria, officially the People&#x27;s Democratic Republic of Algeria, is a country in the Maghreb region of North Africa. It is bordered to the northeast by Tunisia; to the east by Libya; to the southeast by Niger; to the southwest by Mali, Mauritania, and Western Sahara; to the west by Morocco; and to the north by the Mediterranean Sea. The capital and largest city is Algiers, located in the far north on the Mediterranean coast.

Inhabited since prehistory, Algeria has been at the crossroads of numerous cultures and civilisations, including the Phoenicians, Numidians, Romans, Vandals, and Byzantine Greeks. Its modern identity is rooted in centuries of Arab Muslim migration waves since the seventh century and the subsequent Arabisation of the indigenous populations. Following a succession of Islamic Arab and Berber dynasties between the eighth and 15th centuries, the Regency of Algiers was established in 1516 as a largely independent tributary state of the Ottoman Empire. After nearly three centuries as a major power in the Mediterranean, the country was invaded by France in 1830 and formally annexed in 1848, though it was not fully conquered and pacified until 1903. French rule brought mass European settlement that displaced the local population, which was reduced by up to one-third due to warfare, disease, and starvation. The Sétif and Guelma massacre in 1945 catalysed local resistance that culminated in the outbreak of the Algerian War in 1954. Algeria gained its independence in 1962. The country descended into a bloody civil war from 1992 to 2002.

Spanning , Algeria is the world&#x27;s tenth-largest nation by area, and the largest nation in Africa. It has a semi-arid climate, with the Sahara desert dominating most of the territory except for its fertile and mountainous north, where most of the population is concentrated. With a population of 44 million, Algeria is the tenth-most populous country in Africa, and the 33rd-most populous country in the world. Algeria&#x27;s official languages are Arabic and Tamazight; French is used in media, education, and certain administrative matters, but it has no official status. The vast majority of the population speak the Algerian dialect of Arabic. Most Algerians are Arabs, with Berbers forming a sizeable minority. Sunni Islam is the official religion and practised by 99 percent of the population.

Algeria is a semi-presidential republic composed of 58 provinces (&quot;wilayas&quot;) and 1,541 communes. It is a regional power in North Africa and a middle power in global affairs. The country has the second-highest Human Development Index in continental Africa and one of the largest economies in Africa, due mostly to its large petroleum and natural gas reserves, which are the sixteenth and ninth-largest in the world, respectively. Sonatrach, the national oil company, is the largest company in Africa and a major supplier of natural gas to Europe. The Algerian military is one of the largest in Africa, with the highest defence budget on the continent and among the highest in the world (ranks 22nd globally). Algeria is a member of the African Union, the Arab League, the OIC, OPEC, the United Nations, and the Arab Maghreb Union, of which it is a founding member.

== Name ==

Different forms of the name Algeria include: , , . The country&#x27;s full name is officially the &quot;People&#x27;s Democratic Republic of Algeria&quot; (; , RADP; Berber Tifinagh: , Berber Latin alphabet: ).

=== Etymology ===
Algeria&#x27;s name derives from the city of Algiers, which in turn derives from the Arabic (, &quot;the islands&quot;), referring to four small islands off its coast, a truncated form of the older (, &quot;islands of Bani Mazghanna&quot;). The name was given by Buluggin ibn Ziri after he established the city on the ruins of the Phoenician city of Icosium in 950. It was employed by medieval geographers such as Muhammad al-Idrisi and Yaqut al-Hamawi. 

Algeria took its name from the Regency of Algeria or Regency of Algiers, when Ottoman rule was established in the central Maghreb in early 16th century. This period saw the installation of a political and administrative organisation which participated in the establishment of the &quot;Watan el djazâïr&quot; (, country of Algiers) and the definition of its borders with its neighboring entities on the east and west. The Ottoman Turks who settled in Algeria referred both to themselves and the peoples as &quot;Algerians&quot;. Acting as a central military and political authority in the regency, the Ottoman Turks shaped the modern political identity of Algeria as a state possessing all the attributes of sovereign independence, despite still being nominally subject to the Ottoman sultan. Algerian nationalist, historian and statesman Ahmed Tewfik El Madani regarded the regency as the &quot;first Algerian state&quot; and the &quot;Algerian Ottoman republic&quot;.
== History ==
=== Prehistory and ancient history ===
Around ~1.8-million-year-old stone artifacts from Ain Hanech (Algeria) were considered to represent the oldest archaeological materials in North Africa. Stone artifacts and cut-marked bones that were excavated from two nearby deposits at Ain Boucherit are estimated to be ~1.9 million years old, and even older stone artifacts to be as old as ~2.4 million years. Hence, the Ain Boucherit evidence shows that ancestral hominins inhabited the Mediterranean fringe in northern Africa much earlier than previously thought. The evidence strongly argues for early dispersal of stone tool manufacture and use from East Africa, or a possible multiple-origin scenario of stone technology in both East and North Africa.

Neanderthal tool makers produced hand axes in the Levalloisian and Mousterian styles (43,000 BC) similar to those in the Levant. Algeria was the site of the highest state of development of Middle Paleolithic Flake tool techniques. Tools of this era, starting about 30,000 BC, are called Aterian (after the archaeological site of Bir el Ater, south of Tebessa).

The earliest blade industries in North Africa are called Iberomaurusian (located mainly in the Oran region). This industry appears to have spread throughout the coastal regions of the Maghreb between 15,000 and 10,000 BC. Neolithic civilisation (animal domestication and agriculture) developed in the Saharan and Mediterranean Maghreb perhaps as early as 11,000 BC or as late as between 6000 and 2000 BC. This life, richly depicted in the Tassili n&#x27;Ajjer paintings, predominated in Algeria until the classical period. The mixture of peoples of North Africa coalesced eventually into a distinct native population that came to be called Berbers, who are the indigenous peoples of northern Africa.

From their principal center of power at Carthage, the Carthaginians expanded and established small settlements along the North African coast; by 600 BC, a Phoenician presence existed at Tipasa, east of Cherchell, Hippo Regius (modern Annaba) and Rusicade (modern Skikda). These settlements served as market towns as well as anchorages.

As Carthaginian power grew, its impact on the indigenous population increased dramatically. Berber civilisation was already at a stage in which agriculture, manufacturing, trade, and political organisation supported several states. Trade links between Carthage and the Berbers in the interior grew, but territorial expansion also resulted in the enslavement or military recruitment of some Berbers and in the extraction of tribute from others.
By the early 4th century BC, Berbers formed the single largest element of the Carthaginian army. In the Revolt of the Mercenaries, Berber soldiers rebelled from 241 to 238 BC after being unpaid following the defeat of Carthage in the First Punic War. They succeeded in obtaining control of much of Carthage&#x27;s North African territory, and they minted coins bearing the name Libyan, used in Greek to describe natives of North Africa. The Carthaginian state declined because of successive defeats by the Romans in the Punic Wars.

In 146 BC the city of Carthage was destroyed. As Carthaginian power waned, the influence of Berber leaders in the hinterland grew. By the 2nd century BC, several large but loosely administered Berber kingdoms had emerged. Two of them were established in Numidia, behind the coastal areas controlled by Carthage. West of Numidia lay Mauretania, which extended across the Moulouya River in modern-day Morocco to the Atlantic Ocean. The high point of Berber civilisation, unequalled until the coming of the Almohads and Almoravids more than a millennium later, was reached during the reign of Masinissa in the 2nd century BC.

After Masinissa&#x27;s death in 148 BC, the Berber kingdoms were divided and reunited several times. Masinissa&#x27;s line survived until 24 AD, when the remaining Berber territory was annexed to the Roman Empire.
For several centuries Algeria was ruled by the Romans, who founded many colonies in the region. Algeria is home to the second-largest number of Roman sites and remains after Italy. Rome, after getting rid of its powerful rival Carthage in the year 146 BC, decided a century later to include Numidia to become the new master of North Africa. They built more than 500 cities. Like the rest of North Africa, Algeria was one of the breadbaskets of the empire, exporting cereals and other agricultural products. Saint Augustine was the bishop of Hippo Regius (modern-day Annaba, Algeria), located in the Roman province of Africa. The Germanic Vandals of Geiseric moved into North Africa in 429, and by 435 controlled coastal Numidia. They did not make any significant settlement on the land, as they were harassed by local tribes. In fact, by the time the Byzantines arrived Leptis Magna was abandoned and the Msellata region was occupied by the indigenous Laguatan who had been busy facilitating an Amazigh political, military and cultural revival. Furthermore, during the rule of the Romans, Byzantines, Vandals, Carthaginians, and Ottomans the Berber people were the only or one of the few in North Africa who remained independent. The Berber people were so resistant that even during the Muslim conquest of North Africa they still had control and possession over their mountains.

The collapse of the Western Roman Empire led to the establishment of a native Kingdom based in Altava (modern-day Algeria) known as the Mauro-Roman Kingdom. It was succeeded by another Kingdom based in Altava, the Kingdom of Altava. During the reign of Kusaila its territory extended from the region of modern-day Fez in the west to the western Aurès and later Kairaouan and the interior of Ifriqiya in the east.

=== Middle Ages ===

After negligible resistance from the locals, Muslim Arabs of the Umayyad Caliphate conquered Algeria in the early 8th century.

Large numbers of the indigenous Berber people converted to Islam. Christians, Berber and Latin speakers remained in the great majority in Tunisia until the end of the 9th century and Muslims only became a vast majority some time in the 10th. After the fall of the Umayyad Caliphate, numerous local dynasties emerged, including the Rustamids, Aghlabids, Fatimids, Zirids, Hammadids, Almoravids, Almohads and the Zayyanids. The Christians left in three waves: after the initial conquest, in the 10th century and the 11th. The last were evacuated to Sicily by the Normans and the few remaining died out in the 14th century.

During the Middle Ages, North Africa was home to many great scholars, saints and sovereigns including Judah Ibn Quraysh, the first grammarian to mention Semitic and Berber languages, the great Sufi masters Sidi Boumediene (Abu Madyan) and Sidi El Houari, and the Emirs Abd Al Mu&#x27;min and Yāghmūrasen. It was during this time that the Fatimids or children of Fatima, daughter of Muhammad, came to the Maghreb. These &quot;Fatimids&quot; went on to found a long lasting dynasty stretching across the Maghreb, Hejaz and the Levant, boasting a secular inner government, as well as a powerful army and navy, made up primarily of Arabs and Levantines extending from Algeria to their capital state of Cairo. The Fatimid caliphate began to collapse when its governors the Zirids seceded. To punish them the Fatimids sent the Arab Banu Hilal and Banu Sulaym against them. The resultant war is recounted in the epic Tāghribāt. In Al-Tāghrībāt the Amazigh Zirid Hero Khālīfā Al-Zānatī asks daily, for duels, to defeat the Hilalan hero Ābu Zayd al-Hilalī and many other Arab knights in a string of victories. The Zirids, however, were ultimately defeated ushering in an adoption of Arab customs and culture. The indigenous Amazigh tribes, however, remained largely independent, and depending on tribe, location and time controlled varying parts of the Maghreb, at times unifying it (as under the Fatimids). The Fatimid Islamic state, also known as Fatimid Caliphate made an Islamic empire that included North Africa, Sicily, Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon, Syria, Egypt, the Red Sea coast of Africa, Tihamah, Hejaz and Yemen. Caliphates from Northern Africa traded with the other empires of their time, as well as forming part of a confederated support and trade network with other Islamic states during the Islamic Era.

The Berber people historically consisted of several tribes. The two main branches were the Botr and Barnès tribes, who were divided into tribes, and again into sub-tribes. Each region of the Maghreb contained several tribes (for example, Sanhadja, Houara, Zenata, Masmouda, Kutama, Awarba, and Berghwata). All these tribes made independent territorial decisions.

Several Amazigh dynasties emerged during the Middle Ages in the Maghreb and other nearby lands. Ibn Khaldun provides a table summarising the Amazigh dynasties of the Maghreb region, the Zirid, Ifranid, Maghrawa, Almoravid, Hammadid, Almohad, Merinid, Abdalwadid, Wattasid, Meknassa and Hafsid dynasties. Both of the Hammadid and Zirid empires as well as the Fatimids established their rule in all of the Maghreb countries. The Zirids ruled land in what is now Algeria, Tunisia, Morocco, Libya, Spain, Malta and Italy. The Hammadids captured and held important regions such as Ouargla, Constantine, Sfax, Susa, Algiers, Tripoli and Fez establishing their rule in every country in the Maghreb region. The Fatimids which was created and established by the Kutama Berbers conquered all of North Africa as well as Sicily and parts of the Middle East.
Following the Berber revolt numerous independent states emerged across the Maghreb. In Algeria the Rustamid Kingdom was established. The Rustamid realm stretched from Tafilalt in Morocco to the Nafusa mountains in Libya including south, central and western Tunisia therefore including territory in all of the modern day Maghreb countries, in the south the Rustamid realm expanded to the modern borders of Mali and included territory in Mauritania.

Once extending their control over all of the Maghreb, part of Spain and briefly over Sicily, originating from modern Algeria, the Zirids only controlled modern Ifriqiya by the 11th century. The Zirids recognised nominal suzerainty of the Fatimid caliphs of Cairo. El Mu&#x27;izz the Zirid ruler decided to end this recognition and declared his independence. The Zirids also fought against other Zenata Kingdoms, for example the Maghrawa, a Berber dynasty originating from Algeria and which at one point was a dominant power in the Maghreb ruling over much of Morocco and western Algeria including Fez, Sijilmasa, Aghmat, Oujda, most of the Sous and Draa and reaching as far as M&#x27;sila and the Zab in Algeria.

As the Fatimid state was at the time too weak to attempt a direct invasion, they found another means of revenge. Between the Nile and the Red Sea were living Bedouin nomad tribes expelled from Arabia for their disruption and turbulency. The Banu Hilal and the Banu Sulaym for example, who regularly disrupted farmers in the Nile Valley since the nomads would often loot their farms. The then Fatimid vizier decided to destroy what he could not control, and broke a deal with the chiefs of these Bedouin tribes. The Fatimids even gave them money to leave.

Whole tribes set off with women, children, elders, animals and camping equipment. Some stopped on the way, especially in Cyrenaica, where they are still one of the essential elements of the settlement but most arrived in Ifriqiya by the Gabes region, arriving 1051. The Zirid ruler tried to stop this rising tide, but with each encounter, the last under the walls of Kairouan, his troops were defeated and the Arabs remained masters of the battlefield. The Arabs usually did not take control over the cities, instead looting them and destroying them.
The invasion kept going, and in 1057 the Arabs spread on the high plains of Constantine where they encircled the Qalaa of Banu Hammad (capital of the Hammadid Emirate), as they had done in Kairouan a few decades ago. From there they gradually gained the upper Algiers and Oran plains. Some of these territories were forcibly taken back by the Almohads in the second half of the 12th century. The influx of Bedouin tribes was a major factor in the linguistic, cultural Arabisation of the Maghreb and in the spread of nomadism in areas where agriculture had previously been dominant. Ibn Khaldun noted that the lands ravaged by the Banu Hilal tribes had become completely arid desert.

The Almohads originating from modern day Morocco, although founded by a man originating from modern day Algeria known as Abd al-Mu&#x27;min would soon take control over the Maghreb. During the time of the Almohad Dynasty Abd al-Mu&#x27;min&#x27;s tribe, the Koumïa, were the main supporters of the throne and the most important body of the empire. Defeating the weakening Almoravid Empire and taking control over Morocco in 1147, they pushed into Algeria in 1152, taking control over Tlemcen, Oran, and Algiers, wrestling control from the Hilian Arabs, and by the same year they defeated Hammadids who controlled Eastern Algeria.

Following their decisive defeat in the Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa in 1212 the Almohads began collapsing, and in 1235 the governor of modern-day Western Algeria, Yaghmurasen Ibn Zyan declared his independence and established the Kingdom of Tlemcen and the Zayyanid dynasty. Warring with the Almohad forces attempting to restore control over Algeria for 13 years, they defeated the Almohads in 1248 after killing their Caliph in a successful ambush near Oujda.
The Zayyanids retained their control over Algeria for 3 centuries. Much of the eastern territories of Algeria were under the authority of the Hafsid dynasty, although the Emirate of Bejaia encompassing the Algerian territories of the Hafsids would occasionally be independent from central Tunisian control. At their peak the Zayyanid kingdom included all of Morocco as its vassal to the west and in the east reached as far as Tunis which they captured during the reign of Abu Tashfin.

After several conflicts with local Barbary pirates sponsored by the Zayyanid sultans, Spain decided to invade Algeria and defeat the native Kingdom of Tlemcen. In 1505, they invaded and captured Mers el Kébir, and in 1509 after a bloody siege, they conquered Oran. Following their decisive victories over the Algerians in the western-coastal areas of Algeria, the Spanish decided to get bolder, and invaded more Algerian cities. In 1510, they led a series of sieges and attacks, taking over Bejaia in a large siege, and leading a semi-successful siege against Algiers. They also besieged Tlemcen. In 1511, they took control over Cherchell and Jijel, and attacked Mostaganem where although they were not able to conquer the city, they were able to force a tribute on them.

=== Early modern era ===
In 1516, the Turkish privateer brothers Aruj and Hayreddin Barbarossa, who operated successfully under the Hafsids, moved their base of operations to Algiers. They succeeded in conquering Jijel and Algiers from the Spaniards with help from the locals who saw them as liberators from the Christians, but the brothers eventually assassinated the local noble Salim al-Tumi and took control over the city and the surrounding regions. Their state is known as the Regency of Algiers. When Aruj was killed in 1518 during his invasion of Tlemcen, Hayreddin succeeded him as military commander of Algiers. The Ottoman sultan gave him the title of beylerbey and a contingent of some 2,000 janissaries. With the aid of this force and native Algerians, Hayreddin conquered the whole area between Constantine and Oran (although the city of Oran remained in Spanish hands until 1792).

The next beylerbey was Hayreddin&#x27;s son Hasan, who assumed the position in 1544. He was a Kouloughli or of mixed origins, as his mother was an Algerian Mooresse. Until 1587 Beylerbeylik of Algiers was governed by Beylerbeys who served terms with no fixed limits. Subsequently, with the institution of a regular administration, governors with the title of pasha ruled for three-year terms. The pasha was assisted by an autonomous janissary unit, known in Algeria as the Ojaq who were led by an agha. Discontent among the ojaq rose in the mid-1600s because they were not paid regularly, and they repeatedly revolted against the pasha. As a result, the agha charged the pasha with corruption and incompetence and seized power in 1659.

Plague had repeatedly struck the cities of North Africa. Algiers lost between 30,000 and 50,000 inhabitants to the plague in 1620–21, and had high fatalities in 1654–57, 1665, 1691 and 1740–42.
The Barbary pirates preyed on Christian and other non-Islamic shipping in the western Mediterranean Sea. The pirates often took the passengers and crew on the ships and sold them or used them as slaves. They also did a brisk business in ransoming some of the captives. According to Robert Davis, from the 16th to 19th century, pirates captured 1 million to 1.25 million Europeans as slaves. They often made raids on European coastal towns to capture Christian slaves to sell at slave markets in North Africa and other parts of the Ottoman Empire. In 1544, for example, Hayreddin Barbarossa captured the island of Ischia, taking 4,000 prisoners, and enslaved some 9,000 inhabitants of Lipari, almost the entire population. In 1551, the Ottoman governor of Algiers, Turgut Reis, enslaved the entire population of the Maltese island of Gozo. Barbary pirates often attacked the Balearic Islands. The threat was so severe that residents abandoned the island of Formentera. The introduction of broad-sail ships from the beginning of the 17th century allowed them to branch out into the Atlantic.

In July 1627 two pirate ships from Algiers under the command of Dutch pirate Jan Janszoon sailed as far as Iceland, raiding and capturing slaves. Two weeks earlier another pirate ship from Salé in Morocco had also raided in Iceland. Some of the slaves brought to Algiers were later ransomed back to Iceland, but some chose to stay in Algeria. In 1629, pirate ships from Algeria raided the Faroe Islands.

In 1659, the Janissaries stationed in Algiers, also known commonly as the Odjak of Algiers; and the Reis or the company of corsair captains rebelled, they removed the Ottoman viceroy from power, and placed one of its own in power. The new leader received the title of &quot;Agha&quot; then &quot;Dey&quot; in 1671, and the right to select passed to the divan, a council of some sixty military senior officers. Thus Algiers became a sovereign military republic. It was at first dominated by the odjak; but by the 18th century, it had become the dey&#x27;s instrument. Although Algiers remained nominally part of the Ottoman Empire, in reality they acted independently from the rest of the Empire, and often had wars with other Ottoman subjects and territories such as the Beylik of Tunis.

The dey was in effect a constitutional autocrat. The dey was elected for a life term, but in the 159 years (1671–1830) that the system was in place, fourteen of the twenty-nine deys were assassinated. Despite usurpation, military coups and occasional mob rule, the day-to-day operation of the Deylikal government was remarkably orderly. Although the regency patronised the tribal chieftains, it never had the unanimous allegiance of the countryside, where heavy taxation frequently provoked unrest. Autonomous tribal states were tolerated, and the regency&#x27;s authority was seldom applied in the Kabylia, although in 1730 the Regency was able to take control over the Kingdom of Kuku in western Kabylia. Many cities in the northern parts of the Algerian desert paid taxes to Algiers or one of its Beys. 

Barbary raids in the Mediterranean continued to attack Spanish merchant shipping, and as a result, the Spanish Empire launched an invasion in 1775, then the Spanish Navy bombarded Algiers in 1783 and 1784. For the attack in 1784, the Spanish fleet was to be joined by ships from such traditional enemies of Algiers as Naples, Portugal and the Knights of Malta. Over 20,000 cannonballs were fired, but all these military campaigns were doomed and Spain had to ask for peace in 1786 and paid 1 million pesos to the Dey.

In 1792, Algiers took back Oran and Mers el Kébir, the two last Spanish strongholds in Algeria. In the same year, they conquered the Moroccan Rif and Oujda, which they then abandoned in 1795.
In the 19th century, Algerian pirates forged affiliations with Caribbean powers, paying a &quot;license tax&quot; in exchange for safe harbor of their vessels.

Attacks by Algerian pirates on American merchantmen resulted in the First and Second Barbary Wars, which ended the attacks on U.S. ships in 1815. A year later, a combined Anglo-Dutch fleet, under the command of Lord Exmouth bombarded Algiers to stop similar attacks on European fishermen. These efforts proved successful, although Algerian piracy would continue until the French conquest in 1830.

=== French colonisation (1830–1962) ===


Under the pretext of a slight to their consul, the French invaded and captured Algiers in 1830. According to several historians, the methods used by the French to establish control over Algeria reached genocidal proportions. Historian Ben Kiernan wrote on the French conquest of Algeria: &quot;By 1875, the French conquest was complete. The war had killed approximately 825,000 indigenous Algerians since 1830&quot;. French losses from 1831 to 1851 were 92,329 dead in the hospital and only 3,336 killed in action. In 1872, The Algerian population stood at about 2.9 million. French policy was predicated on &quot;civilising&quot; the country. The slave trade and piracy in Algeria ceased following the French conquest. The conquest of Algeria by the French took some time and resulted in considerable bloodshed. A combination of violence and disease epidemics caused the indigenous Algerian population to decline by nearly one-third from 1830 to 1872. On 17 September 1860, Napoleon III declared &quot;Our first duty is to take care of the happiness of the three million Arabs, whom the fate of arms has brought under our domination.&quot; During this time, only Kabylia resisted, the Kabylians were not colonised until after the Mokrani Revolt in 1871.

Alexis de Tocqueville wrote and never completed an unpublished essay outlining his ideas for how to transform Algeria from an occupied tributary state to a colonial regime, wherein he advocated for a mixed system of &quot;total domination and total colonisation&quot; whereby French military would wage total war against civilian populations while a colonial administration would provide rule of law and property rights to settlers within French occupied cities.
From 1848 until independence, France administered the whole Mediterranean region of Algeria as an integral part and &quot;département&quot; of the nation. One of France&#x27;s longest-held overseas territories, Algeria became a destination for hundreds of thousands of European immigrants, who became known as &quot;colons&quot; and later, as &quot;Pied-Noirs.&quot; Between 1825 and 1847, 50,000 French people emigrated to Algeria. These settlers benefited from the French government&#x27;s confiscation of communal land from tribal peoples, and the application of modern agricultural techniques that increased the amount of arable land. Many Europeans settled in Oran and Algiers, and by the early 20th century they formed a majority of the population in both cities.

During the late 19th and early 20th century, the European share was almost a fifth of the population. The French government aimed at making Algeria an assimilated part of France, and this included substantial educational investments especially after 1900. The indigenous cultural and religious resistance heavily opposed this tendency, but in contrast to the other colonised countries&#x27; path in central Asia and Caucasus, Algeria kept its individual skills and a relatively human-capital intensive agriculture.

During the Second World War, Algeria came under Vichy control before being liberated by the Allies in Operation Torch, which saw the first large-scale deployment of American troops in the North African campaign.

Gradually, dissatisfaction among the Muslim population, which lacked political and economic status under the colonial system, gave rise to demands for greater political autonomy and eventually independence from France. In May 1945, the uprising against the occupying French forces was suppressed through what is now known as the Sétif and Guelma massacre. Tensions between the two population groups came to a head in 1954, when the first violent events of what was later called the Algerian War began after the publication of the Declaration of 1 November 1954. Historians have estimated that between 30,000 and 150,000 Harkis and their dependents were killed by the National Liberation Front (FLN) or by lynch mobs in Algeria. The FLN used hit and run attacks in Algeria and France as part of its war, and the French conducted severe reprisals. In addition, the French destroyed over 8,000 villages and relocated over 2 million Algerians to concentration camps.

The war led to the death of hundreds of thousands of Algerians and hundreds of thousands of injuries. Historians, like Alistair Horne and Raymond Aron, state that the actual number of Algerian Muslim war dead was far greater than the original FLN and official French estimates but was less than the 1 million deaths claimed by the Algerian government after independence. Horne estimated Algerian casualties during the span of eight years to be around 700,000. The war uprooted more than 2 million Algerians.

The war against French rule concluded in 1962, when Algeria gained complete independence following the March 1962 Evian agreements and the July 1962 self-determination referendum.

=== The first three decades of independence (1962–1991) ===
The number of European &quot;Pied-Noirs&quot; who fled Algeria totaled more than 900,000 between 1962 and 1964. The exodus to mainland France accelerated after the Oran massacre of 1962, in which hundreds of militants entered European sections of the city and began attacking civilians.
Algeria&#x27;s first president was the Front de Libération Nationale (FLN) leader Ahmed Ben Bella. Morocco&#x27;s claim to portions of western Algeria led to the Sand War in 1963. Ben Bella was overthrown in 1965 by Houari Boumédiène, his former ally and defence minister. Under Ben Bella, the government had become increasingly socialist and authoritarian; Boumédienne continued this trend. However, he relied much more on the army for his support, and reduced the sole legal party to a symbolic role. He collectivised agriculture and launched a massive industrialisation drive. Oil extraction facilities were nationalised. This was especially beneficial to the leadership after the international 1973 oil crisis.

Boumédienne&#x27;s successor, Chadli Bendjedid, introduced some liberal economic reforms. He promoted a policy of Arabisation in Algerian society and public life. Teachers of Arabic, brought in from other Muslim countries, spread conventional Islamic thought in schools and sowed the seeds of a return to Orthodox Islam.

The Algerian economy became increasingly dependent on oil, leading to hardship when the price collapsed during the 1980s oil glut. Economic recession caused by the crash in world oil prices resulted in Algerian social unrest during the 1980s; by the end of the decade, Bendjedid introduced a multi-party system. Political parties developed, such as the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), a broad coalition of Muslim groups.

=== Civil War (1991–2002) and aftermath ===
In December 1991 the Islamic Salvation Front dominated the first of two rounds of legislative elections. Fearing the election of an Islamist government, the authorities intervened on 11 January 1992, cancelling the elections. Bendjedid resigned and a High Council of State was installed to act as the Presidency. It banned the FIS, triggering a civil insurgency between the Front&#x27;s armed wing, the Armed Islamic Group, and the national armed forces, in which more than 100,000 people are thought to have died. The Islamist militants conducted a violent campaign of civilian massacres. At several points in the conflict, the situation in Algeria became a point of international concern, most notably during the crisis surrounding Air France Flight 8969, a hijacking perpetrated by the Armed Islamic Group. The Armed Islamic Group declared a ceasefire in October 1997.

Algeria held elections in 1999, considered biased by international observers and most opposition groups which were won by President Abdelaziz Bouteflika. He worked to restore political stability to the country and announced a &quot;Civil Concord&quot; initiative, approved in a referendum, under which many political prisoners were pardoned, and several thousand members of armed groups were granted exemption from prosecution under a limited amnesty, in force until 13 January 2000. The AIS disbanded and levels of insurgent violence fell rapidly. The Groupe Salafiste pour la Prédication et le Combat (GSPC), a splinter group of the Armed Islamic Group, continued a terrorist campaign against the Government.

Bouteflika was re-elected in the April 2004 presidential election after campaigning on a programme of national reconciliation. The programme comprised economic, institutional, political and social reform to modernise the country, raise living standards, and tackle the causes of alienation. It also included a second amnesty initiative, the Charter for Peace and National Reconciliation, which was approved in a referendum in September 2005. It offered amnesty to most guerrillas and Government security forces.

In November 2008, the Algerian Constitution was amended following a vote in Parliament, removing the two-term limit on Presidential incumbents. This change enabled Bouteflika to stand for re-election in the 2009 presidential elections, and he was re-elected in April 2009. During his election campaign and following his re-election, Bouteflika promised to extend the programme of national reconciliation and a $150-billion spending programme to create three million new jobs, the construction of one million new housing units, and to continue public sector and infrastructure modernisation programmes.

A continuing series of protests throughout the country started on 28 December 2010, inspired by similar protests across the Middle East and North Africa. On 24 February 2011, the government lifted Algeria&#x27;s 19-year-old state of emergency. The government enacted legislation dealing with political parties, the electoral code, and the representation of women in elected bodies. In April 2011, Bouteflika promised further constitutional and political reform. However, elections are routinely criticised by opposition groups as unfair and international human rights groups say that media censorship and harassment of political opponents continue.

On 2 April 2019, Bouteflika resigned from the presidency after mass protests against his candidacy for a fifth term in office.

In December 2019, Abdelmadjid Tebboune became Algeria&#x27;s president, after winning the first round of the presidential election with a record abstention rate – the highest of all presidential elections since Algeria&#x27;s democracy in 1989. Tebboune is accused of being close to the military and being loyal to the deposed president. Tebboune rejects these accusations, claiming to be the victim of a witch hunt. He also reminds his detractors that he was expelled from the Government in August 2017 at the instigation of oligarchs languishing in prison. In September 2024, President Tebboune won a second term with a landslide 84.3 percent of the vote, although his opponents called the results fraud.

== Geography ==

Since the 2011 breakup of Sudan, and the creation of South Sudan, Algeria has been the largest country in Africa, and the Mediterranean Basin. Its southern part includes a significant portion of the Sahara. To the north, the Tell Atlas forms with the Saharan Atlas, further south, two parallel sets of reliefs in approaching eastbound, and between which are inserted vast plains and highlands. Both Atlas tend to merge in eastern Algeria. The vast mountain ranges of Aures and Nememcha occupy the entire northeastern Algeria and are delineated by the Tunisian border. The highest point is Mount Tahat ().

Algeria lies mostly between latitudes 19° and 37°N (a small area is north of 37°N and south of 19°N), and longitudes 9°W and 12°E. Most of the coastal area is hilly, sometimes even mountainous, and there are a few natural harbours. The area from the coast to the Tell Atlas is fertile. South of the Tell Atlas is a steppe landscape ending with the Saharan Atlas; farther south, there is the Sahara desert.

The Hoggar Mountains (), also known as the Hoggar, are a highland region in central Sahara, southern Algeria. They are located about south of the capital, Algiers, and just east of Tamanghasset. Algiers, Oran, Constantine, and Annaba are Algeria&#x27;s main cities.
=== Climate and hydrology ===

In this region, midday desert temperatures can be hot year round. After sunset, however, the clear, dry air permits rapid loss of heat, and the nights are cool to chilly. Enormous daily ranges in temperature are recorded.

Rainfall is fairly plentiful along the coastal part of the Tell Atlas, ranging from annually, the amount of precipitation increasing from west to east. Precipitation is heaviest in the northern part of eastern Algeria, where it reaches as much as in some years.

Farther inland, the rainfall is less plentiful. Algeria also has ergs, or sand dunes, between mountains. Among these, in the summer time when winds are heavy and gusty, temperatures can go up to .

=== Fauna and flora ===

The varied vegetation of Algeria includes coastal, mountainous and grassy desert-like regions which all support a wide range of wildlife. 

In Algeria forest cover is around 1% of the total land area, equivalent to 1,949,000 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, up from 1,667,000 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 1,439,000 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 510,000 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 0% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 6% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 80% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership, 18% private ownership and 2% with ownership listed as other or unknown.

Many of the creatures constituting the Algerian wildlife live in close proximity to civilisation. The most commonly seen animals include the wild boars, jackals, and gazelles, although it is not uncommon to spot fennecs (foxes), and jerboas. Algeria also has a small African leopard and Saharan cheetah population, but these are seldom seen. A species of deer, the Barbary stag, inhabits the dense humid forests in the north-eastern areas. The fennec fox is the national animal of Algeria.

A variety of bird species makes the country an attraction for bird watchers. The forests are inhabited by boars and jackals. Barbary macaques are the sole native monkey. Snakes, monitor lizards, and numerous other reptiles can be found living among an array of rodents throughout the semi arid regions of Algeria. Many animals are now extinct, including the Barbary lions, Atlas bears and crocodiles.

In the north, some of the native flora includes Macchia scrub, olive trees, oaks, cedars and other conifers. The mountain regions contain large forests of evergreens (Aleppo pine, juniper, and evergreen oak) and some deciduous trees. Fig, eucalyptus, agave, and various palm trees grow in the warmer areas. The grape vine is indigenous to the coast. In the Sahara region, some oases have palm trees. Acacias with wild olives are the predominant flora in the remainder of the Sahara. Algeria had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.22/10, ranking it 106th globally out of 172 countries.

Camels are used extensively; the desert also abounds with venomous and nonvenomous snakes, scorpions, and numerous insects.

== Government and politics ==
Algeria&#x27;s government has been described as authoritarian, and elected politicians have relatively little sway over affairs in the country. Instead, a group of unelected civilian and military &quot;décideurs&quot; (&quot;deciders&quot;), known as &quot;le pouvoir&quot; (&quot;the power&quot;), de facto rule the country, even deciding who should be president. The most powerful man might have been Mohamed Mediène, the head of military intelligence, before he was brought down during the 2019 protests. In recent years, many of these generals have died, retired, or been imprisoned. After the death of General Larbi Belkheir, previous president Bouteflika put loyalists in key posts, notably at Sonatrach, and secured constitutional amendments that made him re-electable indefinitely, until he was brought down in 2019 during protests.

The head of state is the President of Algeria, who is elected for a five-year term. The president is limited to two five-year terms. The most recent presidential election was planned to be in April 2019, but widespread protests erupted on 22 February against the president&#x27;s decision to participate in the election, which resulted in President Bouteflika announcing his resignation on 3 April. Abdelmadjid Tebboune, an independent candidate, was elected as president after the election eventually took place on 12 December 2019. Protestors refused to recognise Tebboune as president, citing demands for comprehensive reform of the political system. Algeria has universal suffrage at 18 years of age. The President is the head of the army, the Council of Ministers and the High Security Council. He appoints the Prime Minister who is also the head of government.

The Algerian parliament is bicameral; the lower house, the People&#x27;s National Assembly, has 462 members who are directly elected for five-year terms, while the upper house, the Council of the Nation, has 144 members serving six-year terms, of which 96 members are chosen by local assemblies and 48 are appointed by the president. According to the constitution, no political association may be formed if it is &quot;based on differences in religion, language, race, gender, profession, or region&quot;. In addition, political campaigns must be exempt from the aforementioned subjects.

Parliamentary elections were last held in June 2021. In the elections, the FLN lost 66 of its seats, but remained the largest party with 98 seats. Other parties included the Movement of the Society for Peace which won 65 seats, the National Rally for Democracy which won 58 seats, the Future Front which won 48 seats, and the National Construction Movement which won 39 seats.

=== Foreign relations ===

Algeria is included in the European Union&#x27;s European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.
Giving incentives and rewarding best performers, as well as offering funds in a faster and more flexible manner, are the two main principles underlying the European Neighbourhood Instrument (ENI) that came into force in 2014. It has a budget of €15.4 billion and provides the bulk of funding through a number of programmes.

In 2009, the French government agreed to compensate victims of nuclear tests in Algeria. Defence Minister Hervé Morin stated that &quot;It&#x27;s time for our country to be at peace with itself, at peace thanks to a system of compensation and reparations&quot;, when presenting the draft law on the payouts. Algerian officials and activists believe that this is a good first step and hope that this move would encourage broader reparation.

Tensions between Algeria and Morocco in relation to the Western Sahara have been an obstacle to tightening the Arab Maghreb Union, nominally established in 1989, but which has carried little practical weight. On 24 August 2021, Algeria announced the break of diplomatic relations with Morocco.

=== Military ===
The military of Algeria consists of the People&#x27;s National Army (ANP), the Algerian National Navy (MRA), and the Algerian Air Force (QJJ), plus the Territorial Air Defence Forces. It is the direct successor of the National Liberation Army (Armée de Libération Nationale or ALN), the armed wing of the nationalist National Liberation Front which fought French colonial occupation during the Algerian War of Independence (1954–62).

Total military personnel include 147,000 active, 150,000 reserve, and 187,000 paramilitary staff (2008 estimate). Service in the military is compulsory for men aged 19–30, for a total of 12 months. The military expenditure was 4.3% of the gross domestic product (GDP) in 2012. Algeria has the second-largest military in North Africa with the largest defence budget in Africa ($10 billion). Most of Algeria&#x27;s weapons are imported from Russia, with whom they are a close ally.

In 2007, the Algerian Air Force signed a deal with Russia to purchase 49 MiG-29SMT and 6 MiG-29UBT at an estimated cost of $1.9 billion. Russia is also building two 636-type diesel submarines for Algeria.

Algeria is the 90th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.

=== Human rights ===

Algeria has been categorised by the US government funded Freedom House as &quot;not free&quot; since it began publishing such ratings in 1972, with the exception of 1989, 1990, and 1991, when the country was labelled &quot;partly free&quot;. In December 2016, the &quot;Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Monitor&quot; issued a report regarding violation of media freedom in Algeria. It clarified that the Algerian government imposed restrictions on freedom of the press; expression; and right to peaceful demonstration, protest and assembly as well as intensified censorship of the media and websites. Due to the fact that the journalists and activists criticise the ruling government, some media organisations&#x27; licenses are cancelled.

Independent and autonomous trade unions face routine harassment from the government, with many leaders imprisoned and protests suppressed. In 2016, a number of unions, many of which were involved in the 2010–2012 Algerian Protests, have been deregistered by the government.

Homosexuality is illegal in Algeria. Public homosexual behavior is punishable by up to two years in prison. Despite this, about 26% of Algerians think that homosexuality should be accepted, according to the survey conducted by the BBC News Arabic-Arab Barometer in 2019. Algeria showed the highest LGBT acceptance compared to other Arab countries where the survey was conducted.

Human Rights Watch has accused the Algerian authorities of using the COVID-19 pandemic as an excuse to prevent pro-democracy movements and protests in the country, leading to the arrest of youths as part of social distancing.

=== Administrative divisions ===

Algeria is divided into 58 provinces (&quot;wilayas&quot;), 553 districts (&quot;daïras&quot;) and 1,541 municipalities (&quot;baladiyahs&quot;). Each province, district, and municipality is named after its seat, which is usually the largest city.

The administrative divisions have changed several times since independence. When introducing new provinces, the numbers of old provinces are kept, hence the non-alphabetical order. With their official numbers, currently (since 1983) they are:

== Economy ==
Algeria&#x27;s currency is the dinar (DZD). The economy remains dominated by the state, a legacy of the country&#x27;s socialist post-independence development model. In June 2024 The World Bank&#x27;s 2024 report marks a turning point for Algeria, which joins the select club of upper-middle-income countries. This economic rise, the result of an ambitious development strategy, places the country in the same category as emerging powers such as China, Brazil and Turkey In recent years, the Algerian government has halted the privatisation of state-owned industries and imposed restrictions on imports and foreign involvement in its economy. These restrictions are just starting to be lifted off recently although questions about Algeria&#x27;s slowly-diversifying economy remain.

Algeria has struggled to develop industries outside hydrocarbons in part because of high costs and an inert state bureaucracy. The government&#x27;s efforts to diversify the economy by attracting foreign and domestic investment outside the energy sector have done little to reduce high youth unemployment rates or to address housing shortages. The country is facing a number of short-term and medium-term problems, including the need to diversify the economy, strengthen political, economic and financial reforms, improve the business climate and reduce inequalities among regions.

A wave of economic protests in February and March 2011 prompted the Algerian government to offer more than $23 billion in public grants and retroactive salary and benefit increases. Public spending has increased by 27% annually during the past five years. The 2010–14 public-investment programme will cost US$286 billion, 40% of which will go to human development.

Thanks to strong hydrocarbon revenues, Algeria has a cushion of $173 billion in foreign currency reserves and a large hydrocarbon stabilisation fund. In addition, Algeria&#x27;s external debt is extremely low at about 2% of GDP. The economy remains very dependent on hydrocarbon wealth, and, despite high foreign exchange reserves (US$178 billion, equivalent to three years of imports), current expenditure growth makes Algeria&#x27;s budget more vulnerable to the risk of prolonged lower hydrocarbon revenues.

Algeria has not joined the WTO, despite several years of negotiations but is a member of the Greater Arab Free Trade Area, the African Continental Free Trade Area, and has an association agreement with the European Union.

Turkish direct investments have accelerated in Algeria, with total value reaching $5 billion. As of 2022, the number of Turkish companies present in Algeria has reached 1,400. In 2020, despite the pandemic, more than 130 Turkish companies were created in Algeria.

=== Oil and natural resources ===

Algeria, whose economy is reliant on petroleum, has been an OPEC member since 1969. Its crude oil production stands at around 1.1 million barrels/day, but it is also a major gas producer and exporter, with important links to Europe. Hydrocarbons have long been the backbone of the economy, accounting for roughly 60% of budget revenues, 30% of GDP, and 87.7% of export earnings. Algeria has the 10th-largest reserves of natural gas in the world and is the sixth-largest gas exporter. The U.S. Energy Information Administration reported that in 2005, Algeria had of proven natural gas reserves. It also ranks 16th in oil reserves.

Non-hydrocarbon growth for 2011 was projected at 5%. To cope with social demands, the authorities raised expenditure, especially on basic food support, employment creation, support for SMEs, and higher salaries. High hydrocarbon prices have improved the current account and the already large international reserves position.

Income from oil and gas rose in 2011 as a result of continuing high oil prices, though the trend in production volume is downward. Production from the oil and gas sector in terms of volume continues to decline, dropping from 43.2 million tonnes to 32 million tonnes between 2007 and 2011. Nevertheless, the sector accounted for 98% of the total volume of exports in 2011, against 48% in 1962, and 70% of budgetary receipts, or US$71.4 billion.

The Algerian national oil company is Sonatrach, which plays a key role in all aspects of the oil and natural gas sectors in Algeria. All foreign operators must work in partnership with Sonatrach, which usually has majority ownership in production-sharing agreements.

Access to biocapacity in Algeria is lower than world average. In 2016, Algeria had 0.53 global hectares of biocapacity per person within its territory, much less than the world average of 1.6 global hectares per person. In 2016, Algeria used 2.4 global hectares of biocapacity per person – their ecological footprint of consumption. This means they use just under 4.5 times as much biocapacity as Algeria contains. As a result, Algeria is running a biocapacity deficit. In April 2022, diplomats from Italy and Spain held talks after Rome&#x27;s move to secure large volume of Algerian gas stoked concerns in Madrid. Under the deal between Algeria&#x27;s Sonatrach and Italy&#x27;s Eni, Algeria will send an additional 9 billion cubic metres of gas to Italy by next year and in 2024.

=== Research and alternative energy sources ===
Algeria has invested an estimated 100 billion dinars towards developing research facilities and paying researchers. This development programme is meant to advance alternative energy production, especially solar and wind power. Algeria is estimated to have the largest solar energy potential in the Mediterranean, so the government has funded the creation of a solar science park in Hassi R&#x27;Mel. Currently, Algeria has 20,000 research professors at various universities and over 780 research labs, with state-set goals to expand to 1,000. Besides solar energy, areas of research in Algeria include space and satellite telecommunications, nuclear power and medical research.

=== Labour market ===
The overall rate of unemployment was 11.8% in 2023. The government strengthened in 2011 the job programmes introduced in 1988, in particular in the framework of the programme to aid those seeking work (Dispositif d&#x27;Aide à l&#x27;Insertion Professionnelle).

Despite a decline in total unemployment, youth and women unemployment is high.

=== Tourism ===

The development of the tourism sector in Algeria had previously been hampered by a lack of facilities, but since 2004 a broad tourism development strategy has been implemented resulting in many hotels of a high modern standard being built.

There are several UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Algeria which includes Al Qal&#x27;a of Beni Hammad, the first capital of the Hammadid empire; Tipasa, a Phoenician and later Roman town;Djémila and Timgad, both Roman ruins; M&#x27;Zab Valley, a limestone valley containing a large urbanised oasis; and the Casbah of Algiers, an important citadel. The only natural World Heritage Site in Algeria is the Tassili n&#x27;Ajjer, a mountain range.

=== Transport ===

Two trans-African automobile routes pass through Algeria:
* Cairo-Dakar Highway
* Algiers-Lagos Highway
The Algerian road network is the densest in Africa; its length is estimated at of highways, with more than 3,756 structures and a paving rate of 85%. This network will be complemented by the East-West Highway, a major infrastructure project currently under construction. It is a three-way, highway, linking Annaba in the extreme east to the Tlemcen in the far west. Algeria is also crossed by the Trans-Sahara Highway, which is now completely paved. This road is supported by the Algerian government to increase trade between the six countries crossed: Algeria, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Chad, and Tunisia.

== Demographics ==

Algeria has a population of an estimated 45.6 million, of which the majority, 75% to 85% are ethnically Arab. At the outset of the 20th century, its population was approximately 4 million. About 90% of Algerians live in the northern, coastal area; the inhabitants of the Sahara desert are mainly concentrated in oases, although some 1.5 million remain nomadic or partly nomadic. 28.1% of Algerians are under the age of 15.

Between 90,000 and 165,000 Sahrawis from Western Sahara live in the Sahrawi refugee camps, in the western Algerian Sahara desert. There are also more than 4,000 Palestinian refugees, who are well integrated and have not asked for assistance from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). In 2009, 35,000 Chinese migrant workers lived in Algeria.

The largest concentration of Algerian migrants outside Algeria is in France, which has reportedly over 1.7 million Algerians of up to the second generation.

=== Ethnic groups ===
Arabs and indigenous Berbers as well as Phoenicians, Romans, Vandals, Byzantine Greeks, Turks, various Sub-Saharan Africans, and French have contributed to the history and culture of Algeria. Descendants of Andalusi refugees are also present in the population of Algiers and other cities. Moreover, Spanish was spoken by these Aragonese and Castillian Morisco descendants deep into the 18th century, and even Catalan was spoken at the same time by Catalan Morisco descendants in the small town of Grish El-Oued.

Centuries of Arab migrations to the Maghreb since the seventh century shifted the demographic scope in Algeria. Estimates vary based on different sources. The majority of the population of Algeria is ethnically Arab, constituting between 75% and 80% to 85% of the population. Berbers who make up between 15% and 20% to 24% of the population are divided into many groups with varying languages. The largest of these are the Kabyles, who live in the Kabylie region east of Algiers, the Chaoui of Northeast Algeria, the Tuaregs in the southern desert and the Shenwa people of North Algeria.
During the colonial period, there was a large (10% in 1960) European population who became known as &quot;Pied-Noirs&quot;. They were primarily of French, Spanish and Italian origin. Almost all of this population left during the war of independence or immediately after its end.

=== Languages ===
Modern Standard Arabic and Berber are the official languages. Algerian Arabic (Darja) is the language used by the majority of the population. Colloquial Algerian Arabic has some Berber loanwords which represent 8% to 9% of its vocabulary.

Berber has been recognised as a &quot;national language&quot; by the constitutional amendment of 8 May 2002. Kabyle, the predominant Berber language, is taught and is partially co-official (with a few restrictions) in parts of Kabylie. Kabyle has a significant Arabic, French, Latin, Greek, Phoenician and Punic substratum, and Arabic loanwords represent 35% of the total Kabyle vocabulary. In February 2016, the Algerian constitution passed a resolution that made Berber an official language alongside Arabic. Algeria emerged as a bilingual state after 1962. Colloquial Algerian Arabic is spoken by about 83% of the population and Berber by 27%.

Although French has no official status in Algeria, it has one of the largest Francophone populations in the world, and French is widely used in government, media (newspapers, radio, local television), and both the education system (from primary school onwards) and academia due to Algeria&#x27;s colonial history. It can be regarded as a lingua franca of Algeria. In 2008, 11.2 million Algerians could read and write in French. In 2013, it was estimated that 60% of the population could speak or understand French. In 2022, it was estimated that 33% of the population was Francophone. 

The use of English in Algeria, though limited in comparison to the previously mentioned languages, has increased due to globalisation. In 2022 it was announced that English would be taught in elementary schools.

=== Religion ===

Islam is the predominant religion in Algeria, with its adherents, mostly Sunnis, accounting for 99% of the population according to a 2021 CIA &quot;World Factbook&quot; estimate, and 97.9% according to Pew Research in 2020. There are about 290,000 Ibadis in the M&#x27;zab Valley in the region of Ghardaia.

Prior to independence, Algeria was home to more than 1.3 million Christians (mostly of European ancestry). Most of the Christian settlers left to France after the country&#x27;s independence. Today, estimates of the Christian population range from 100,000 to 200,000. Algerian citizens who are Christians predominantly belong to Protestant denominations, which have seen increased pressure from the government in recent years including many forced closures.

According to the Arab Barometer in 2018–2019, the vast majority of Algerians (99.1%) continue to identify as Muslim. The June 2019 Arab Barometer-BBC News report found that the percentage of Algerians identifying as non-religious has grown from around 8% in 2013 to around 15% in 2018. The Arab Barometer December 2019, found that the growth in the percentage of Algerians identifying as non-religious is largely driven by young Algerians, with roughly 25% describing themselves as non-religious. However, the 2021 Arab Barometer report found that those who said they were not religious among Algerians has decreased, with just 2.6% identifying as non-religious. In that same report, 69.5% of Algerians identified as religious and another 27.8% identifying as somewhat religious.

Algeria has given the Muslim world a number of prominent thinkers, including Emir Abdelkader, Abdelhamid Ben Badis, Mouloud Kacem Naît Belkacem, Malek Bennabi and Mohamed Arkoun.

=== Health ===

In 2018, Algeria had the highest numbers of physicians in the Maghreb region (1.72 per 1,000 people), nurses (2.23 per 1,000 people), and dentists (0.31 per 1,000 people). Access to &quot;improved water sources&quot; was around 97.4% of the population in urban areas and 98.7% of the population in the rural areas. Some 99% of Algerians living in urban areas, and around 93.4% of those living in rural areas, had access to &quot;improved sanitation&quot;. According to the World Bank, Algeria is making progress towards its goal of &quot;reducing by half the number of people without sustainable access to improved drinking water and basic sanitation by 2015&quot;. Given Algeria&#x27;s young population, policy favours preventive health care and clinics over hospitals. In keeping with this policy, the government maintains an immunisation programme. However, poor sanitation and unclean water still cause tuberculosis, hepatitis, measles, typhoid fever, cholera and dysentery. The poor generally receive healthcare free of charge.

Health records have been maintained in Algeria since 1882 and began adding Muslims living in the south to their vital record database in 1905 during French rule.

=== Education ===
Since the 1970s, in a centralised system that was designed to significantly reduce the rate of illiteracy, the Algerian government introduced a decree by which school attendance became compulsory for all children aged between 6 and 15 years who have the ability to track their learning through the 20 facilities built since independence, now the literacy rate is around 92.6%. Since 1972, Arabic is used as the language of instruction during the first nine years of schooling. From the third year, French is taught and it is also the language of instruction for science classes. The students can also learn English, Italian, Spanish and German. In 2008, new programmes at the elementary appeared, therefore the compulsory schooling does not start at the age of six anymore, but at the age of five. Apart from the 122 private schools, the Universities of the State are free of charge. After nine years of primary school, students can go to a high school or to an educational institution. The school offers two programmes: general or technical. At the end of the third year of secondary school, students pass the exam of the baccalaureate, which allows once it is successful to pursue graduate studies in universities and institutes.

Education is officially compulsory for children between the ages of six and 15. In 2008, the illiteracy rate for people over 10 was 22.3%, 15.6% for men and 29.0% for women. The province with the lowest rate of illiteracy was Algiers Province at 11.6%, while the province with the highest rate was Djelfa Province at 35.5%.

Algeria has 26 universities and 67 institutions of higher education, which must accommodate a million Algerians and 80,000 foreign students in 2008. The University of Algiers, founded in 1879, is the oldest, it offers education in various disciplines (law, medicine, science and letters). Twenty-five of these universities and almost all of the institutions of higher education were founded after the independence of the country.

Even if some of them offer instruction in Arabic like areas of law and the economy, most of the other sectors such as science and medicine continue to be provided in French and English. Among the most important universities, there are the University of Sciences and Technology Houari Boumediene, the University of Mentouri Constantine, and University of Oran Es-Senia. The University of Abou Bekr Belkaïd in Tlemcen and University of Batna Hadj Lakhdar occupy the 26th and 45th row in Africa. Algeria was ranked 115th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

== Culture ==

Modern Algerian literature, split between Arabic, Tamazight and French, has been strongly influenced by the country&#x27;s recent history. Famous novelists of the 20th century include Mohammed Dib, Albert Camus, Kateb Yacine and Ahlam Mosteghanemi while Assia Djebar is widely translated. Among the important novelists of the 1980s were Rachid Mimouni, later vice-president of Amnesty International, and Tahar Djaout, murdered by an Islamist group in 1993 for his secularist views.

Malek Bennabi and Frantz Fanon are noted for their thoughts on decolonisation; Augustine of Hippo was born in Tagaste (modern-day Souk Ahras); and Ibn Khaldun, though born in Tunis, wrote the Muqaddima while staying in Algeria. The works of the Sanusi family in pre-colonial times, and of Emir Abdelkader and Sheikh Ben Badis in colonial times, are widely noted. The Latin author Apuleius was born in Madaurus (Mdaourouch), in what later became Algeria.

Contemporary Algerian cinema is varied in terms of genre, exploring a wider range of themes and issues. There has been a transition from cinema which focused on the war of independence to films more concerned with the everyday lives of Algerians.

=== Media ===
=== Art ===
Algerian painters, like Mohammed Racim and Baya, attempted to revive the prestigious Algerian past prior to French colonisation, at the same time that they have contributed to the preservation of the authentic values of Algeria. In this line, Mohamed Temam, Abdelkhader Houamel have also returned through this art, scenes from the history of the country, the habits and customs of the past and the country life. Other new artistic currents including the one of M&#x27;hamed Issiakhem, Mohammed Khadda and Bachir Yelles, appeared on the scene of Algerian painting, abandoning figurative classical painting to find new pictorial ways, to adapt Algerian paintings to the new realities of the country through its struggle and its aspirations. Mohammed Khadda and M&#x27;hamed Issiakhem have been notable in recent years.

=== Literature ===

The historic roots of Algerian literature go back to the Numidian and Roman African era, when Apuleius wrote &quot;The Golden Ass&quot;, the only Latin novel to survive in its entirety. This period had also known Augustine of Hippo, Nonius Marcellus and Martianus Capella, among many others. The Middle Ages have known many Arabic writers who revolutionised the Arab world literature, with authors like Ahmad al-Buni, Ibn Manzur and Ibn Khaldoun, who wrote the Muqaddimah while staying in Algeria, and many others.

Albert Camus was an Algerian-born French Pied-Noir author. In 1957, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.

Today Algeria contains, in its literary landscape, big names having not only marked the Algerian literature, but also the universal literary heritage in Arabic and French.

As a first step, Algerian literature was marked by works whose main concern was the assertion of the Algerian national entity, there is the publication of novels as the &quot;Algerian trilogy&quot; of Mohammed Dib, or even &quot;Nedjma&quot; of Kateb Yacine novel which is often regarded as a monumental and major work. Other known writers will contribute to the emergence of Algerian literature whom include Mouloud Feraoun, Malek Bennabi, Malek Haddad, Moufdi Zakaria, Abdelhamid Ben Badis, Mohamed Laïd Al-Khalifa, Mouloud Mammeri, Frantz Fanon, and Assia Djebar.
In the aftermath of the independence, several new authors emerged on the Algerian literary scene, they will attempt through their works to expose a number of social problems, among them there are Rachid Boudjedra, Rachid Mimouni, Leila Sebbar, Tahar Djaout and Tahir Wattar.

Currently, a part of Algerian writers tends to be defined in a literature of shocking expression, due to the terrorism that occurred during the 1990s, the other party is defined in a different style of literature who staged an individualistic conception of the human adventure. Among the most noted recent works, there is the writer, &quot;the swallows of Kabul&quot; and &quot;the attack&quot; of Yasmina Khadra, &quot;the oath of barbarians&quot; of Boualem Sansal, &quot;memory of the flesh&quot; of Ahlam Mosteghanemi and the last novel by Assia Djebar &quot;nowhere in my father&#x27;s House&quot;.

=== Cinema ===

The Algerian state&#x27;s interest in film-industry activities can be seen in the annual budget of DZD 200 million (EUR 1.3 million) allocated to production, specific measures and an ambitious programme plan implemented by the Ministry of Culture to promote national production, renovate the cinema stock and remedy the weak links in distribution and exploitation.

The financial support provided by the state, through the Fund for the Development of the Arts, Techniques and the Film Industry (FDATIC) and the Algerian Agency for Cultural Influence (AARC), plays a key role in the promotion of national production. Between 2007 and 2013, FDATIC subsidised 98 films (feature films, documentaries and short films). In mid-2013, AARC had already supported a total of 78 films, including 42 feature films, 6 short films and 30 documentaries.

According to the European Audiovisual Observatory&#x27;s LUMIERE database, 41 Algerian films were distributed in Europe between 1996 and 2013; 21 films in this repertoire were Algerian-French co-productions. &quot;Days of Glory&quot; (2006) and &quot;Outside the Law&quot; (2010) recorded the highest number of admissions in the European Union, 3,172,612 and 474,722, respectively.

Algeria won the for &quot;Chronicle of the Years of Fire&quot; (1975), two Oscars for &quot;Z&quot; (1969), and other awards for the Italian-Algerian movie &quot;The Battle of Algiers&quot;.

=== Cuisine ===
Algerian cuisine is rich and diverse as a result of interactions and exchanges with other cultures and nations over the centuries. It is based on both land and sea products. Conquests or demographic movement towards the Algerian territory were two of the main factors of exchanges between the different peoples and cultures. The Algerian cuisine is a mix of Arab, Berber, Turkish and French roots.

Algerian cuisine offers a variety of dishes depending on the region and the season, but vegetables and cereals remain at its core. Most of the Algerian dishes are centered around bread, meats (lamb, beef or poultry), olive oil, vegetables, and fresh herbs. Vegetables are often used for salads, soups, tajines, couscous, and sauce-based dishes. Of all the Algerian traditional dishes available, the most famous one is couscous, recognized as a national dish.

=== Sports ===
Various games have existed in Algeria since antiquity. In the Aures, people played several games such as El Kherba or El khergueba (chess variant). Playing cards, checkers and chess games are part of Algerian culture. Racing (fantasia) and rifle shooting are part of cultural recreation of the Algerians.

Football is the most popular sport in the country. The Algerian national football team, known as the Desert Foxes, has a strong fan base and has achieved success both domestically and internationally.

Algeria has a long history in other sports such as athletics, boxing, volleyball, handball and the study of martial arts. Algerian athletes have competed in the Olympic Games and have won medals in various events. Many sports clubs and organisations exist in Algeria to promote and develop sports among young people. The Ministry of Youth and Sports in Algeria manages sport-related activities.

== See also ==
* Index of Algeria-related articles
* Outline of Algeria

== Explanatory notes ==

== Citations ==
== General bibliography ==

* Ageron, Charles-Robert (1991). &quot;Modern Algeria – A History from 1830 to the Present&quot;. Translated from French and edited by Michael Brett. London: Hurst. .
* Aghrout, Ahmed; Bougherira, Redha M. (2004). &quot;Algeria in Transition – Reforms and Development Prospects&quot;. Routledge. .
* Bennoune, Mahfoud (1988). &quot;The Making of Contemporary Algeria – Colonial Upheavals and Post-Independence Development, 1830–1987&quot;. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. .
* Christelow, Allan (1985) &quot;Muslim Law Courts and the French Colonial State in Algeria&quot;. Princeton University Press.
* Fanon, Frantz (1966; 2005 paperback). &quot;The Wretched of the Earth&quot;. Grove Press. ASIN B0007FW4AW, .
* Horne, Alistair (1977). &quot;A Savage War of Peace: Algeria 1954–1962&quot;. Viking Adult. , (2006 reprint)
* Laouisset, Djamel (2009). &quot;A Retrospective Study of the Algerian Iron and Steel Industry&quot;. New York City: Nova Publishers. .
* Roberts, Hugh (2003). &quot;The Battlefield – Algeria, 1988–2002. Studies in a Broken Polity&quot;. London: Verso Books. .
* Ruedy, John (1992). &quot;Modern Algeria – The Origins and Development of a Nation&quot;. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. .
* Stora, Benjamin (2001). &quot;Algeria, 1830–2000 – A Short History&quot;. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press. .
* Sidaoui, Riadh (2009). &quot;Islamic Politics and the Military – Algeria 1962–2008&quot;. &quot;Religion and Politics – Islam and Muslim Civilisation&quot;. Farnham: Ashgate Publishing. .
== External links ==

* Key Development Forecasts for Algeria from International Futures 

=== Government ===
* Public Services – gateway to government sites
* El Mouradia Palace – official website of the president of Algeria
* Statistics – official website of National Office of Statistics 

=== History ===
* &quot;History&quot; – Algerian history at Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

=== Tourism ===
* Visit Algeria – Algeria&#x27;s official tourism portal 

=== Maps ===
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="0" end="7" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="24" end="68" title="Algeria" label="People&amp;#x27;s Democratic Republic of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="90" end="97" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="108" end="120" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088693" start="140" end="153" title="Algeria–Tunisia border" label="the northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="157" end="164" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088687" start="169" end="177" title="Algeria–Libya border" label="the east"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="181" end="186" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088696" start="191" end="204" title="Algeria–Niger border" label="the southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="208" end="213" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088690" start="218" end="231" title="Algeria–Western Sahara border" label="the southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="235" end="239" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="241" end="251" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="257" end="271" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742537" start="276" end="284" title="Algeria–Morocco border" label="the west"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="288" end="295" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="321" end="338" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q110852" start="356" end="368" title="List of cities in Algeria" label="largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="372" end="379" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="451" end="461" title="prehistory" label="prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="552" end="563" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q102679" start="565" end="574" title="Numidia" label="Numidians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="576" end="582" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="584" end="591" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441232" start="597" end="613" title="Byzantine Greeks" label="Byzantine Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q116191092" start="661" end="688" title="Arab migrations to the Maghreb" label="Arab Muslim migration waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q925960" start="695" end="714" title="Muslim conquest of the Maghreb" label="the seventh century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369900" start="734" end="745" title="Arabization" label="Arabisation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="803" end="836" title="List of Muslim states and dynasties#North Africa (Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia)" label="Islamic Arab and Berber dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045696" start="880" end="898" title="Regency of Algiers" label="Regency of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241965" start="948" end="963" title="tributary state" label="tributary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="971" end="985" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317226" start="1071" end="1088" title="Invasion of Algiers in 1830" label="invaded by France"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="1101" end="1117" title="French Algeria" label="formally annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629782" start="1151" end="1160" title="French conquest of Algeria" label="conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122811" start="1165" end="1173" title="pacification of Algeria" label="pacified"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="1206" end="1230" title="Pied-Noir" label="mass European settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q593024" start="1350" end="1375" title="Sétif and Guelma massacre" label="Sétif and Guelma massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="1450" end="1462" title="Algerian War" label="Algerian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819824" start="1480" end="1503" title="Independence Day (Algeria)" label="gained its independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q142529" start="1542" end="1558" title="Algerian Civil War" label="bloody civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="1618" end="1646" title="List of countries and dependencies by area" label="tenth-largest nation by area"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037226" start="1656" end="1680" title="List of African countries by area" label="largest nation in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="1719" end="1725" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q202080" start="1781" end="1788" title="Soil fertility" label="fertile"/>
<link wikidata="Q153211" start="1906" end="1933" title="List of African countries by population" label="tenth-most populous country"/>
<link wikidata="Q712280" start="1953" end="1979" title="List of countries and dependencies by population" label="33rd-most populous country"/>
<link wikidata="Q56467" start="2032" end="2038" title="Modern Standard Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q61053330" start="2043" end="2052" title="Standard Algerian Berber" label="Tamazight"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871941" start="2054" end="2060" title="French language in Algeria" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q56499" start="2203" end="2229" title="Algerian Arabic" label="Algerian dialect of Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="2250" end="2255" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="2262" end="2269" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="2299" end="2310" title="Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="2397" end="2423" title="Semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q240601" start="2436" end="2448" title="Provinces of Algeria" label="58 provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q19576" start="2450" end="2469" title="wilaya" label="&amp;quot;wilayas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989398" start="2475" end="2489" title="Communes of Algeria" label="1,541 communes"/>
<link wikidata="Q339834" start="2499" end="2513" title="regional power" label="regional power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322988" start="2536" end="2548" title="middle power" label="middle power"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="2603" end="2626" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622706" start="2664" end="2691" title="List of African countries by GDP (nominal)" label="largest economies in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253007" start="2767" end="2776" title="List of countries by proven oil reserves" label="sixteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116737" start="2781" end="2794" title="List of countries by natural gas proven reserves" label="ninth-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090717" start="2823" end="2832" title="Sonatrach" label="Sonatrach"/>
<link wikidata="Q897700" start="2944" end="2961" title="Algerian People&amp;#x27;s National Armed Forces" label="Algerian military"/>
<link wikidata="Q874302" start="3004" end="3026" title="List of countries with highest military expenditures" label="highest defence budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="3129" end="3142" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="3148" end="3159" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543" start="3165" end="3168" title="Organisation of Islamic Cooperation" label="OIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="3170" end="3174" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q370862" start="3204" end="3222" title="Arab Maghreb Union" label="Arab Maghreb Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="3437" end="3443" title="Berber languages" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q208503" start="3444" end="3452" title="Tifinagh" label="Tifinagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532709" start="3456" end="3477" title="Berber Latin alphabet" label="Berber Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="3546" end="3553" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004719" start="3764" end="3781" title="Buluggin ibn Ziri" label="Buluggin ibn Ziri"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="3832" end="3841" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502671" start="3851" end="3858" title="Icosium" label="Icosium"/>
<link wikidata="Q173441" start="3915" end="3933" title="Muhammad al-Idrisi" label="Muhammad al-Idrisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q316364" start="3938" end="3953" title="Yaqut al-Hamawi" label="Yaqut al-Hamawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="4079" end="4086" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="4379" end="4392" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12480578" start="4469" end="4478" title="Algerians" label="Algerians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="4506" end="4514" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324355" start="4519" end="4538" title="political authority" label="political authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147836" start="4591" end="4609" title="political identity" label="political identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304859" start="4665" end="4674" title="sovereign" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="4734" end="4748" title="List of sultans of the Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827672" start="4796" end="4818" title="Ahmed Tewfik El Madani" label="Ahmed Tewfik El Madani"/>
<link wikidata="Q841321" start="5741" end="5753" title="Levallois technique" label="Levalloisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q259118" start="5758" end="5768" title="Mousterian" label="Mousterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="5812" end="5818" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q626270" start="5880" end="5898" title="Middle Paleolithic" label="Middle Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457087" start="5899" end="5909" title="Flake tool" label="Flake tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q204134" start="5978" end="5985" title="Aterian" label="Aterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904370" start="6020" end="6031" title="Bir el Ater" label="Bir el Ater"/>
<link wikidata="Q984575" start="6042" end="6049" title="Tébessa" label="Tebessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470903" start="6110" end="6124" title="Iberomaurusian" label="Iberomaurusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="6148" end="6152" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="6237" end="6244" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="6275" end="6297" title="neolithic" label="Neolithic civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190048" start="6492" end="6512" title="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer" label="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="6693" end="6700" title="Berber people" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="6794" end="6802" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383747" start="6808" end="6821" title="Carthaginians" label="Carthaginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="6909" end="6918" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529269" start="6940" end="6946" title="Tipasa" label="Tipasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617666" start="6956" end="6965" title="Cherchell" label="Cherchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q858024" start="6967" end="6979" title="Hippo Regius" label="Hippo Regius"/>
<link wikidata="Q45942" start="6988" end="6994" title="Annaba" label="Annaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292517" start="7000" end="7008" title="Rusicade" label="Rusicade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292517" start="7017" end="7023" title="Skikda" label="Skikda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132393" start="7639" end="7664" title="Mercenary War" label="Revolt of the Mercenaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286" start="7769" end="7784" title="First Punic War" label="First Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q124988" start="8055" end="8065" title="Punic Wars" label="Punic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="8090" end="8098" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q102679" start="8322" end="8329" title="Numidia" label="Numidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q309272" start="8400" end="8410" title="Mauretania" label="Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146608" start="8438" end="8452" title="Moulouya River" label="Moulouya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="8467" end="8474" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="8572" end="8580" title="Almohads" label="Almohads"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="8585" end="8595" title="Almoravids" label="Almoravids"/>
<link wikidata="Q314685" start="8658" end="8667" title="Masinissa" label="Masinissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="8892" end="8904" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="9413" end="9428" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Saint Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q858024" start="9447" end="9459" title="Hippo Regius" label="Hippo Regius"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="9523" end="9529" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="9544" end="9551" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q152127" start="9555" end="9563" title="Geiseric" label="Geiseric"/>
<link wikidata="Q191504" start="9776" end="9788" title="Leptis Magna" label="Leptis Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="9858" end="9866" title="Amazigh" label="Laguatan"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="9901" end="9908" title="Amazigh" label="Amazigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="10306" end="10326" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q434703" start="10381" end="10387" title="Altava" label="Altava"/>
<link wikidata="Q25080783" start="10422" end="10441" title="Mauro-Roman Kingdom" label="Mauro-Roman Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22948839" start="10500" end="10517" title="Kingdom of Altava" label="Kingdom of Altava"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794524" start="10539" end="10546" title="Kusaila" label="Kusaila"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="10600" end="10603" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822303" start="10631" end="10636" title="Aurès" label="Aurès"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="10647" end="10656" title="Kairouan" label="Kairaouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="10766" end="10772" title="Muslims" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="10773" end="10778" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="10786" end="10803" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q940123" start="11180" end="11189" title="Rustamids" label="Rustamids"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="11191" end="11200" title="Aghlabids" label="Aghlabids"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="11202" end="11210" title="Fatimids" label="Fatimids"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="11212" end="11218" title="Zirids" label="Zirids"/>
<link wikidata="Q588672" start="11220" end="11229" title="Hammadids" label="Hammadids"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="11231" end="11241" title="Almoravids" label="Almoravids"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="11243" end="11251" title="Almohads" label="Almohads"/>
<link wikidata="Q307697" start="11260" end="11269" title="Abdalwadid" label="Zayyanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="11396" end="11402" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="11410" end="11417" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="11482" end="11493" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898339" start="11573" end="11590" title="Judah ibn Kuraish" label="Judah Ibn Quraysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="11664" end="11668" title="Sufism" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q590185" start="11677" end="11705" title="Abu Madyan" label="Sidi Boumediene (Abu Madyan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483230" start="11710" end="11724" title="Sidi El Houari" label="Sidi El Houari"/>
<link wikidata="Q307312" start="11740" end="11758" title="Abd al-Mu&amp;#x27;min" label="Abd Al Mu&amp;#x27;min"/>
<link wikidata="Q335451" start="11763" end="11774" title="Yaghmurasen Ibn Zyan" label="Yāghmūrasen"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="11809" end="11817" title="Fatimids" label="Fatimids"/>
<link wikidata="Q180123" start="11833" end="11839" title="Fatima" label="Fatima"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="11853" end="11861" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="11875" end="11882" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="11982" end="11987" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="11996" end="12002" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="12099" end="12104" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="12109" end="12115" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="12169" end="12174" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="12180" end="12197" title="Fatimid caliphate" label="Fatimid caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="12239" end="12245" title="Zirids" label="Zirids"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="12297" end="12307" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456206" start="12312" end="12323" title="Banu Sulaym" label="Banu Sulaym"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638255" start="12381" end="12390" title="Taghribat Bani Hilal" label="Tāghribāt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6399653" start="12431" end="12448" title="Khalifa al-Zanati" label="Khālīfā Al-Zānatī"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083502" start="12499" end="12517" title="Abu Zayd al-Hilali" label="Ābu Zayd al-Hilalī"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="12576" end="12581" title="Zirid" label="Zirid"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="12686" end="12693" title="Berber people" label="Amazigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="12911" end="12928" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="12988" end="12997" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="12999" end="13005" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="13007" end="13014" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="13016" end="13021" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="13023" end="13028" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="13034" end="13041" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="13068" end="13073" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="13078" end="13083" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="13285" end="13298" title="Berber people" label="Berber people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510021" start="13519" end="13527" title="Sanhadja" label="Sanhadja"/>
<link wikidata="Q691819" start="13529" end="13535" title="Houara" label="Houara"/>
<link wikidata="Q146076" start="13537" end="13543" title="Zenata" label="Zenata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572273" start="13545" end="13553" title="Masmuda" label="Masmouda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427023" start="13555" end="13561" title="Kutama" label="Kutama"/>
<link wikidata="Q808139" start="13575" end="13584" title="Berghwata" label="Berghwata"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="13653" end="13660" title="Berber people" label="Amazigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="13741" end="13752" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="13831" end="13836" title="Zirid dynasty" label="Zirid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446273" start="13838" end="13845" title="Emirate of Tlemcen" label="Ifranid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642579" start="13847" end="13855" title="Maghrawid Dynasty" label="Maghrawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="13857" end="13866" title="Almoravid" label="Almoravid"/>
<link wikidata="Q588672" start="13868" end="13876" title="Hammadid" label="Hammadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="13878" end="13885" title="Almohad" label="Almohad"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="13887" end="13894" title="Merinid" label="Merinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q307697" start="13896" end="13906" title="Zayyanid dynasty" label="Abdalwadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q970799" start="13908" end="13916" title="Wattasid" label="Wattasid"/>
<link wikidata="Q178663" start="13918" end="13926" title="Meknassa" label="Meknassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="13931" end="13937" title="Hafsid" label="Hafsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q588672" start="13961" end="13969" title="Hammadid" label="Hammadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="13974" end="13979" title="Zirid" label="Zirid"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="14003" end="14010" title="Fatimid" label="Fatimid"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="14072" end="14078" title="Zirid dynasty" label="Zirids"/>
<link wikidata="Q588672" start="14167" end="14176" title="Hammadid dynasty" label="Hammadids"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="14348" end="14356" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimids"/>
<link wikidata="Q940123" start="14590" end="14606" title="Rustamid dynasty" label="Rustamid Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="14896" end="14900" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="14927" end="14937" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="15070" end="15076" title="Zirids" label="Zirids"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="15100" end="15108" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q293658" start="15204" end="15218" title="Al-Mu&amp;#x27;izz ibn Badis" label="El Mu&amp;#x27;izz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642579" start="15368" end="15376" title="Maghrawa" label="Maghrawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334331" start="15542" end="15551" title="Sijilmasa" label="Sijilmasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826842" start="15553" end="15559" title="Aghmat" label="Aghmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q193802" start="15561" end="15566" title="Oujda" label="Oujda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="15779" end="15783" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="15792" end="15799" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="15812" end="15819" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="15847" end="15853" title="Arabia" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="15895" end="15905" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456206" start="15914" end="15925" title="Banu Sulaym" label="Banu Sulaym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="15978" end="15989" title="Nile Valley" label="Nile Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q160307" start="16046" end="16053" title="Fatimid Caliphate" label="Fatimid"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="16331" end="16340" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q622855" start="16431" end="16439" title="Ifriqiya" label="Ifriqiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q242263" start="16447" end="16451" title="Gabès Governorate" label="Gabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q205718" start="16480" end="16485" title="Zirid" label="Zirid"/>
<link wikidata="Q179570" start="16577" end="16585" title="Kairouan" label="Kairouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187346" start="16837" end="16848" title="Constantine, Algeria" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q500367" start="16874" end="16894" title="Beni Hammad Fort" label="Qalaa of Banu Hammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q588672" start="16911" end="16927" title="Hammadid dynasty" label="Hammadid Emirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="17021" end="17028" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="17033" end="17037" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="17104" end="17112" title="Almohads" label="Almohads"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="17167" end="17174" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369900" start="17229" end="17240" title="Arabization" label="Arabisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="17277" end="17282" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="17343" end="17354" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q790108" start="17391" end="17401" title="Banu Hilal" label="Banu Hilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="17449" end="17457" title="Almohad Caliphate" label="Almohads"/>
<link wikidata="Q307312" start="17566" end="17584" title="Abd al-Mu&amp;#x27;min" label="Abd al-Mu&amp;#x27;min"/>
<link wikidata="Q307312" start="17666" end="17684" title="Abd al-Mu&amp;#x27;min" label="Abd al-Mu&amp;#x27;min"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="17817" end="17833" title="Almoravid dynasty" label="Almoravid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q219697" start="18115" end="18144" title="Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa" label="Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q335451" start="18240" end="18260" title="Yaghmurasen Ibn Zyan" label="Yaghmurasen Ibn Zyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030701" start="18307" end="18325" title="Kingdom of Tlemcen" label="Kingdom of Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q307697" start="18334" end="18350" title="Zayyanid dynasty" label="Zayyanid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="18680" end="18694" title="Hafsid dynasty" label="Hafsid dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28499348" start="18709" end="18726" title="Hafsids of Bejaïa" label="Emirate of Bejaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="18964" end="18969" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="19059" end="19074" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q603279" start="19198" end="19232" title="Capture of Mers-el-Kébir (1505)" label="invaded and captured Mers el Kébir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783538" start="19273" end="19287" title="Spanish conquest of Oran (1509)" label="conquered Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q28496874" start="19522" end="19538" title="Capture of Bejaia (1510)" label="in a large siege"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19554" end="19591" title="Siege of Algiers (1510)" label="semi-successful siege against Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617666" start="19653" end="19662" title="Cherchell" label="Cherchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q402726" start="19667" end="19672" title="Jijel" label="Jijel"/>
<link wikidata="Q849524" start="19687" end="19697" title="Mostaganem" label="Mostaganem"/>
<link wikidata="Q470634" start="19862" end="19866" title="Aruj" label="Aruj"/>
<link wikidata="Q200582" start="19871" end="19891" title="Hayreddin Barbarossa" label="Hayreddin Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="19929" end="19936" title="Hafsids" label="Hafsids"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="20037" end="20046" title="Spain" label="Spaniards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045696" start="20280" end="20298" title="Regency of Algiers" label="Regency of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4090268" start="20340" end="20359" title="Fall of Tlemcen (1518)" label="invasion of Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q200582" start="20361" end="20370" title="Hayreddin Barbarossa" label="Hayreddin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="20423" end="20430" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q203910" start="20431" end="20437" title="Sultan of the Ottoman Empire" label="sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q740406" start="20460" end="20469" title="beylerbey" label="beylerbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="20501" end="20512" title="janissaries" label="janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128171" start="20738" end="20743" title="Hasan Pasha (son of Barbarossa)" label="Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199283" start="20788" end="20798" title="Kouloughlis" label="Kouloughli"/>
<link wikidata="Q105085695" start="21167" end="21171" title="Odjak of Algiers" label="Ojaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522853" start="21191" end="21195" title="Agha of the Janissaries" label="agha"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="21431" end="21437" title="Plague (disease)" label="Plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="21629" end="21644" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="21820" end="21826" title="slavery" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045287" start="22103" end="22116" title="Slavery in the Ottoman Empire" label="slave markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="22156" end="22170" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q200582" start="22194" end="22214" title="Hayreddin Barbarossa" label="Hayreddin Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q189387" start="22238" end="22244" title="Ischia" label="Ischia"/>
<link wikidata="Q496389" start="22309" end="22315" title="Lipari" label="Lipari"/>
<link wikidata="Q367350" start="22389" end="22400" title="Turgut Reis" label="Turgut Reis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170488" start="22458" end="22462" title="Gozo" label="Gozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5765" start="22499" end="22515" title="Balearic Islands" label="Balearic Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q52626" start="22581" end="22591" title="Formentera" label="Formentera"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="22780" end="22785" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q544509" start="22793" end="22805" title="Jan Janszoon" label="Jan Janszoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q151128" start="22823" end="22830" title="History of Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149737" start="22832" end="22860" title="Turkish Abductions" label="raiding and capturing slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q466046" start="22905" end="22909" title="Sale, Morocco" label="Salé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136188" start="22913" end="22920" title="Saadi dynasty" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="23105" end="23118" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q105085695" start="23195" end="23200" title="Odjak of Algiers" label="Odjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="23296" end="23303" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12821337" start="23417" end="23420" title="Dey" label="Dey"/>
<link wikidata="Q830104" start="23474" end="23479" title="divan" label="divan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899891" start="23892" end="23907" title="Beylik of Tunis" label="Beylik of Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12821337" start="23914" end="23917" title="dey" label="dey"/>
<link wikidata="Q46178" start="24509" end="24516" title="Kabylie" label="Kabylia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446186" start="24581" end="24596" title="Kingdom of Kuku" label="Kingdom of Kuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="24821" end="24835" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059597" start="24848" end="24864" title="Invasion of Algiers (1775)" label="invasion in 1775"/>
<link wikidata="Q676404" start="24875" end="24887" title="Spanish Navy" label="Spanish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940496" start="24909" end="24913" title="Bombardment of Algiers (1783)" label="1783"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940494" start="24918" end="24922" title="Bombardment of Algiers (1784)" label="1784"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="25036" end="25042" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45670" start="25044" end="25052" title="Kingdom of Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="25061" end="25077" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Knights of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q275491" start="25379" end="25382" title="Rif" label="Rif"/>
<link wikidata="Q193802" start="25387" end="25392" title="Oujda" label="Oujda"/>
<link wikidata="Q468293" start="25658" end="25663" title="First Barbary War" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q233505" start="25668" end="25686" title="Second Barbary War" label="Second Barbary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="25761" end="25766" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Anglo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15864" start="25767" end="25772" title="United Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q335338" start="25801" end="25813" title="Edward Pellew, 1st Viscount Exmouth" label="Lord Exmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q891806" start="25814" end="25831" title="Bombardment of Algiers (1816)" label="bombarded Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629782" start="25962" end="25977" title="French conquest of Algeria" label="French conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202" start="26081" end="26087" title="July Monarchy" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317226" start="26100" end="26116" title="Invasion of Algiers in 1830" label="captured Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122811" start="26232" end="26241" title="Algerian genocide" label="genocidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895498" start="26265" end="26276" title="Ben Kiernan" label="Ben Kiernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629782" start="26754" end="26773" title="French conquest of Algeria" label="conquest of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="26902" end="26912" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="27005" end="27017" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458306" start="27261" end="27275" title="Mokrani Revolt" label="Mokrani Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q140694" start="27286" end="27307" title="Alexis de Tocqueville" label="Alexis de Tocqueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="28018" end="28026" title="European ethnic groups" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="28098" end="28107" title="Pied-Noir" label="Pied-Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="28414" end="28418" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="28423" end="28430" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704511" start="28569" end="28583" title="White Africans of European ancestry" label="European share"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="28936" end="28944" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="29047" end="29063" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="29084" end="29097" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy control"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="29128" end="29134" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="29138" end="29153" title="Operation Torch" label="Operation Torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370388" start="29201" end="29216" title="Military history of the United States during World War II" label="American troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="29224" end="29246" title="North African campaign" label="North African campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q783684" start="29460" end="29466" title="Provisional Government of the French Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q593024" start="29578" end="29603" title="Sétif and Guelma massacre" label="Sétif and Guelma massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="29731" end="29743" title="Algerian War" label="Algerian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042712" start="29779" end="29809" title="Declaration of 1 November 1954" label="Declaration of 1 November 1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q942985" start="29869" end="29874" title="Harki" label="Harki"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="29916" end="29941" title="National Liberation Front (Algeria)" label="National Liberation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="29954" end="29959" title="lynching" label="lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532562" start="30077" end="30093" title="Torture during the Algerian War of Independence" label="severe reprisals"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30191" end="30210" title="Internment camps in France#Algerian War" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q955411" start="30332" end="30346" title="Alistair Horne" label="Alistair Horne"/>
<link wikidata="Q160640" start="30351" end="30363" title="Raymond Aron" label="Raymond Aron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471139" start="30836" end="30852" title="Evian agreements" label="Evian agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q128513" start="30871" end="30900" title="Algerian self-determination referendum, 1962" label="self-determination referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="30992" end="31001" title="Pied-Noir" label="Pied-Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546598" start="31127" end="31148" title="Oran massacre of 1962" label="Oran massacre of 1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="31320" end="31323" title="FLN (Algeria)" label="FLN"/>
<link wikidata="Q179908" start="31332" end="31347" title="Ahmed Ben Bella" label="Ahmed Ben Bella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575948" start="31373" end="31400" title="Greater Morocco" label="portions of western Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891008" start="31412" end="31420" title="Sand War" label="Sand War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2999015" start="31444" end="31462" title="1965 Algerian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="overthrown in 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q310855" start="31466" end="31483" title="Houari Boumédiène" label="Houari Boumédiène"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="31579" end="31588" title="Socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314084" start="31756" end="31769" title="collective farming" label="collectivised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349660" start="31830" end="31844" title="Extraction of petroleum" label="Oil extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="31948" end="31963" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q314688" start="31996" end="32012" title="Chadli Bendjedid" label="Chadli Bendjedid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369900" start="32080" end="32091" title="Arabisation" label="Arabisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q615231" start="32403" end="32417" title="1980s oil glut" label="1980s oil glut"/>
<link wikidata="Q734545" start="32641" end="32664" title="Islamic Salvation Front" label="Islamic Salvation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q734545" start="32774" end="32797" title="Islamic Salvation Front" label="Islamic Salvation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586959" start="32835" end="32856" title="Algerian legislative election, 1991" label="legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128444" start="33004" end="33025" title="High Council of State (Algeria)" label="High Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323212" start="33104" end="33114" title="insurgency" label="insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125408" start="33156" end="33175" title="Armed Islamic Group of Algeria" label="Armed Islamic Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560927" start="33323" end="33341" title="List of massacres during the Algerian Civil War" label="civilian massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574009" start="33487" end="33509" title="Air France Flight 8969" label="Air France Flight 8969"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586511" start="33639" end="33656" title="Algerian presidential election, 1999" label="elections in 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q57308" start="33758" end="33778" title="Abdelaziz Bouteflika" label="Abdelaziz Bouteflika"/>
<link wikidata="Q13370431" start="33904" end="33914" title="Algerian Civil Concord referendum, 1999" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q311841" start="34179" end="34228" title="Groupe Salafiste pour la Prédication et le Combat" label="Groupe Salafiste pour la Prédication et le Combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586512" start="34371" end="34403" title="Algerian presidential election, 2004" label="April 2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086760" start="34679" end="34724" title="Charter for Peace and National Reconciliation" label="Charter for Peace and National Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724101" start="34750" end="34778" title="Algerian national reconciliation referendum, 2005" label="referendum in September 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504636" start="34873" end="34894" title="Algerian Constitution" label="Algerian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q916635" start="35058" end="35085" title="Algerian presidential election, 2009" label="2009 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="35558" end="35606" title="Arab Spring" label="protests across the Middle East and North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q216227" start="35678" end="35696" title="state of emergency" label="state of emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q61829297" start="36167" end="36180" title="2019–2020 Algerian protests" label="mass protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821166" start="36250" end="36270" title="Abdelmadjid Tebboune" label="Abdelmadjid Tebboune"/>
<link wikidata="Q46640783" start="36341" end="36362" title="2019 Algerian presidential election" label="presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q106746723" start="36829" end="36832" title="2024 Algerian presidential election" label="won"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="37079" end="37098" title="Mediterranean Basin" label="Mediterranean Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="37156" end="37162" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478180" start="37182" end="37192" title="Tell Atlas" label="Tell Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898305" start="37208" end="37221" title="Saharan Atlas" label="Saharan Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822303" start="37424" end="37429" title="Aures" label="Aures"/>
<link wikidata="Q984575" start="37434" end="37442" title="Tébessa" label="Nememcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q822326" start="37546" end="37557" title="Mount Tahat" label="Mount Tahat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254997" start="37601" end="37604" title="19th parallel north" label="19°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186318" start="37609" end="37613" title="37th parallel north" label="37°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698923" start="37680" end="37683" title="9th meridian west" label="9°W"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704708" start="37688" end="37692" title="12th meridian east" label="12°E"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="37785" end="37792" title="harbour" label="harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="37878" end="37884" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898305" start="37911" end="37924" title="Saharan Atlas" label="Saharan Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q26399" start="37974" end="37990" title="Hoggar Mountains" label="Hoggar Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q205792" start="38151" end="38163" title="Tamanghasset" label="Tamanghasset"/>
<link wikidata="Q131818" start="38174" end="38178" title="Oran" label="Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q187346" start="38180" end="38191" title="Constantine, Algeria" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q45942" start="38197" end="38203" title="Annaba" label="Annaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="38642" end="38655" title="Precipitation (meteorology)" label="Precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q319120" start="38818" end="38822" title="erg (landform)" label="ergs"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="39018" end="39025" title="coastal" label="coastal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="39027" end="39038" title="mountainous" label="mountainous"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="39050" end="39056" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="39127" end="39139" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="39455" end="39469" title="primary forest" label="primary forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="39694" end="39710" title="State ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="39716" end="39733" title="Private property" label="private ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="39931" end="39935" title="boar" label="boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q125525" start="39938" end="39944" title="jackal" label="jackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29001815" start="39951" end="39958" title="gazelle" label="gazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131564" start="39997" end="40004" title="fennecs" label="fennecs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965236" start="40018" end="40025" title="jerboas" label="jerboas"/>
<link wikidata="Q39153" start="40052" end="40067" title="African leopard" label="African leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164369" start="40072" end="40087" title="Saharan cheetah" label="Saharan cheetah"/>
<link wikidata="Q788101" start="40150" end="40162" title="Barbary stag" label="Barbary stag"/>
<link wikidata="Q131564" start="40229" end="40239" title="fennec fox" label="fennec fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245895" start="40247" end="40262" title="national animal" label="national animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q199962" start="40401" end="40416" title="Barbary macaque" label="Barbary macaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q81228" start="40454" end="40468" title="monitor lizard" label="monitor lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="40537" end="40543" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="40560" end="40569" title="semi arid" label="semi arid"/>
<link wikidata="Q221094" start="40634" end="40646" title="Barbary lion" label="Barbary lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q695431" start="40649" end="40659" title="Atlas bear" label="Atlas bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q551529" start="40665" end="40674" title="West African crocodile" label="crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q667552" start="40726" end="40733" title="Macchia" label="Macchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="40741" end="40752" title="Olive" label="olive trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="40754" end="40757" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q128550" start="40760" end="40766" title="cedrus" label="cedars"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="40777" end="40785" title="Pinophyta" label="conifers"/>
<link wikidata="Q211457" start="40845" end="40856" title="Aleppo pine" label="Aleppo pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25662" start="40858" end="40865" title="juniper" label="juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q52387698" start="40871" end="40884" title="evergreen oak" label="evergreen oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q59798" start="40912" end="40915" title="Ficus" label="Fig"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="40917" end="40927" title="eucalyptus" label="eucalyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q155874" start="40929" end="40934" title="agave" label="agave"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="40948" end="40958" title="Arecaceae" label="palm trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q191019" start="40989" end="40999" title="grape vine" label="grape vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="41078" end="41084" title="Acacia" label="Acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37083" start="41096" end="41101" title="olive" label="olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="41153" end="41159" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520600" start="41180" end="41212" title="Forest Landscape Integrity Index" label="Forest Landscape Integrity Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q19125" start="41376" end="41384" title="scorpion" label="scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318712" start="41843" end="41858" title="Mohamed Mediène" label="Mohamed Mediène"/>
<link wikidata="Q61829297" start="41933" end="41946" title="2019–2020 Algerian protests" label="2019 protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041052" start="42055" end="42069" title="Larbi Belkheir" label="Larbi Belkheir"/>
<link wikidata="Q57308" start="42090" end="42100" title="Abdelaziz Bouteflika" label="Bouteflika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090717" start="42140" end="42149" title="Sonatrach" label="Sonatrach"/>
<link wikidata="Q61829297" start="42271" end="42279" title="2019–2020 Algerian protests" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914452" start="42307" end="42327" title="President of Algeria" label="President of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q46640783" start="42419" end="42452" title="2019 Algerian presidential election" label="most recent presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q61829297" start="42490" end="42509" title="2019 Algerian protests" label="widespread protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821166" start="42681" end="42701" title="Abdelmadjid Tebboune" label="Abdelmadjid Tebboune"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="42958" end="42966" title="suffrage" label="suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q897700" start="43020" end="43024" title="Algerian Army" label="army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015487" start="43030" end="43050" title="Council of Ministers of Algeria" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43059" end="43080" title="High Security Council" label="High Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q182762" start="43098" end="43112" title="Prime Minister of Algeria" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="43177" end="43186" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q633590" start="43209" end="43240" title="People&amp;#x27;s National Assembly" label="People&amp;#x27;s National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119509" start="43331" end="43352" title="Council of the Nation" label="Council of the Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504636" start="43501" end="43513" title="Constitution of Algeria" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q84029857" start="43781" end="43790" title="2021 Algerian parliamentary election" label="June 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q204543" start="43814" end="43817" title="National Liberation Front (Algeria)" label="FLN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889454" start="43913" end="43946" title="Movement of Society for Peace" label="Movement of the Society for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q840321" start="43971" end="43999" title="National Rally for Democracy (Algeria)" label="National Rally for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088407" start="44024" end="44036" title="Future Front" label="Future Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q77343344" start="44065" end="44095" title="National Construction Movement" label="National Construction Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="44171" end="44185" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q583535" start="44193" end="44222" title="European Neighbourhood Policy" label="European Neighbourhood Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424079" start="45052" end="45088" title="Algeria–Morocco relations" label="Tensions between Algeria and Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="45108" end="45122" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q370862" start="45163" end="45181" title="Arab Maghreb Union" label="Arab Maghreb Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q897700" start="45404" end="45431" title="People&amp;#x27;s National Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665572" start="45443" end="45465" title="Algerian National Navy" label="Algerian National Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q923346" start="45481" end="45499" title="Algerian Air Force" label="Algerian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043069" start="45516" end="45546" title="Territorial Air Defence Forces" label="Territorial Air Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746356" start="45582" end="45606" title="National Liberation Army (Algeria)" label="National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q188686" start="45736" end="45746" title="military occupation" label="occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q821387" start="46092" end="46115" title="List of countries by number of military and paramilitary personnel" label="second-largest military"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382943" start="46261" end="46277" title="Algeria–Russia relations" label="are a close ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q130681" start="46353" end="46359" title="MiG-29" label="MiG-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q55520" start="46445" end="46453" title="Kilo class submarine" label="636-type"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="46461" end="46471" title="submarines" label="submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="46564" end="46582" title="Global Peace Index" label="Global Peace Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="46664" end="46677" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="46962" end="46975" title="media freedom" label="media freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="47054" end="47074" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281325" start="47622" end="47635" title="LGBT rights in Algeria" label="Homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033966" start="47853" end="47868" title="BBC Arabic" label="BBC News Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="48002" end="48020" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="48071" end="48088" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314010" start="48209" end="48226" title="social distancing" label="social distancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q240601" start="48290" end="48299" title="provinces of Algeria" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q19576" start="48307" end="48313" title="wilaya" label="wilaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614970" start="48327" end="48336" title="districts of Algeria" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576151" start="48344" end="48349" title="daïra" label="daïra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989398" start="48368" end="48382" title="Municipalities of Algeria" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q515483" start="48390" end="48399" title="baladiyah" label="baladiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="48470" end="48474" title="Capital city" label="seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q199674" start="48801" end="48806" title="Algerian dinar" label="dinar"/>
<link wikidata="Q317617" start="50582" end="50607" title="foreign currency reserves" label="foreign currency reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060549" start="50680" end="50693" title="List of countries by external debt" label="external debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="51041" end="51044" title="WTO" label="WTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q12239049" start="51107" end="51135" title="Greater Arab Free Trade Area" label="Greater Arab Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q50828855" start="51141" end="51176" title="African Continental Free Trade Area" label="African Continental Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795" start="51597" end="51601" title="OPEC" label="OPEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116737" start="51932" end="51968" title="List of countries by natural gas proven reserves" label="10th-largest reserves of natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053945" start="51993" end="52019" title="List of countries by natural gas exports" label="sixth-largest gas exporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133499" start="52030" end="52063" title="Energy Information Administration" label="Energy Information Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q115827361" start="52109" end="52129" title="natural gas reserves" label="natural gas reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253007" start="52145" end="52165" title="List of countries by proven oil reserves" label="16th in oil reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090717" start="52976" end="52985" title="Sonatrach" label="Sonatrach"/>
<link wikidata="Q864404" start="53217" end="53228" title="biocapacity" label="biocapacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q234173" start="53503" end="53523" title="ecological footprint" label="ecological footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="55359" end="55365" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="55366" end="55386" title="World Heritage Sites" label="World Heritage Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q500367" start="55413" end="55441" title="Al Qal&amp;#x27;a of Beni Hammad" label="Al Qal&amp;#x27;a of Beni Hammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q588672" start="55468" end="55476" title="Hammadid" label="Hammadid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529269" start="55485" end="55491" title="Tipasa" label="Tipasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q457362" start="55527" end="55534" title="Djémila" label="Djémila"/>
<link wikidata="Q459629" start="55539" end="55545" title="Timgad" label="Timgad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="55552" end="55557" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q724484" start="55565" end="55582" title="M&amp;#x27;Zab Valley" label="M&amp;#x27;Zab Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="55632" end="55637" title="oasis" label="oasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q89468" start="55647" end="55653" title="Casbah" label="Casbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="55705" end="55724" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q190048" start="55743" end="55763" title="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer" label="Tassili n&amp;#x27;Ajjer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506411" start="55863" end="55882" title="Cairo-Dakar Highway" label="Cairo-Dakar Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449946" start="55885" end="55906" title="Algiers-Lagos Highway" label="Algiers-Lagos Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872947" start="56098" end="56115" title="Algeria East–West Highway" label="East-West Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q45942" start="56214" end="56220" title="Annaba" label="Annaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q185134" start="56248" end="56255" title="Tlemcen" label="Tlemcen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449946" start="56304" end="56324" title="Trans-Sahara Highway" label="Trans-Sahara Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="56469" end="56473" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="56475" end="56480" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="56482" end="56489" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="56491" end="56495" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="56501" end="56508" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="56635" end="56639" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q43742" start="56843" end="56848" title="oasis" label="oases"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="56883" end="56888" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q577055" start="56982" end="56990" title="Sahrawi people" label="Sahrawis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="56996" end="57010" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359974" start="57023" end="57044" title="Sahrawi refugee camps" label="Sahrawi refugee camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506487" start="57116" end="57135" title="Palestinian refugee" label="Palestinian refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="57276" end="57283" title="Overseas Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12480578" start="57434" end="57443" title="Algerians" label="Algerians"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="57499" end="57504" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="57520" end="57527" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="57539" end="57550" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="57552" end="57558" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="57560" end="57567" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441232" start="57569" end="57585" title="Byzantine Greeks" label="Byzantine Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="57587" end="57592" title="Turkish people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="57602" end="57622" title="Sub-Saharan Africans" label="Sub-Saharan Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="57706" end="57714" title="Al-Andalus" label="Andalusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="57826" end="57832" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573855" start="57840" end="57850" title="Castilian people" label="Castillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208176" start="57851" end="57858" title="Moriscos" label="Morisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="57908" end="57915" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="57947" end="57954" title="Catalonia" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208176" start="57955" end="57962" title="Moriscos" label="Morisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q116191092" start="58025" end="58055" title="Arab migrations to the Maghreb" label="Arab migrations to the Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="58223" end="58227" title="Arabs" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="58288" end="58295" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q648255" start="58435" end="58442" title="Kabyle people" label="Kabyles"/>
<link wikidata="Q46178" start="58460" end="58467" title="Kabylie" label="Kabylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q402515" start="58496" end="58502" title="Chaoui people" label="Chaoui"/>
<link wikidata="Q58843" start="58529" end="58536" title="Tuareg people" label="Tuaregs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775933" start="58568" end="58581" title="Chenouas" label="Shenwa people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="58660" end="58668" title="Ethnic groups in Europe" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="58706" end="58715" title="Pied-Noir" label="Pied-Noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3804342" start="58767" end="58781" title="Italian Algerians" label="Italian origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56467" start="58898" end="58920" title="Modern Standard Arabic" label="Modern Standard Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="58925" end="58931" title="Berber language" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q56499" start="58960" end="58975" title="Algerian Arabic" label="Algerian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="59138" end="59144" title="Berber language" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q35853" start="59247" end="59253" title="Kabyle language" label="Kabyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q46178" start="59365" end="59372" title="Kabylie" label="Kabylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="59399" end="59405" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="59407" end="59413" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="59415" end="59420" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="59422" end="59427" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q36734" start="59429" end="59439" title="Phoenician language" label="Phoenician"/>
<link wikidata="Q535958" start="59444" end="59449" title="Punic language" label="Punic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56499" start="59709" end="59724" title="Algerian Arabic" label="Algerian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q218272" start="60067" end="60098" title="French rule in Algeria" label="Algeria&amp;#x27;s colonial history"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="60124" end="60137" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q105562482" start="60384" end="60402" title="English in Algeria" label="English in Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="60604" end="60609" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="60752" end="60766" title="World Factbook" label="World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q243551" start="60852" end="60857" title="Ibadi" label="Ibadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q622841" start="60901" end="60909" title="Ghardaia" label="Ghardaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q466237" start="60999" end="61016" title="Pied-Noir" label="European ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036713" start="61128" end="61148" title="Christianity in Algeria" label="Christian population"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="61241" end="61251" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q20311580" start="61388" end="61402" title="Arab Barometer" label="Arab Barometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20311580" start="61502" end="61516" title="Arab Barometer" label="Arab Barometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="61517" end="61525" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="62174" end="62186" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q179825" start="62229" end="62244" title="Emir Abdelkader" label="Emir Abdelkader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224315" start="62246" end="62266" title="Abdelhamid Ben Badis" label="Abdelhamid Ben Badis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325906" start="62268" end="62295" title="Mouloud Kacem Naît Belkacem" label="Mouloud Kacem Naît Belkacem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887149" start="62297" end="62310" title="Malek Bennabi" label="Malek Bennabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738498" start="62315" end="62329" title="Mohamed Arkoun" label="Mohamed Arkoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="63255" end="63267" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131742" start="63269" end="63278" title="hepatitis" label="hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="63280" end="63287" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="63289" end="63302" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="63304" end="63311" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="63316" end="63325" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q141026" start="65022" end="65038" title="Algiers Province" label="Algiers Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q233233" start="65094" end="65109" title="Djelfa Province" label="Djelfa Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190852" start="65274" end="65295" title="University of Algiers" label="University of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="65594" end="65600" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181219" start="65791" end="65846" title="University of Sciences and Technology Houari Boumediene" label="University of Sciences and Technology Houari Boumediene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551442" start="65852" end="65874" title="University of Mentouri" label="University of Mentouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551549" start="65892" end="65910" title="University of Oran" label="University of Oran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551363" start="65925" end="65956" title="University of Abou Bekr Belkaïd" label="University of Abou Bekr Belkaïd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036584" start="65972" end="65991" title="University of Batna" label="University of Batna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="66077" end="66100" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654327" start="66168" end="66174" title="Classical Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="66176" end="66185" title="Berber languages" label="Tamazight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828308" start="66265" end="66281" title="List of Algerian writers" label="Famous novelists"/>
<link wikidata="Q462649" start="66310" end="66322" title="Mohammed Dib" label="Mohammed Dib"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="66324" end="66336" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q379962" start="66338" end="66350" title="Kateb Yacine" label="Kateb Yacine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772341" start="66355" end="66373" title="Ahlam Mosteghanemi" label="Ahlam Mosteghanemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q157313" start="66380" end="66392" title="Assia Djebar" label="Assia Djebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086711" start="66463" end="66477" title="Rachid Mimouni" label="Rachid Mimouni"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="66503" end="66524" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q561721" start="66530" end="66542" title="Tahar Djaout" label="Tahar Djaout"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="66559" end="66567" title="Islamist" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887149" start="66609" end="66622" title="Malek Bennabi" label="Malek Bennabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193670" start="66627" end="66639" title="Frantz Fanon" label="Frantz Fanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="66672" end="66686" title="decolonization" label="decolonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="66688" end="66706" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324444" start="66719" end="66726" title="Tagaste" label="Tagaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q402992" start="66739" end="66749" title="Souk Ahras" label="Souk Ahras"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="66756" end="66767" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="66784" end="66789" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259616" start="66801" end="66810" title="Muqaddima" label="Muqaddima"/>
<link wikidata="Q171296" start="66854" end="66860" title="Senussi" label="Sanusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179825" start="66898" end="66913" title="Emir Abdelkader" label="Emir Abdelkader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224315" start="66925" end="66934" title="Abdelhamid Ben Badis" label="Ben Badis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170512" start="66989" end="66997" title="Apuleius" label="Apuleius"/>
<link wikidata="Q11936307" start="67010" end="67018" title="Madaurus" label="Madaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973130" start="67077" end="67092" title="Algerian cinema" label="Algerian cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041027" start="67362" end="67376" title="Mohammed Racim" label="Mohammed Racim"/>
<link wikidata="Q542171" start="67381" end="67385" title="Baya (artist)" label="Baya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318855" start="67581" end="67594" title="Mohamed Temam" label="Mohamed Temam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821110" start="67596" end="67615" title="Abdelkhader Houamel" label="Abdelkhader Houamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272339" start="67799" end="67821" title="M&amp;#x27;hamed Issiakhem" label="M&amp;#x27;hamed Issiakhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319034" start="67823" end="67838" title="Mohammed Khadda" label="Mohammed Khadda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878328" start="67843" end="67856" title="Bachir Yelles" label="Bachir Yelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319034" start="68077" end="68092" title="Mohammed Khadda" label="Mohammed Khadda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272339" start="68097" end="68119" title="M&amp;#x27;hamed Issiakhem" label="M&amp;#x27;hamed Issiakhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q102679" start="68233" end="68240" title="Numidia" label="Numidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="68246" end="68258" title="Africa (Roman province)" label="Roman Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170512" start="68270" end="68278" title="Apuleius" label="Apuleius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044767" start="68291" end="68305" title="The Golden Ass" label="The Golden Ass"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="68389" end="68407" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183420" start="68409" end="68425" title="Nonius Marcellus" label="Nonius Marcellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q348408" start="68430" end="68447" title="Martianus Capella" label="Martianus Capella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695507" start="68579" end="68592" title="Ahmad al-Buni" label="Ahmad al-Buni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397028" start="68594" end="68604" title="Ibn Manzur" label="Ibn Manzur"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="68609" end="68621" title="Ibn Khaldoun" label="Ibn Khaldoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259616" start="68637" end="68647" title="Muqaddimah" label="Muqaddimah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="68692" end="68704" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="68779" end="68804" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize in Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q462649" start="69181" end="69193" title="Mohammed Dib" label="Mohammed Dib"/>
<link wikidata="Q379962" start="69225" end="69237" title="Kateb Yacine" label="Kateb Yacine"/>
<link wikidata="Q382077" start="69389" end="69404" title="Mouloud Feraoun" label="Mouloud Feraoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887149" start="69406" end="69419" title="Malek Bennabi" label="Malek Bennabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281833" start="69421" end="69433" title="Malek Haddad" label="Malek Haddad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325447" start="69435" end="69449" title="Moufdi Zakaria" label="Moufdi Zakaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q983025" start="69498" end="69513" title="Mouloud Mammeri" label="Mouloud Mammeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q193670" start="69515" end="69527" title="Frantz Fanon" label="Frantz Fanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q157313" start="69533" end="69545" title="Assia Djebar" label="Assia Djebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q965861" start="69743" end="69759" title="Rachid Boudjedra" label="Rachid Boudjedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086711" start="69761" end="69775" title="Rachid Mimouni" label="Rachid Mimouni"/>
<link wikidata="Q730886" start="69777" end="69789" title="Leila Sebbar" label="Leila Sebbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q561721" start="69791" end="69803" title="Tahar Djaout" label="Tahar Djaout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084346" start="69808" end="69820" title="Tahir Wattar" label="Tahir Wattar"/>
<link wikidata="Q313182" start="70221" end="70235" title="Yasmina Khadra" label="Yasmina Khadra"/>
<link wikidata="Q894948" start="70275" end="70289" title="Boualem Sansal" label="Boualem Sansal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772341" start="70326" end="70344" title="Ahlam Mosteghanemi" label="Ahlam Mosteghanemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466744" start="71492" end="71524" title="Days of Glory (2006 film)" label="&amp;quot;Days of Glory&amp;quot; (2006)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679822" start="71529" end="71563" title="Outside the Law (2010 film)" label="&amp;quot;Outside the Law&amp;quot; (2010)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713929" start="71693" end="71723" title="Chronicle of the Years of Fire" label="Chronicle of the Years of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q136605" start="71753" end="71773" title="Z (1969 film)" label="&amp;quot;Z&amp;quot; (1969)"/>
<link wikidata="Q784812" start="71829" end="71850" title="The Battle of Algiers" label="The Battle of Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q623970" start="72233" end="72237" title="Arab cuisine" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q679042" start="72239" end="72245" title="Berber cuisine" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q654493" start="72247" end="72254" title="Turkish cuisine" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661" start="72259" end="72265" title="French cuisine" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="72377" end="72383" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q865004" start="72576" end="72582" title="tajine" label="tajine"/>
<link wikidata="Q76605" start="72585" end="72593" title="couscous" label="couscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q117063126" start="72692" end="72700" title="Algerian couscous" label="couscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q62624" start="72811" end="72816" title="Aurès Mountains" label="Aures"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="72881" end="72886" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293" start="72912" end="72920" title="checkers" label="checkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395855" start="72975" end="72983" title="Fantasia (culture)" label="fantasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="72989" end="73003" title="rifle shooting" label="rifle shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076684" start="73055" end="73063" title="Football in Algeria" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q181903" start="73110" end="73141" title="Algeria national football team" label="Algerian national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117371" start="73308" end="73317" title="Athletics in Algeria" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117371" start="73319" end="73325" title="Boxing in Algeria" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117371" start="73327" end="73337" title="Volleyball in Algeria" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117371" start="73339" end="73347" title="Handball in Algeria" label="handball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117371" start="73365" end="73377" title="Martial arts in Algeria" label="martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q828347" start="73402" end="73431" title="Algeria at the Olympics" label="competed in the Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2312714" start="73578" end="73606" title="Ministry of Youth and Sports" label="Ministry of Youth and Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017886" start="73670" end="73703" title="Index of Algeria-related articles" label="Index of Algeria-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112176" start="73706" end="73724" title="Outline of Algeria" label="Outline of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006526" start="73953" end="73958" title="C. Hurst &amp;amp; Co" label="Hurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="74080" end="74089" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="74246" end="74272" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q193670" start="74405" end="74418" title="Frantz Fanon" label="Fanon, Frantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777164" start="74482" end="74493" title="Grove Press" label="Grove Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q955411" start="74516" end="74531" title="Alistair Horne" label="Horne, Alistair"/>
<link wikidata="Q921536" start="74594" end="74606" title="Viking Adult" label="Viking Adult"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345330" start="74743" end="74758" title="Nova Publishers" label="Nova Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010248" start="74872" end="74883" title="Verso Books" label="Verso Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q11130954" start="74992" end="75016" title="Indiana University Press" label="Indiana University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997531" start="75114" end="75138" title="Cornell University Press" label="Cornell University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805028" start="75310" end="75328" title="Ashgate Publishing" label="Ashgate Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050701" start="75399" end="75420" title="International Futures" label="International Futures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="359" wikidata="Q3253031" url="?curid=359" title="List of Atlas Shrugged characters">
<text>This is a list of characters in Ayn Rand&#x27;s 1957 novel &quot;Atlas Shrugged.&quot;

==Major characters==
The following are major characters from the novel.

===Protagonists===
====Dagny Taggart====
Dagny Taggart is the protagonist of the novel. She is vice president in charge of operations for Taggart Transcontinental, under her brother, James Taggart. Given James&#x27; incompetence, Dagny is responsible for all the workings of the railroad.

====Francisco d&#x27;Anconia====
Francisco d&#x27;Anconia is one of the central characters in &quot;Atlas Shrugged&quot;, an owner by inheritance of the world&#x27;s largest copper mining operation. He is a childhood friend, and the first love, of Dagny Taggart. A child prodigy of exceptional talents, Francisco was dubbed the &quot;climax&quot; of the d&#x27;Anconia line, an already prestigious Argentine family of skilled industrialists. He was a classmate of John Galt and Ragnar Danneskjöld and student of both Hugh Akston and Robert Stadler. He began working while still in school to show that he could have been successful without the aid of his family&#x27;s wealth. Later, Francisco bankrupts the d&#x27;Anconia business to put it out of others&#x27; reach. His full name is given as &quot;Francisco Domingo Carlos Andres Sebastián d&#x27;Anconia&quot;.

====John Galt====

John Galt is the primary male hero of &quot;Atlas Shrugged&quot;. He initially appears as an unnamed menial worker for Taggart Transcontinental, who often dines with Eddie Willers in the employees&#x27; cafeteria, and leads Eddie to reveal important information about Dagny Taggart and Taggart Transcontinental. Only Eddie&#x27;s side of their conversations is given in the novel. Later in the novel, the reader discovers this worker&#x27;s true identity.

Before working for Taggart Transcontinental, Galt worked as an engineer for the Twentieth Century Motor Company, where he secretly invented a generator of usable electric energy from ambient static electricity, but abandoned his prototype, and his employment, when dissatisfied by an easily corrupted novel system of payment. This prototype was found by Dagny Taggart and Hank Rearden. Galt himself remains concealed throughout much of the novel, working a job and living by himself, where he unites the most skillful inventors and business leaders under his leadership. He delivers a lengthy broadcast speech that presents the author&#x27;s philosophy of Objectivism.

====Henry &quot;Hank&quot; Rearden====
Henry (known as &quot;Hank&quot;) Rearden is one of the central characters in &quot;Atlas Shrugged&quot;. He owns the most important steel company in the United States, and invents Rearden Metal, an alloy stronger, lighter, cheaper and tougher than steel. He lives in Philadelphia with his wife Lillian, his brother Philip, and his elderly mother. Rearden represents a type of self-made man and eventually divorces Lillian, abandons his steel mills following a bloody assault by government-planted workers, and joins John Galt&#x27;s strike.

====Eddie Willers====
Edwin &quot;Eddie&quot; Willers is the Special Assistant to the vice-president in Charge of Operations at Taggart Transcontinental. His father and grandfather worked for the Taggarts, and himself likewise. He is completely loyal to Dagny and to Taggart Transcontinental. Willers does not possess the creative ability of Galt&#x27;s associates, but matches them in moral courage and is capable of appreciating and making use of their creations. After Dagny shifts her attention and loyalty to saving the captive Galt, Willers maintains the railroad until its collapse.

====Ragnar Danneskjöld====
One of Galt&#x27;s first followers, and world-famous as a pirate, who seizes relief ships sent from the United States to the People&#x27;s States of Europe. He works to ensure that once those espousing Galt&#x27;s philosophy are restored to their rightful place in society, they have enough capital to rebuild the world. Kept in the background for much of the book, Danneskjöld makes a personal appearance to encourage Rearden to persevere in his increasingly difficult situation, and gives him a bar of gold as compensation for the income taxes he has paid over the last several years. Danneskjöld is married to the actress Kay Ludlow; their relationship is kept hidden from the outside world, which only knows of Ludlow as a retired film star. Considered a misfit by Galt&#x27;s other adherents, he views his actions as a means to speed the world along in understanding Galt&#x27;s perspective.

According to Barbara Branden, who was closely associated with Rand at the time the book was written, there were sections written describing Danneskjöld&#x27;s adventures at sea, cut from the final published text. In a 1974 comment at a lecture, Rand said that Danneskjöld&#x27;s name was a tribute to Victor Hugo&#x27;s novel &quot;Hans of Iceland&quot;, wherein the hero becomes the first of the Counts of Danneskjöld. In the published book, Danneskjöld is always seen through the eyes of others (Dagny Taggart or Hank Rearden), except for a brief paragraph in the very last chapter.

===Antagonists===
====James Taggart====
The President of Taggart Transcontinental and the book&#x27;s most important antagonist. Taggart is an expert influence peddler but incapable of making operational decisions on his own. He relies on his sister, Dagny Taggart, to actually run the railroad, but nonetheless opposes her in almost every endeavor because of his various anti-capitalist moral and political beliefs. In a sense, he is the antithesis of Dagny. This contradiction leads to the recurring absurdity of his life: the desire to overcome those on whom his life depends, and the horror that he will succeed at this. In the final chapters of the novel, he suffers a complete mental breakdown upon realizing that he can no longer deceive himself in this respect.

====Lillian Rearden====
The unsupportive wife of Hank Rearden, who dislikes his habits and (secretly at first) seeks to ruin Rearden to prove her own value. Lillian achieves this, when she passes information to James Taggart about her husband&#x27;s affair with his sister. This information is used to blackmail Rearden to sign a Gift Certificate which delivers all the property rights of Rearden Metal to others. Lillian thereafter uses James Taggart for sexual satisfaction, until Hank abandons her.

====Dr. Floyd Ferris====
Ferris is a biologist who works as &quot;co-ordinator&quot; at the State Science Institute. He uses his position there to deride reason and productive achievement, and publishes a book entitled &quot;Why Do You Think You Think?&quot; He clashes on several occasions with Hank Rearden, and twice attempts to blackmail Rearden into giving up Rearden Metal. He is also one of the group of looters who tries to get Rearden to agree to the Steel Unification Plan. Ferris hosts the demonstration of the Project X weapon, and is the creator of the Ferris Persuader, a torture machine. When John Galt is captured by the looters, Ferris uses the device on Galt, but it breaks down before extracting the information Ferris wants from Galt. Ferris represents the group which uses brute force on the heroes to achieve the ends of the looters.

====Dr. Robert Stadler====
A former professor at Patrick Henry University, and along with colleague Hugh Akston, mentor to Francisco d&#x27;Anconia, John Galt, and Ragnar Danneskjöld. He has since become a sell-out, one who had great promise but squandered it for social approval, to the detriment of the free. He works at the State Science Institute where all his inventions are perverted for use by the military, including a sound-based weapon known as Project X (Xylophone). He is killed when Cuffy Meigs (see below) drunkenly overloads the circuits of Project X, causing it to destroy itself and every structure and living thing in a 100-mile radius. The character was, in part, modeled on J. Robert Oppenheimer, whom Rand had interviewed for an earlier project, and his part in the creation of nuclear weapons. To his former student Galt, Stadler represents the epitome of human evil, as the &quot;man who knew better&quot; but chose not to act for the good.

====Wesley Mouch====
The incompetent and treacherous lobbyist whom Hank Rearden reluctantly employs in Washington, who rises to prominence and authority throughout the novel through trading favours and disloyalty. In return for betraying Hank by helping broker the Equalization of Opportunity Bill (which, by restricting the number of businesses each person may own to one, forces Hank to divest most of his companies), he is given a senior position at the Bureau of Economic Planning and National Resources. Later in the novel he becomes its Top Co-ordinator, a position that eventually becomes Economic Dictator of the country. Mouch&#x27;s mantra, whenever a problem arises from his prior policy, is to say, &quot;I can&#x27;t help it. I need wider powers.&quot;

==Secondary characters==
The following secondary characters also appear in the novel.
*Hugh Akston is identified as &quot;one of the last great advocates of reason.&quot; He was a renowned philosopher and the head of the Department of Philosophy at Patrick Henry University, where he taught Francisco d&#x27;Anconia, John Galt, and Ragnar Danneskjöld. He was, along with Robert Stadler, a father figure to these three. Akston&#x27;s name is so hallowed that a young lady, on hearing that Francisco had studied under him, is shocked. She thought that he must have been one of those great names from an earlier century. He now works as a cook in a roadside diner and proves extremely skillful at the job. When Dagny tracks him down, and before she discovers his true identity, he rejects her enthusiastic offer to manage the dining car services for Taggart Transcontinental. He is based on Aristotle.
*Jeff Allen is a tramp who stows away on a Taggart train during one of Dagny&#x27;s cross-country trips. Instead of throwing him out, she allows him to ride as her guest. It is from Allen that she learns the full story behind the collapse of the Twentieth Century Motor Company (Rand&#x27;s extensive metaphor for the inherent flaws of communism) as well as a hint of John Galt&#x27;s true background.
*Calvin Atwood is owner of Atwood Light and Power Company and joins Galt&#x27;s strike.
*Mayor Bascom is the mayor of Rome, Wisconsin, who reveals part of the history of the Twentieth Century Motor Company.
*Dr. Blodgett is the scientist who pulls the lever to demonstrate Project X.
*Orren Boyle is the head of Associated Steel, the antithesis of Hank Rearden, and a friend of James Taggart. He is an investor in the San Sebastián mines. He disappears from the story after having a nervous breakdown following the failed &quot;unification&quot; of the steel industry.
*Laura Bradford is an actress and Kip Chalmers&#x27;s mistress. She is one of the passengers on his train who dies in the Taggart Tunnel disaster.
*Bill Brent is the chief dispatcher for the Colorado Division of Taggart Transcontinental who tries to prevent the Taggart Tunnel disaster.
*Cherryl Brooks is a dime-store shopgirl who marries James Taggart after a chance encounter in her store the night the John Galt Line was falsely deemed his greatest success. She marries him, thinking that he is the heroic person behind Taggart Transcontinental. Cherryl is at first harsh towards Dagny, having believed Jim Taggart&#x27;s descriptions of his sister, until she questions employees of the railroad. Upon learning that her scorn had been misdirected, Cherryl puts off apologizing to Dagny out of shame but eventually admits to Dagny that when she married Jim, she thought that he had the heroic qualities that she had looked up to—she thought that she was marrying someone like Dagny. Shortly after making this admission, she learns of Jim&#x27;s infidelity with Lillian Rearden. Jim slaps her in their ensuing verbal fight. She commits suicide by jumping over a stone parapet and into the river, unable to live with her evil husband and seeing no way to escape him and the unsympathetic world that is at odds with her worldview.
*Emma Chalmers, Kip Chalmers&#x27;s mother, gains some influence after his death. Known as &quot;Kip&#x27;s Ma,&quot; she starts a soybean-growing project in Louisiana and commandeers thousands of railroad freight cars to move the harvest. As a result, the year&#x27;s wheat crop from Minnesota never reaches the rest of the country but instead rots in storage; also, the soybean crop is lost, having been reaped too early.
*Kip Chalmers is a Washington man who has decided to run for election as legislator from California. On the way to a campaign rally, the Taggart Transcontinental train that is carrying him encounters a split rail, resulting in the destruction of its diesel engine. In response to his demands, a coal-burning steam engine replaces his train&#x27;s diesel engine and pulls it through an eight-mile tunnel that has insufficient ventilation. The result is the suffocation of all passengers and the destruction of the tunnel, caused when a train hauling military ordnance crashes into Chalmers&#x27;s train and explodes.
*Tom Colby is the head of the Rearden Steel Workers Union.
*Dan Conway is the middle-aged president of the Phoenix-Durango railroad. Running a railroad is just about the only thing he knows. When the Anti-dog-eat-dog Rule is used to drive his business out of Colorado, he loses the will to fight, and resigns himself to a quiet life of books and fishing. He is &quot;not&quot; one of those who joined John Galt&#x27;s strike, his resignation being a personal choice of his own.
*Ken Danagger owns Danagger Coal in Pennsylvania. He helps Hank Rearden illegally make Rearden Metal, then later decides to quit and join Galt&#x27;s strike moments before Dagny arrives to try to persuade him otherwise.
*Quentin Daniels is an enterprising engineer hired by Dagny Taggart to reconstruct John Galt&#x27;s motor. Partway through this process, Quentin withdraws his effort for the same reasons John Galt himself had. Dagny&#x27;s pursuit of Quentin leads her to Galt&#x27;s Gulch. Galt recognizes in him a younger version of himself, having emulated both Galt&#x27;s achievements in physics and Galt&#x27;s social reasoning.
*Balph Eubank is called &quot;the literary leader of the age&quot; despite the fact that no book he has written has sold more than 3,000 copies. He complains that it is disgraceful that artists are treated as peddlers. He advocates a law limiting the sales of books to 10,000 copies. He is a misogynist who thinks it disgusting that Dagny Taggart is a railroad vice-president.
*The Fishwife is one of the strikers, who earns her living by providing the fish for Hammond&#x27;s grocery market; she is described as having &quot;dark, disheveled hair and large eyes&quot; and is a writer. Galt says she &quot;wouldn&#x27;t be published outside. She believes that when one deals with words, one deals with the mind.&quot; This character represents Rand herself; it is her cameo appearance in her own novel.
*Richard Halley is Dagny Taggart&#x27;s favorite composer. He mysteriously disappeared after the evening of his greatest triumph. Halley spent years as a struggling and unappreciated composer. At age 24, his opera &quot;Phaethon&quot; was performed for the first time, to an audience who booed and heckled it. After 19 years, &quot;Phaethon&quot; was performed again, but this time it was received to the greatest ovation the opera house had ever heard. The following day, Halley retired, sold the rights to his music, and disappeared. It is later revealed that he has joined the strike and settled in Galt&#x27;s Gulch.
*Lawrence Hammond runs Hammond Cars in Colorado, one of the few companies in existence that still produces top-quality vehicles. He eventually quits and joins the strike.
*Mrs. William Hastings is the widow of the chief engineer at the Twentieth Century Motor Company. Her husband quit shortly after Galt did and joined the strike some years later. Her lead allows Dagny to find Hugh Akston.
*Dr. Thomas Hendricks is a famous brain surgeon who developed a new method of preventing strokes. He joined Galt&#x27;s strike when the American medical system was put under government control.
*Tinky Holloway is one of the &quot;looters&quot; and is frequently referred to and quoted by other characters in the story, but he has only one major appearance, during the Washington meeting with Hank Rearden.
*Lee Hunsacker is in charge of a company called Amalgamated Service that takes over the Twentieth Century Motor Company. He files a lawsuit that eventually leads Midas Mulligan and Judge Narragansett to join the strike. A failed businessman, he laments constantly that no one ever gave him a chance.
*Gwen Ives is Hank Rearden&#x27;s secretary, described as being in her late twenties and remaining calm and professional despite the chaos that threatens his business. When Rearden abandons his mills and joins Galt&#x27;s strike, she and many other employees do the same.
*Gilbert Keith-Worthing is a British novelist of erstwhile fame, now neglected but still considered a &quot;walking classic,&quot; and a proponent of the idea that freedom is an illusion. Kip Chalmers brings him along on the train to California, &quot;for no reason that either of them could discover&quot;; he dies in the Taggart Tunnel disaster.
*Owen Kellogg is assistant to the manager of the Taggart Terminal in New York. He catches Dagny Taggart&#x27;s eye as one of the few competent men on staff. After seeing the sorry state of the Ohio Division, she decides to make him its new superintendent. However, as soon as she returns to New York, Kellogg informs her that he is quitting his job. Owen Kellogg eventually reaches, and settles in, Galt&#x27;s Gulch.
*Fred Kinnan is a labor leader and member of the looter cabal. Unlike the others, however, Kinnan is straightforward and honest about his purpose. Kinnan is the only one to openly state his and his fellow conspirators&#x27; true motivations. At the end of Galt&#x27;s three-hour speech, he expresses admiration for the man, as he says what he means. Despite this, Kinnan admits that he is one of the people Galt is out to destroy.
*Paul Larkin is an unsuccessful, middle-aged businessman, a friend of the Rearden family. He meets with the other looters to work out a plan to bring Rearden down. James Taggart knows that he is a friend of Hank Rearden and challenges his loyalty; Larkin assures Taggart that he will go along with them.
*Eugene Lawson heads the Community Bank of Madison, then gets a job with the government when his bank goes bankrupt under new government policies. One of the looter&#x27;s cabal, he is a collectivist who abhors production and money-making.
*Mort Liddy is a hack composer who writes trite scores for movies and modern symphonies to which no one listens. He believes melody is a primitive vulgarity. He is one of Lillian Rearden&#x27;s friends and a member of the cultural elite.
*Clifton Locey is a friend of Jim Taggart who takes the position of vice-president of operations when Dagny Taggart quits.
*Pat Logan is the engineer on the first run of the John Galt Line. He later strikes.
*Kay Ludlow is a beautiful actress who quit Hollywood because of the roles she was given and secretly married the pirate Ragnar Danneskjöld.
*Roger Marsh is a producer of electrical equipment who joins the strike. Dagny finds him growing cabbage in Galt&#x27;s Gulch.
*Dick McNamara is a contractor who finished the San Sebastián Line. Dagny Taggart plans to hire him to lay the new Rearden Metal track for the Rio Norte Line, but before she does so, he mysteriously disappears. She later discovers that he has joined the strike and settled in Galt&#x27;s Gulch.
*Cuffy Meigs is the Director of Unification for the railroad business. He carries a pistol and a lucky rabbit&#x27;s foot, dresses in a military uniform, and is described as &quot;impervious to thought&quot;. Meigs seizes control of Project X and accidentally destroys it, demolishing the country&#x27;s last railroad bridge across the Mississippi River and killing himself, his men, and Dr. Stadler.
*Dave Mitchum is a state-hired superintendent of the Colorado Division of Taggart Transcontinental. He is partially responsible for the Taggart Tunnel disaster.
*Chick Morrison holds the position of &quot;morale conditioner&quot; in the government. He quits when society begins to collapse and flees to a stronghold in Tennessee. His fellow looters consider it unlikely that he will survive.
*Horace Bussby Mowen is the president of the Amalgamated Switch and Signal Company, Inc., of Connecticut. He is a businessman who sees nothing wrong with the moral code that is destroying society and would never dream of saying he is in business for any reason other than the good of society. Dagny Taggart hires Mowen to produce switches made of Rearden Metal. He is reluctant to build anything with this unproven technology and has to be cajoled into accepting the contract. When pressured by public opinion, he discontinues production of the switches, forcing Dagny to find an alternative source.
*Midas Mulligan is a wealthy banker who mysteriously disappeared in protest after he was given a court order to lend money to an incompetent applicant. When the order came down, he liquidated his entire business, paid off his depositors, and joined Galt&#x27;s strike. He is the legal owner of the land where Galt&#x27;s Gulch is located. Mulligan&#x27;s birth name was Michael, but he had it legally changed after a news article called him &quot;Midas&quot; in a derogatory fashion, which Mulligan took as a compliment.
*Judge Narragansett is an American jurist who ruled in favor of Midas Mulligan during the case brought against him by the incompetent loan applicant. When Narragansett&#x27;s ruling was reversed on appeal, he retired and joined the strike. At the end of the novel, he is seen editing the United States Constitution, crossing out portions that contradict each other and adding an amendment to prohibit Congress from passing laws that restrain freedom of trade.
*Ben Nealy is a railroad contractor whom Dagny Taggart hires to replace the track on the Rio Norte Line with Rearden Metal. Nealy is incompetent, but Dagny can find no one better in all the country. Nealy believes that anything can get done with enough muscle power. He sees no role for intelligence in human achievement. He relies on Dagny and Ellis Wyatt to run things and resents them for doing it, because it appears to him that they are just bossing people around.
*Ted Nielsen is the head of Nielsen Motors. He eventually goes on strike, along with most of the other industrialist &quot;producer&quot; types, by closing his motor factory. Dagny later finds him when she visits Galt&#x27;s Gulch for the first time.
*Betty Pope is a wealthy socialite who is having a meaningless sexual affair with James Taggart. She is deliberately crude in a way that casts ridicule on her high social position.
*Dr. Potter holds some undefined position with the State Science Institute. He is sent to try to obtain the rights to Rearden Metal.
*Dr. Simon Pritchett is the prestigious head of the Department of Philosophy at Patrick Henry University and is considered the leading philosopher of the age. He believes that man is nothing but a collection of chemicals, reason is a superstition, it is futile to seek meaning in life, and the duty of a philosopher is to show that nothing can be understood.
*Rearden&#x27;s mother, whose name is not mentioned, lives with Rearden at his home in Philadelphia. She is involved in charity work and berates Rearden whenever she can. She dotes on her weak son Philip Rearden.
*Philip Rearden is the younger brother of Hank Rearden. He lives in his brother&#x27;s home in Philadelphia and is completely dependent on him. He is resentful of his brother&#x27;s charity.
*Dwight Sanders owns Sanders Aircraft, a producer of high-quality airplanes, and joins the strike.
*Bertram Scudder is an editorial writer for the magazine &quot;The Future&quot;. He typically bashes business and businessmen but he never says anything specific in his articles, relying on innuendo, sneers, and denunciation. He wrote a hatchet job on Hank Rearden called &quot;The Octopus&quot;. He is also vocal in support of the Equalization of Opportunity Bill. Scudder claims that the most important thing in life is &quot;brother love&quot; but seems to have nothing but hatred for those around him. He loses his job after Dagny Taggart reveals her affair with Hank Rearden over air on his radio show.
*Claude Slagenhop is president of the political organization Friends of Global Progress and one of Lillian Rearden&#x27;s friends. He believes that ideas are just air and that this is no time for talk, but for action. Global Progress is a sponsor of the Equalization of Opportunity Bill.
*Gerald and Ivy Starnes are the two surviving children of Jed Starnes, the founder of the Twentieth Century Motor Company. Together with their since-deceased brother Eric, they instituted a communistic payment-and-benefits program that drove the company into bankruptcy. Gerald, a dying alcoholic, and Ivy, a pseudo-Buddhist ascetic, continue to insist that the plan was perfect and that the failure of their father&#x27;s company was entirely due to the workers. Eric was a weak, attention-seeking man with a pathological desire to be loved. He committed suicide after the woman he loved married another man. Gerald claims that he always acted for the good of the employees, but he was vain and incompetent and often threw lavish parties using company funds. Ivy, on the other hand, is described as a sadist who relishes seeing others in poverty, but who has no desire for wealth of her own.
*Andrew Stockton runs the Stockton Foundry in Stockton, Colorado. When he joins the strike, he opens a foundry in Galt&#x27;s Gulch. 
*Mr. Thompson is the &quot;head of the state&quot; for the United States. He is not particularly intelligent and has a very undistinguished look. He knows politics, however, and is a master of public relations and back-room deals. Rand&#x27;s notes indicate that she modeled him on President Harry S. Truman and that she deliberately decided not to call him &quot;President of the United States&quot; as this title has &quot;honorable connotations&quot; which the character does not deserve.
*Lester Tuck is the campaign manager for Kip Chalmers and one of his guests on the train trip to California. He dies in the Taggart Tunnel disaster.
*Clem Weatherby is a government representative on the board of directors of Taggart Transcontinental. Dagny considers him the least bad of the government representatives, since he does have some real knowledge of the running of trains. She notices, however, that he is the least appreciated by his own bosses.
*The Wet Nurse (Tony) is a young bureaucrat sent by the government to watch over Rearden&#x27;s mills. Though he starts out as a cynical follower of the looters&#x27; code, his experience at the mills transforms him, and he comes to respect and admire the producers. He is shot attempting to inform Hank Rearden about a government plot, but does succeed in warning Rearden just before he dies.
*Ellis Wyatt is the head of Wyatt Oil. He has almost single-handedly revived the economy of Colorado by discovering a new process for extracting more oil from what were thought to be exhausted oil wells. When first introduced, he is aggressive towards Dagny, whom he does not yet know and whom he blames for what are, in fact, her brother&#x27;s policies which directly threaten his business. When the government passes laws and decrees which make it impossible for him to continue, he sets all his oil wells on fire and disappears from public view, leaving a note: &quot;I am leaving it as I found it. Take over. It&#x27;s yours.&quot; One particular burning well that resists all efforts to extinguish it becomes known as &quot;Wyatt&#x27;s Torch&quot;. Later Dagny meets him in Galt&#x27;s Gulch.

==Notes==
==References==
===Works cited===
*
*

==External links==
*Website with comprehensive list of individuals mentioned in &quot;Atlas Shrugged&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q132524" start="32" end="40" title="Ayn Rand" label="Ayn Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q374098" start="65" end="79" title="Atlas Shrugged" label="Atlas Shrugged"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="223" end="234" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="625" end="631" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q74950" start="2448" end="2459" title="Objectivism" label="Objectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="2700" end="2705" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2769" end="2781" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448143" start="2878" end="2891" title="self-made man" label="self-made man"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="3720" end="3726" title="pirate" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337738" start="4397" end="4406" title="film star" label="film star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858770" start="4573" end="4588" title="Barbara Branden" label="Barbara Branden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496854" start="4892" end="4907" title="Hans of Iceland" label="Hans of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="7971" end="7992" title="J. Robert Oppenheimer" label="J. Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="8076" end="8090" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="8345" end="8355" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="9897" end="9906" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="13509" end="13517" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="14658" end="14668" title="misogynist" label="misogynist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="15134" end="15150" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q203480" start="15389" end="15397" title="Phaethon" label="Phaethon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637189" start="18918" end="18922" title="hack writer" label="hack"/>
<link wikidata="Q308398" start="21750" end="21755" title="Midas" label="Midas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="22112" end="22138" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="25386" end="25401" title="New Age" label="pseudo-Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="26131" end="26148" title="Head of state" label="head of the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="26396" end="26411" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="569" wikidata="Q23404" url="?curid=569" title="Anthropology">
<text>Anthropology is the scientific study of humanity, concerned with human behavior, human biology, cultures, societies, and linguistics, in both the present and past, including archaic humans. Social anthropology studies patterns of behavior, while cultural anthropology studies cultural meaning, including norms and values. The term sociocultural anthropology is commonly used today. Linguistic anthropology studies how language influences social life. Biological or physical anthropology studies the biological development of humans.

Archaeology, often termed as &quot;anthropology of the past,&quot; studies human activity through investigation of physical evidence. It is considered a branch of anthropology in North America and Asia, while in Europe, archaeology is viewed as a discipline in its own right or grouped under other related disciplines, such as history and palaeontology.

==Etymology==
The abstract noun &quot;&quot; is first attested in reference to history. Its present use first appeared in Renaissance Germany in the works of Magnus Hundt and Otto Casmann. Their Neo-Latin &#x27; derived from the combining forms of the Greek words &quot;ánthrōpos&quot; (, &quot;human&quot;) and &quot;lógos&quot; (, &quot;study&quot;). Its adjectival form appeared in the works of Aristotle. It began to be used in English, possibly via French &#x27;, by the early 18th century.

==Origin and development of the term==

===Through the 19th century===
In 1647, the Bartholins, early scholars of the University of Copenhagen, defined &quot;&quot; as follows:

Sporadic use of the term for some of the subject matter occurred subsequently, such as the use by Étienne Serres in 1839 to describe the natural history, or paleontology, of man, based on comparative anatomy, and the creation of a chair in anthropology and ethnography in 1850 at the French National Museum of Natural History by Jean Louis Armand de Quatrefages de Bréau. Various short-lived organizations of anthropologists had already been formed. The Société Ethnologique de Paris, the first to use the term &quot;ethnology&quot;, was formed in 1839 and focused on methodically studying human races. After the death of its founder, William Frédéric Edwards, in 1842, it gradually declined in activity until it eventually dissolved in 1862.

Meanwhile, the Ethnological Society of New York, currently the American Ethnological Society, was founded on its model in 1842, as well as the Ethnological Society of London in 1843, a break-away group of the Aborigines&#x27; Protection Society. These anthropologists of the times were liberal, anti-slavery, and pro-human-rights activists. They maintained international connections.

Anthropology and many other current fields are the intellectual results of the comparative methods developed in the earlier 19th century. Theorists in diverse fields such as anatomy, linguistics, and ethnology, started making feature-by-feature comparisons of their subject matters, and were beginning to suspect that similarities between animals, languages, and folkways were the result of processes or laws unknown to them then. For them, the publication of Charles Darwin&#x27;s &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot; was the epiphany of everything they had begun to suspect. Darwin himself arrived at his conclusions through comparison of species he had seen in agronomy and in the wild.

Darwin and Wallace unveiled evolution in the late 1850s. There was an immediate rush to bring it into the social sciences. Paul Broca in Paris was in the process of breaking away from the Société de biologie to form the first of the explicitly anthropological societies, the Société d&#x27;Anthropologie de Paris, meeting for the first time in Paris in 1859. When he read Darwin, he became an immediate convert to &quot;Transformisme&quot;, as the French called evolutionism. His definition now became &quot;the study of the human group, considered as a whole, in its details, and in relation to the rest of nature&quot;.

Broca, being what today would be called a neurosurgeon, had taken an interest in the pathology of speech. He wanted to localize the difference between man and the other animals, which appeared to reside in speech. He discovered the speech center of the human brain, today called Broca&#x27;s area after him. His interest was mainly in Biological anthropology, but a German philosopher specializing in psychology, Theodor Waitz, took up the theme of general and social anthropology in his six-volume work, entitled &quot;Die Anthropologie der Naturvölker&quot;, 1859–1864. The title was soon translated as &quot;The Anthropology of Primitive Peoples&quot;. The last two volumes were published posthumously.

Waitz defined anthropology as &quot;the science of the nature of man&quot;. Following Broca&#x27;s lead, Waitz points out that anthropology is a new field, which would gather material from other fields, but would differ from them in the use of comparative anatomy, physiology, and psychology to differentiate man from &quot;the animals nearest to him&quot;. He stresses that the data of comparison must be empirical, gathered by experimentation. The history of civilization, as well as ethnology, are to be brought into the comparison. It is to be presumed fundamentally that the species, man, is a unity, and that &quot;the same laws of thought are applicable to all men&quot;.

Waitz was influential among British ethnologists. In 1863, the explorer Richard Francis Burton and the speech therapist James Hunt broke away from the Ethnological Society of London to form the Anthropological Society of London, which henceforward would follow the path of the new anthropology rather than just ethnology. It was the 2nd society dedicated to general anthropology in existence. Representatives from the French &quot;Société&quot; were present, though not Broca. In his keynote address, printed in the first volume of its new publication, &quot;The Anthropological Review&quot;, Hunt stressed the work of Waitz, adopting his definitions as a standard. Among the first associates were the young Edward Burnett Tylor, inventor of cultural anthropology, and his brother Alfred Tylor, a geologist. Previously Edward had referred to himself as an ethnologist; subsequently, an anthropologist.

Similar organizations in other countries followed: The Anthropological Society of Madrid (1865), the American Anthropological Association in 1902, the Anthropological Society of Vienna (1870), the Italian Society of Anthropology and Ethnology (1871), and many others subsequently. The majority of these were evolutionists. One notable exception was the Berlin Society for Anthropology, Ethnology, and Prehistory (1869) founded by Rudolph Virchow, known for his vituperative attacks on the evolutionists. Not religious himself, he insisted that Darwin&#x27;s conclusions lacked empirical foundation.

During the last three decades of the 19th century, a proliferation of anthropological societies and associations occurred, most independent, most publishing their own journals, and all international in membership and association. The major theorists belonged to these organizations. They supported the gradual osmosis of anthropology curricula into the major institutions of higher learning. By 1898, 48 educational institutions in 13 countries had some curriculum in anthropology. None of the 75 faculty members were under a department named anthropology.

===20th and 21st centuries===
Anthropology as a specialized field of academic study developed much through the end of the 19th century. Then it rapidly expanded beginning in the early 20th century to the point where many of the world&#x27;s higher educational institutions typically included anthropology departments. Thousands of anthropology departments have come into existence, and anthropology has also diversified from a few major subdivisions to dozens more. Practical anthropology, the use of anthropological knowledge and technique to solve specific problems, has arrived; for example, the presence of buried victims might stimulate the use of a forensic archaeologist to recreate the final scene. The organization has also reached a global level. For example, the World Council of Anthropological Associations (WCAA), &quot;a network of national, regional and international associations that aims to promote worldwide communication and cooperation in anthropology&quot;, currently contains members from about three dozen nations.

Since the work of Franz Boas and Bronisław Malinowski in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, &quot;social&quot; anthropology in Great Britain and &quot;cultural&quot; anthropology in the US have been distinguished from other social sciences by their emphasis on cross-cultural comparisons, long-term in-depth examination of context, and the importance they place on participant-observation or experiential immersion in the area of research. Cultural anthropology, in particular, has emphasized cultural relativism, holism, and the use of findings to frame cultural critiques. This has been particularly prominent in the United States, from Boas&#x27; arguments against 19th-century racial ideology, through Margaret Mead&#x27;s advocacy for gender equality and sexual liberation, to current criticisms of post-colonial oppression and promotion of multiculturalism. Ethnography is one of its primary research designs as well as the text that is generated from anthropological fieldwork.

In Great Britain and the Commonwealth countries, the British tradition of social anthropology tends to dominate. In the United States, anthropology has traditionally been divided into the four field approach developed by Franz Boas in the early 20th century: &quot;biological&quot; or &quot;physical&quot; anthropology; &quot;social&quot;, &quot;cultural&quot;, or &quot;sociocultural&quot; anthropology; archaeological anthropology; and linguistic anthropology. These fields frequently overlap but tend to use different methodologies and techniques.

European countries with overseas colonies tended to practice more ethnology (a term coined and defined by Adam F. Kollár in 1783). It is sometimes referred to as sociocultural anthropology in the parts of the world that were influenced by the European tradition.

==Fields==
Anthropology is a global discipline involving humanities, social sciences and natural sciences. Anthropology builds upon knowledge from natural sciences, including the discoveries about the origin and evolution of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;, human physical traits, human behavior, the variations among different groups of humans, how the evolutionary past of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; has influenced its social organization and culture, and from social sciences, including the organization of human social and cultural relations, institutions, social conflicts, etc. Early anthropology originated in Classical Greece and Persia and studied and tried to understand observable cultural diversity. As such, anthropology has been central in the development of several new (late 20th century) interdisciplinary fields such as cognitive science, global studies, and various ethnic studies.

According to Clifford Geertz,

Sociocultural anthropology has been heavily influenced by structuralist and postmodern theories, as well as a shift toward the analysis of modern societies. During the 1970s and 1990s, there was an epistemological shift away from the positivist traditions that had largely informed the discipline. During this shift, enduring questions about the nature and production of knowledge came to occupy a central place in cultural and social anthropology. In contrast, archaeology and biological anthropology remained largely positivist. Due to this difference in epistemology, the four sub-fields of anthropology have lacked cohesion over the last several decades.

===Sociocultural===

Sociocultural anthropology draws together the principal axes of cultural anthropology and social anthropology. Cultural anthropology is the comparative study of the manifold ways in which people &quot;make sense&quot; of the world around them, while social anthropology is the study of the &quot;relationships&quot; among individuals and groups. Cultural anthropology is more related to philosophy, literature and the arts (how one&#x27;s culture affects the experience for self and group, contributing to a more complete understanding of the people&#x27;s knowledge, customs, and institutions), while social anthropology is more related to sociology and history. In that, it helps develop an understanding of social structures, typically of others and other populations (such as minorities, subgroups, dissidents, etc.). There is no hard-and-fast distinction between them, and these categories overlap to a considerable degree.

Inquiry in sociocultural anthropology is guided in part by cultural relativism, the attempt to understand other societies in terms of their own cultural symbols and values. Accepting other cultures in their own terms moderates reductionism in cross-cultural comparison. This project is often accommodated in the field of ethnography. Ethnography can refer to both a methodology and the product of ethnographic research, i.e. an ethnographic monograph. As a methodology, ethnography is based upon long-term fieldwork within a community or other research site. Participant observation is one of the foundational methods of social and cultural anthropology. Ethnology involves the systematic comparison of different cultures. The process of participant-observation can be especially helpful to understanding a culture from an emic (conceptual, vs. etic, or technical) point of view.

The study of kinship and social organization is a central focus of sociocultural anthropology, as kinship is a human universal. Sociocultural anthropology also covers economic and political organization, law and conflict resolution, patterns of consumption and exchange, material culture, technology, infrastructure, gender relations, ethnicity, childrearing and socialization, religion, myth, symbols, values, etiquette, worldview, sports, music, nutrition, recreation, games, food, festivals, and language (which is also the object of study in linguistic anthropology).

Comparison across cultures is a key element of method in sociocultural anthropology, including the industrialized (and de-industrialized) West. The Standard Cross-Cultural Sample (SCCS) includes 186 such cultures.

===Biological===

Biological anthropology and physical anthropology are synonymous terms to describe anthropological research focused on the study of humans and non-human primates in their biological, evolutionary, and demographic dimensions. It examines the biological and social factors that have affected the evolution of humans and other primates, and that generate, maintain or change contemporary genetic and physiological variation.

===Archaeological===

Archaeology is the study of the human past through its material remains. Artifacts, faunal remains, and human altered landscapes are evidence of the cultural and material lives of past societies. Archaeologists examine material remains in order to deduce patterns of past human behavior and cultural practices. Ethnoarchaeology is a type of archaeology that studies the practices and material remains of living human groups in order to gain a better understanding of the evidence left behind by past human groups, who are presumed to have lived in similar ways.
===Linguistic===

Linguistic anthropology (not to be confused with anthropological linguistics) seeks to understand the processes of human communications, verbal and non-verbal, variation in language across time and space, the social uses of language, and the relationship between language and culture. It is the branch of anthropology that brings linguistic methods to bear on anthropological problems, linking the analysis of linguistic forms and processes to the interpretation of sociocultural processes. Linguistic anthropologists often draw on related fields including sociolinguistics, pragmatics, cognitive linguistics, semiotics, discourse analysis, and narrative analysis.

=== Ethnography ===
Ethnography is a method of analysing social or cultural interaction. It often involves participant observation though an ethnographer may also draw from texts written by participants of in social interactions. Ethnography views first-hand experience and social context as important.

Tim Ingold distinguishes ethnography from anthropology arguing that anthropology tries to construct general theories of human experience, applicable in general and novel settings, while ethnography concerns itself with fidelity. He argues that the anthropologist must make his writing consistent with their understanding of literature and other theory but notes that ethnography may be of use to the anthropologists and the fields inform one another.

== Key topics by field: sociocultural ==
===Art, media, music, dance and film===
==== Art ====
One of the central problems in the anthropology of art concerns the universality of &#x27;art&#x27; as a cultural phenomenon. Several anthropologists have noted that the Western categories of &#x27;painting&#x27;, &#x27;sculpture&#x27;, or &#x27;literature&#x27;, conceived as independent artistic activities, do not exist, or exist in a significantly different form, in most non-Western contexts. To surmount this difficulty, anthropologists of art have focused on formal features in objects which, without exclusively being &#x27;artistic&#x27;, have certain evident &#x27;aesthetic&#x27; qualities. Boas&#x27; &quot;Primitive Art&quot;, Claude Lévi-Strauss&#x27; &quot;The Way of the Masks&quot; (1982) or Geertz&#x27;s &#x27;Art as Cultural System&#x27; (1983) are some examples in this trend to transform the anthropology of &#x27;art&#x27; into an anthropology of culturally specific &#x27;aesthetics&#x27;.

==== Media ====
Media anthropology (also known as the anthropology of media or mass media) emphasizes ethnographic studies as a means of understanding producers, audiences, and other cultural and social aspects of mass media. The types of ethnographic contexts explored range from contexts of media production (e.g., ethnographies of newsrooms in newspapers, journalists in the field, film production) to contexts of media reception, following audiences in their everyday responses to media. Other types include cyber anthropology, a relatively new area of internet research, as well as ethnographies of other areas of research which happen to involve media, such as development work, social movements, or health education. This is in addition to many classic ethnographic contexts, where media such as radio, the press, new media, and television have started to make their presences felt since the early 1990s.

==== Music ====

Ethnomusicology is an academic field encompassing various approaches to the study of music (broadly defined), that emphasize its cultural, social, material, cognitive, biological, and other dimensions or contexts instead of or in addition to its isolated sound component or any particular repertoire.

Ethnomusicology can be used in a wide variety of fields, such as teaching, politics, cultural anthropology etc. While the origins of ethnomusicology date back to the 18th and 19th centuries, it was formally termed &quot;ethnomusicology&quot; by Dutch scholar Jaap Kunst . Later, the influence of study in this area spawned the creation of the periodical &quot;Ethnomusicology&quot; and the Society of Ethnomusicology.

==== Visual ====

Visual anthropology is concerned, in part, with the study and production of ethnographic photography, film and, since the mid-1990s, new media. While the term is sometimes used interchangeably with ethnographic film, visual anthropology also encompasses the anthropological study of visual representation, including areas such as performance, museums, art, and the production and reception of mass media. Visual representations from all cultures, such as sandpaintings, tattoos, sculptures and reliefs, cave paintings, scrimshaw, jewelry, hieroglyphs, paintings, and photographs are included in the focus of visual anthropology.

=== Economic, political economic, applied and development ===
==== Economic ====

Economic anthropology attempts to explain human economic behavior in its widest historic, geographic and cultural scope. It has a complex relationship with the discipline of economics, of which it is highly critical. Its origins as a sub-field of anthropology begin with the Polish-British founder of anthropology, Bronisław Malinowski, and his French compatriot, Marcel Mauss, on the nature of gift-giving exchange (or reciprocity) as an alternative to market exchange. Economic Anthropology remains, for the most part, focused upon exchange. The school of thought derived from Marx and known as Political Economy focuses on production, in contrast. Economic anthropologists have abandoned the primitivist niche they were relegated to by economists, and have now turned to examine corporations, banks, and the global financial system from an anthropological perspective.

====Political economy====

Political economy in anthropology is the application of the theories and methods of historical materialism to the traditional concerns of anthropology, including, but not limited to, non-capitalist societies. Political economy introduced questions of history and colonialism to ahistorical anthropological theories of social structure and culture. Three main areas of interest rapidly developed. The first of these areas was concerned with the &quot;pre-capitalist&quot; societies that were subject to evolutionary &quot;tribal&quot; stereotypes. Sahlin&#x27;s work on hunter-gatherers as the &quot;original affluent society&quot; did much to dissipate that image. The second area was concerned with the vast majority of the world&#x27;s population at the time, the peasantry, many of whom were involved in complex revolutionary wars such as in Vietnam. The third area was on colonialism, imperialism, and the creation of the capitalist world-system. More recently, these political economists have more directly addressed issues of industrial (and post-industrial) capitalism around the world.

==== Applied ====

Applied anthropology refers to the application of the method and theory of anthropology to the analysis and solution of practical problems. It is a &quot;complex of related, research-based, instrumental methods which produce change or stability in specific cultural systems through the provision of data, initiation of direct action, and/or the formulation of policy&quot;. Applied anthropology is the practical side of anthropological research; it includes researcher involvement and activism within the participating community. It is closely related to development anthropology (distinct from the more critical anthropology of development).

====Development====

Anthropology of development tends to view development from a &quot;critical&quot; perspective. The kind of issues addressed and implications for the approach involve pondering why, if a key development goal is to alleviate poverty, is poverty increasing? Why is there such a gap between plans and outcomes? Why are those working in development so willing to disregard history and the lessons it might offer? Why is development so externally driven rather than having an internal basis? In short, why does so much planned development fail?

===Kinship, feminism, gender and sexuality===
==== Kinship ====

&quot;Kinship&quot; can refer both to &quot;the study of&quot; the patterns of social relationships in one or more human cultures, or it can refer to &quot;the patterns of social relationships&quot; themselves. Over its history, anthropology has developed a number of related concepts and terms, such as &quot;descent&quot;, &quot;descent groups&quot;, &quot;lineages&quot;, &quot;affines&quot;, &quot;cognates&quot;, and even &quot;fictive kinship&quot;. Broadly, kinship patterns may be considered to include people related both by descent (one&#x27;s social relations during development), and also relatives by marriage. Within kinship you have two different families. People have their biological families and it is the people they share DNA with. This is called consanguinity or &quot;blood ties&quot;. People can also have a chosen family in which they chose who they want to be a part of their family. In some cases, people are closer with their chosen family more than with their biological families.

==== Feminist ====

Feminist anthropology is a four field approach to anthropology (archeological, biological, cultural, linguistic) that seeks to reduce male bias in research findings, anthropological hiring practices, and the scholarly production of knowledge. Anthropology engages often with feminists from non-Western traditions, whose perspectives and experiences can differ from those of white feminists of Europe, America, and elsewhere. From the perspective of the Western world, historically such &#x27;peripheral&#x27; perspectives have been ignored, observed only from an outsider perspective, and regarded as less-valid or less-important than knowledge from the Western world. Exploring and addressing that double bias against women from marginalized racial or ethnic groups is of particular interest in intersectional feminist anthropology.

Feminist anthropologists have stated that their publications have contributed to anthropology, along the way correcting against the systemic biases beginning with the &quot;patriarchal origins of anthropology (and (academia)&quot; and note that from 1891 to 1930 doctorates in anthropology went to males more than 85%, more than 81% were under 35, and only 7.2% to anyone over 40 years old, thus reflecting an age gap in the pursuit of anthropology by first-wave feminists until later in life. This correction of systemic bias may include mainstream feminist theory, history, linguistics, archaeology, and anthropology. Feminist anthropologists are often concerned with the construction of gender across societies. Gender constructs are of particular interest when studying sexism.

According to St. Clair Drake, Vera Mae Green was, until &quot;[w]ell into the 1960s&quot;, the only African American female anthropologist who was also a Caribbeanist. She studied ethnic and family relations in the Caribbean as well as the United States, and thereby tried to improve the way black life, experiences, and culture were studied. However, Zora Neale Hurston, although often primarily considered to be a literary author, was trained in anthropology by Franz Boas, and published &quot;Tell my Horse&quot; about her &quot;anthropological observations&quot; of voodoo in the Caribbean (1938).

Feminist anthropology is inclusive of the anthropology of birth as a specialization, which is the anthropological study of pregnancy and childbirth within cultures and societies.

===Medical, nutritional, psychological, cognitive and transpersonal===
==== Medical ====
Medical anthropology is an interdisciplinary field which studies &quot;human health and disease, health care systems, and biocultural adaptation&quot;. It is believed that William Caudell was the first to discover the field of medical anthropology. Currently, research in medical anthropology is one of the main growth areas in the field of anthropology as a whole. It focuses on the following six basic fields:

* The development of systems of medical knowledge and medical care
* The patient-physician relationship
* The integration of alternative medical systems in culturally diverse environments
* The interaction of social, environmental and biological factors which influence health and illness both in the individual and the community as a whole
* The critical analysis of interaction between psychiatric services and migrant populations (&quot;critical ethnopsychiatry&quot;: Beneduce 2004, 2007)
* The impact of biomedicine and biomedical technologies in non-Western settings

Other subjects that have become central to medical anthropology worldwide are violence and social suffering (Farmer, 1999, 2003; Beneduce, 2010) as well as other issues that involve physical and psychological harm and suffering that are not a result of illness. On the other hand, there are fields that intersect with medical anthropology in terms of research methodology and theoretical production, such as &quot;cultural psychiatry&quot; and &quot;transcultural psychiatry&quot; or &quot;ethnopsychiatry&quot;.

==== Nutritional ====
Nutritional anthropology is a synthetic concept that deals with the interplay between economic systems, nutritional status and food security, and how changes in the former affect the latter. If economic and environmental changes in a community affect access to food, food security, and dietary health, then this interplay between culture and biology is in turn connected to broader historical and economic trends associated with globalization. Nutritional status affects overall health status, work performance potential, and the overall potential for economic development (either in terms of human development or traditional western models) for any given group of people.

==== Psychological ====

Psychological anthropology is an interdisciplinary subfield of anthropology that studies the interaction of cultural and mental processes. This subfield tends to focus on ways in which humans&#x27; development and enculturation within a particular cultural group – with its own history, language, practices, and conceptual categories – shape processes of human cognition, emotion, perception, motivation, and mental health. It also examines how the understanding of cognition, emotion, motivation, and similar psychological processes inform or constrain our models of cultural and social processes.

==== Cognitive ====

Cognitive anthropology seeks to explain patterns of shared knowledge, cultural innovation, and transmission over time and space using the methods and theories of the cognitive sciences (especially experimental psychology and evolutionary biology) often through close collaboration with historians, ethnographers, archaeologists, linguists, musicologists and other specialists engaged in the description and interpretation of cultural forms. Cognitive anthropology is concerned with what people from different groups know and how that implicit knowledge changes the way people perceive and relate to the world around them.

==== Transpersonal ====

Transpersonal anthropology studies the relationship between altered states of consciousness and culture. As with transpersonal psychology, the field is much concerned with altered states of consciousness (ASC) and transpersonal experience. However, the field differs from mainstream transpersonal psychology in taking more cognizance of cross-cultural issues – for instance, the roles of myth, ritual, diet, and text in evoking and interpreting extraordinary experiences.

===Political and legal===
==== Political ====

Political anthropology concerns the structure of political systems, looked at from the basis of the structure of societies. Political anthropology developed as a discipline concerned primarily with politics in stateless societies, a new development started from the 1960s, and is still unfolding: anthropologists started increasingly to study more &quot;complex&quot; social settings in which the presence of states, bureaucracies and markets entered both ethnographic accounts and analysis of local phenomena. The turn towards complex societies meant that political themes were taken up at two main levels. Firstly, anthropologists continued to study political organization and political phenomena that lay outside the state-regulated sphere (as in patron-client relations or tribal political organization). Secondly, anthropologists slowly started to develop a disciplinary concern with states and their institutions (and on the relationship between formal and informal political institutions). An anthropology of the state developed, and it is a most thriving field today. Geertz&#x27;s comparative work on &quot;Negara&quot;, the Balinese state, is an early, famous example.

====Legal====

Legal anthropology or anthropology of law specializes in &quot;the cross-cultural study of social ordering&quot;. Earlier legal anthropological research often focused more narrowly on conflict management, crime, sanctions, or formal regulation. More recent applications include issues such as human rights, legal pluralism, and political uprisings.

====Public====

Public anthropology was created by Robert Borofsky, a professor at Hawaii Pacific University, to &quot;demonstrate the ability of anthropology and anthropologists to effectively address problems beyond the discipline – illuminating larger social issues of our times as well as encouraging broad, public conversations about them with the explicit goal of fostering social change&quot;.

=== Nature, science, and technology ===
====Cyborg====

Cyborg anthropology originated as a sub-focus group within the American Anthropological Association&#x27;s annual meeting in 1993. The sub-group was very closely related to STS and the Society for the Social Studies of Science. Donna Haraway&#x27;s 1985 &quot;Cyborg Manifesto&quot; could be considered the founding document of cyborg anthropology by first exploring the philosophical and sociological ramifications of the term. Cyborg anthropology studies humankind and its relations with the technological systems it has built, specifically modern technological systems that have reflexively shaped notions of what it means to be human beings.

==== Digital ====

Digital anthropology is the study of the relationship between humans and digital-era technology and extends to various areas where anthropology and technology intersect. It is sometimes grouped with sociocultural anthropology, and sometimes considered part of material culture. The field is new, and thus has a variety of names with a variety of emphases. These include techno-anthropology, digital ethnography, cyberanthropology, and virtual anthropology.

==== Ecological ====

Ecological anthropology is defined as the &quot;study of cultural adaptations to environments&quot;. The sub-field is also defined as, &quot;the study of relationships between a population of humans and their biophysical environment&quot;. The focus of its research concerns &quot;how cultural beliefs and practices helped human populations adapt to their environments, and how their environments change across space and time. The contemporary perspective of environmental anthropology, and arguably at least the backdrop, if not the focus of most of the ethnographies and cultural fieldworks of today, is political ecology. Many characterize this new perspective as more informed with culture, politics and power, globalization, localized issues, century anthropology and more. The focus and data interpretation is often used for arguments for/against or creation of policy, and to prevent corporate exploitation and damage of land. Often, the observer has become an active part of the struggle either directly (organizing, participation) or indirectly (articles, documentaries, books, ethnographies). Such is the case with environmental justice advocate Melissa Checker and her relationship with the people of Hyde Park.

==== Environment ====
Social sciences, like anthropology, can provide interdisciplinary approaches to the environment. Professor Kay Milton, Director of the Anthropology research network in the School of History and Anthropology, describes anthropology as distinctive, with its most distinguishing feature being its interest in non-industrial indigenous and traditional societies. Anthropological theory is distinct because of the consistent presence of the concept of culture; not an exclusive topic but a central position in the study and a deep concern with the human condition. Milton describes three trends that are causing a fundamental shift in what characterizes anthropology: dissatisfaction with the cultural relativist perspective, reaction against cartesian dualisms which obstructs progress in theory (nature culture divide), and finally an increased attention to globalization (transcending the barriers or time/space).

Environmental discourse appears to be characterized by a high degree of globalization. (The troubling problem is borrowing non-indigenous practices and creating standards, concepts, philosophies and practices in western countries.) Anthropology and environmental discourse now have become a distinct position in anthropology as a discipline. Knowledge about diversities in human culture can be important in addressing environmental problems - anthropology is now a study of human ecology. Human activity is the most important agent in creating environmental change, a study commonly found in human ecology which can claim a central place in how environmental problems are examined and addressed. Other ways anthropology contributes to environmental discourse is by being theorists and analysts, or by refinement of definitions to become more neutral/universal, etc. In exploring environmentalism - the term typically refers to a concern that the environment should be protected, particularly from the harmful effects of human activities. Environmentalism itself can be expressed in many ways. Anthropologists can open the doors of environmentalism by looking beyond industrial society, understanding the opposition between industrial and non-industrial relationships, knowing what ecosystem people and biosphere people are and are affected by, dependent and independent variables, &quot;primitive&quot; ecological wisdom, diverse environments, resource management, diverse cultural traditions, and knowing that environmentalism is a part of culture.

===Historical===
Ethnohistory is the study of ethnographic cultures and indigenous customs by examining historical records. It is also the study of the history of various ethnic groups that may or may not exist today. Ethnohistory uses both historical and ethnographic data as its foundation. Its historical methods and materials go beyond the standard use of documents and manuscripts. Practitioners recognize the utility of such source material as maps, music, paintings, photography, folklore, oral tradition, site exploration, archaeological materials, museum collections, enduring customs, language, and place names.

=== Religion ===
The anthropology of religion involves the study of religious institutions in relation to other social institutions, and the comparison of religious beliefs and practices across cultures. Modern anthropology assumes that there is complete continuity between magical thinking and religion, and that every religion is a cultural product, created by the human community that worships it.

=== Urban ===

Urban anthropology is concerned with issues of urbanization, poverty, and neoliberalism. Ulf Hannerz quotes a 1960s remark that traditional anthropologists were &quot;a notoriously agoraphobic lot, anti-urban by definition&quot;. Various social processes in the Western World as well as in the &quot;Third World&quot; (the latter being the habitual focus of attention of anthropologists) brought the attention of &quot;specialists in &#x27;other cultures&#x27;&quot; closer to their homes. There are two main approaches to urban anthropology: examining the types of cities or examining the social issues within the cities. These two methods are overlapping and dependent of each other. By defining different types of cities, one would use social factors as well as economic and political factors to categorize the cities. By directly looking at the different social issues, one would also be studying how they affect the dynamic of the city.

== Key topics by field: archaeological and biological ==
=== Anthrozoology ===

Anthrozoology (also known as &quot;human–animal studies&quot;) is the study of interaction between living things. It is an interdisciplinary field that overlaps with a number of other disciplines, including anthropology, ethology, medicine, psychology, veterinary medicine and zoology. A major focus of anthrozoologic research is the quantifying of the positive effects of human-animal relationships on either party and the study of their interactions. It includes scholars from a diverse range of fields, including anthropology, sociology, biology, and philosophy.

=== Biocultural ===

Biocultural anthropology is the scientific exploration of the relationships between human biology and culture. Physical anthropologists throughout the first half of the 20th century viewed this relationship from a racial perspective; that is, from the assumption that typological human biological differences lead to cultural differences. After World War II the emphasis began to shift toward an effort to explore the role culture plays in shaping human biology.

=== Evolutionary ===

Evolutionary anthropology is the interdisciplinary study of the evolution of human physiology and human behaviour and the relation between hominins and non-hominin primates. Evolutionary anthropology is based in natural science and social science, combining the human development with socioeconomic factors. Evolutionary anthropology is concerned with both biological and cultural evolution of humans, past and present. It is based on a scientific approach, and brings together fields such as archaeology, behavioral ecology, psychology, primatology, and genetics. It is a dynamic and interdisciplinary field, drawing on many lines of evidence to understand the human experience, past and present.

=== Forensic ===

Forensic anthropology is the application of the science of physical anthropology and human osteology in a legal setting, most often in criminal cases where the victim&#x27;s remains are in the advanced stages of decomposition. A forensic anthropologist can assist in the identification of deceased individuals whose remains are decomposed, burned, mutilated or otherwise unrecognizable. The adjective &quot;forensic&quot; refers to the application of this subfield of science to a court of law.

=== Palaeoanthropology ===
Paleoanthropology combines the disciplines of paleontology and physical anthropology. It is the study of ancient humans, as found in fossil hominid evidence such as petrifacted bones and footprints. Genetics and morphology of specimens are crucially important to this field. Markers on specimens, such as enamel fractures and dental decay on teeth, can also give insight into the behaviour and diet of past populations.

== Organizations ==
Contemporary anthropology is an established science with academic departments at most universities and colleges. The single largest organization of anthropologists is the American Anthropological Association (AAA), which was founded in 1903. Its members are anthropologists from around the globe.

In 1989, a group of European and American scholars in the field of anthropology established the European Association of Social Anthropologists (EASA) which serves as a major professional organization for anthropologists working in Europe. The EASA seeks to advance the status of anthropology in Europe and to increase visibility of marginalized anthropological traditions and thereby contribute to the project of a global anthropology or world anthropology.

Hundreds of other organizations exist in the various sub-fields of anthropology, sometimes divided up by nation or region, and many anthropologists work with collaborators in other disciplines, such as geology, physics, zoology, paleontology, anatomy, music theory, art history, sociology and so on, belonging to professional societies in those disciplines as well.

===List of major organizations===
* American Anthropological Association
* American Ethnological Society
* Asociación de Antropólogos Iberoamericanos en Red, AIBR
* Anthropological Society of London
* Center for World Indigenous Studies
* Ethnological Society of London
* European Association of Social Anthropologists
* Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology
* Network of Concerned Anthropologists
* N.N. Miklukho-Maklai Institute of Ethnology and Anthropology
* Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland
* Society for Anthropological Sciences
* Society for Applied Anthropology
* USC Center for Visual Anthropology
==Ethics==
As the field has matured it has debated and arrived at ethical principles aimed at protecting both the subjects of anthropological research as well as the researchers themselves, and professional societies have generated codes of ethics.

Anthropologists, like other researchers (especially historians and scientists engaged in field research), have over time assisted state policies and projects, especially colonialism.

Some commentators have contended:
* That the discipline grew out of colonialism, perhaps was in league with it, and derives some of its key notions from it, consciously or not. (See, for example, Gough, Pels and Salemink, but cf. Lewis 2004).
* That ethnographic work is often ahistorical, writing about people as if they were &quot;out of time&quot; in an &quot;ethnographic present&quot; (Johannes Fabian, &quot;Time and Its Other&quot;).
* In his article &quot;The Misrepresentation of Anthropology and Its Consequences,&quot; Herbert S. Lewis critiqued older anthropological works that presented other cultures as if they were strange and unusual. While the findings of those researchers should not be discarded, the field should learn from its mistakes.

=== Cultural relativism ===
As part of their quest for scientific objectivity, present-day anthropologists typically urge cultural relativism, which has an influence on all the sub-fields of anthropology. This is the notion that cultures should not be judged by another&#x27;s values or viewpoints, but be examined dispassionately on their own terms. There should be no notions, in good anthropology, of one culture being better or worse than another culture.

Ethical commitments in anthropology include noticing and documenting genocide, infanticide, racism, sexism, mutilation (including circumcision and subincision), and torture. Topics like racism, slavery, and human sacrifice attract anthropological attention and theories ranging from nutritional deficiencies, to genes, to acculturation, to colonialism, have been proposed to explain their origins and continued recurrences.

To illustrate the depth of an anthropological approach, one can take just one of these topics, such as racism, and find thousands of anthropological references, stretching across all the major and minor sub-fields.

===Military involvement===
Anthropologists&#x27; involvement with the U.S. government, in particular, has caused bitter controversy within the discipline. Franz Boas publicly objected to US participation in World War I, and after the war he published a brief exposé and condemnation of the participation of several American archaeologists in espionage in Mexico under their cover as scientists.

But by the 1940s, many of Boas&#x27; anthropologist contemporaries were active in the allied war effort against the Axis Powers (Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, and Imperial Japan). Many served in the armed forces, while others worked in intelligence (for example, Office of Strategic Services and the Office of War Information). At the same time, David H. Price&#x27;s work on American anthropology during the Cold War provides detailed accounts of the pursuit and dismissal of several anthropologists from their jobs for communist sympathies.

Attempts to accuse anthropologists of complicity with the CIA and government intelligence activities during the Vietnam War years have turned up little. Many anthropologists (students and teachers) were active in the antiwar movement. Numerous resolutions condemning the war in all its aspects were passed overwhelmingly at the annual meetings of the American Anthropological Association (AAA).

Professional anthropological bodies often object to the use of anthropology for the benefit of the state. Their codes of ethics or statements may proscribe anthropologists from giving secret briefings. The Association of Social Anthropologists of the UK and Commonwealth (ASA) has called certain scholarship ethically dangerous. The &quot;Principles of Professional Responsibility&quot; issued by the American Anthropological Association and amended through November 1986 stated that &quot;in relation with their own government and with host governments ... no secret research, no secret reports or debriefings of any kind should be agreed to or given.&quot; The current &quot;Principles of Professional Responsibility&quot; does not make explicit mention of ethics surrounding state interactions.

Anthropologists, along with other social scientists, were working with the US military as part of the US Army&#x27;s strategy in Afghanistan. &quot;The Christian Science Monitor&quot; reports that &quot;Counterinsurgency efforts focus on better grasping and meeting local needs&quot; in Afghanistan, under the &quot;Human Terrain System&quot; (HTS) program; in addition, HTS teams are working with the US military in Iraq. In 2009, the American Anthropological Association&#x27;s Commission on the Engagement of Anthropology with the US Security and Intelligence Communities (CEAUSSIC) released its final report concluding, in part, that: 

==Post-World War II developments==
Before WWII British &#x27;social anthropology&#x27; and American &#x27;cultural anthropology&#x27; were still distinct traditions. After the war, enough British and American anthropologists borrowed ideas and methodological approaches from one another that some began to speak of them collectively as &#x27;sociocultural&#x27; anthropology.

===Basic trends===
There are several characteristics that tend to unite anthropological work. One of the central characteristics is that anthropology tends to provide a comparatively more holistic account of phenomena and tends to be highly empirical. The quest for holism leads most anthropologists to study a particular place, problem or phenomenon in detail, using a variety of methods, over a more extensive period than normal in many parts of academia.

In the 1990s and 2000s, calls for clarification of what constitutes a culture, of how an observer knows where his or her own culture ends and another begins, and other crucial topics in writing anthropology were heard. These dynamic relationships, between what can be observed on the ground, as opposed to what can be observed by compiling many local observations remain fundamental in any kind of anthropology, whether cultural, biological, linguistic or archaeological.

Biological anthropologists are interested in both human variation and in the possibility of human universals (behaviors, ideas or concepts shared by virtually all human cultures). They use many different methods of study, but modern population genetics, participant observation and other techniques often take anthropologists &quot;into the field,&quot; which means traveling to a community in its own setting, to do something called &quot;fieldwork.&quot; On the biological or physical side, human measurements, genetic samples, nutritional data may be gathered and published as articles or monographs.

Along with dividing up their project by theoretical emphasis, anthropologists typically divide the world up into relevant time periods and geographic regions. Human time on Earth is divided up into relevant cultural traditions based on material, such as the Paleolithic and the Neolithic, of particular use in archaeology. Further cultural subdivisions according to tool types, such as Olduwan or Mousterian or Levalloisian help archaeologists and other anthropologists in understanding major trends in the human past. Anthropologists and geographers share approaches to culture regions as well, since mapping cultures is central to both sciences. By making comparisons across cultural traditions (time-based) and cultural regions (space-based), anthropologists have developed various kinds of comparative method, a central part of their science.

===Commonalities between fields===
Because anthropology developed from so many different enterprises (see History of anthropology), including but not limited to fossil-hunting, exploring, documentary film-making, paleontology, primatology, antiquity dealings and curatorship, philology, etymology, genetics, regional analysis, ethnology, history, philosophy, and religious studies, it is difficult to characterize the entire field in a brief article, although attempts to write histories of the entire field have been made.

Some authors argue that anthropology originated and developed as the study of &quot;other cultures&quot;, both in terms of time (past societies) and space (non-European/non-Western societies). For example, the classic of urban anthropology, Ulf Hannerz in the introduction to his seminal &quot;Exploring the City: Inquiries Toward an Urban Anthropology&quot; mentions that the &quot;Third World&quot; had habitually received most of attention; anthropologists who traditionally specialized in &quot;other cultures&quot; looked for them far away and started to look &quot;across the tracks&quot; only in late 1960s.

Now there exist many works focusing on peoples and topics very close to the author&#x27;s &quot;home&quot;. It is also argued that other fields of study, like History and Sociology, on the contrary focus disproportionately on the West.

In France, the study of Western societies has been traditionally left to sociologists, but this is increasingly changing, starting in the 1970s from scholars like Isac Chiva and journals like &quot;Terrain&quot; (&quot;fieldwork&quot;) and developing with the center founded by Marc Augé (&quot;Le Centre d&#x27;anthropologie des mondes contemporains&quot;, the Anthropological Research Center of Contemporary Societies).

Since the 1980s it has become common for social and cultural anthropologists to set ethnographic research in the North Atlantic region, frequently examining the connections between locations rather than limiting research to a single locale. There has also been a related shift toward broadening the focus beyond the daily life of ordinary people; increasingly, research is set in settings such as scientific laboratories, social movements, governmental and nongovernmental organizations and businesses.

==See also==

* Christian anthropology, a sub-field of theology
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Philosophical anthropology, a sub-field of philosophy
* 

=== Lists ===
* 
* 
==Notes==
==References==
===Works cited===
* 


==Further reading==
===Dictionaries and encyclopedias===
* 
* 


===Fieldnotes and memoirs===
* 
* 
* 


===Histories===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


===Textbooks and key theoretical works===
* 
* 


==External links==

* Open Encyclopedia of Anthropology.

(AIO)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="0" end="12" title="Anthropology" label="Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="40" end="45" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769299" start="65" end="79" title="human behavior" label="human behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q339557" start="81" end="94" title="human biology" label="human biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="96" end="104" title="cultures" label="cultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="106" end="115" title="society" label="societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="121" end="132" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="174" end="188" title="archaic humans" label="archaic humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051" start="190" end="209" title="Social anthropology" label="Social anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="246" end="267" title="cultural anthropology" label="cultural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552777" start="331" end="357" title="sociocultural anthropology" label="sociocultural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q772835" start="382" end="405" title="Linguistic anthropology" label="Linguistic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q27172" start="451" end="486" title="Biological anthropology" label="Biological or physical anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="534" end="545" title="Archaeology" label="Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="873" end="886" title="palaeontology" label="palaeontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="968" end="975" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455000" start="1011" end="1022" title="German Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1023" end="1030" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q100210" start="1047" end="1059" title="Magnus Hundt" label="Magnus Hundt"/>
<link wikidata="Q99794" start="1064" end="1076" title="Otto Casmann" label="Otto Casmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248221" start="1084" end="1093" title="Neo-Latin" label="Neo-Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686701" start="1118" end="1132" title="combining form" label="combining form"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1141" end="1146" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="1184" end="1189" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="1228" end="1233" title="science" label="study"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="1287" end="1296" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1343" end="1349" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q264593" start="1470" end="1480" title="Caspar Bartholin the Elder" label="Bartholins"/>
<link wikidata="Q186285" start="1504" end="1528" title="University of Copenhagen" label="University of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959091" start="1662" end="1676" title="Étienne Serres" label="Étienne Serres"/>
<link wikidata="Q838691" start="1848" end="1889" title="National Museum of Natural History, France" label="French National Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q700275" start="1893" end="1934" title="Jean Louis Armand de Quatrefages de Bréau" label="Jean Louis Armand de Quatrefages de Bréau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552908" start="2018" end="2047" title="Société Ethnologique de Paris" label="Société Ethnologique de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="2081" end="2090" title="ethnology" label="ethnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152782" start="2199" end="2223" title="William Frédéric Edwards" label="William Frédéric Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743699" start="2371" end="2400" title="American Ethnological Society" label="American Ethnological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404386" start="2451" end="2481" title="Ethnological Society of London" label="Ethnological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q322981" start="2517" end="2552" title="Aborigines&amp;#x27; Protection Society" label="Aborigines&amp;#x27; Protection Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="2625" end="2648" title="Human rights" label="human-rights activists."/>
<link wikidata="Q843900" start="2867" end="2874" title="Comparative anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="2876" end="2887" title="Comparative method (linguistics)" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="2893" end="2902" title="ethnology" label="ethnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="3153" end="3167" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="3181" end="3205" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q173113" start="3357" end="3365" title="agronomy" label="agronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q311276" start="3507" end="3517" title="Paul Broca" label="Paul Broca"/>
<link wikidata="Q15845476" start="3572" end="3591" title="Société de biologie" label="Société de biologie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487788" start="3659" end="3696" title="Society of Anthropology of Paris" label="Société d&amp;#x27;Anthropologie de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076026" start="3846" end="3858" title="evolutionism" label="evolutionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188449" start="4049" end="4061" title="Neurosurgery" label="neurosurgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q728285" start="4286" end="4303" title="Broca&amp;#x27;s area" label="Broca&amp;#x27;s area"/>
<link wikidata="Q27172" start="4342" end="4365" title="Biological anthropology" label="Biological anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781630" start="4420" end="4433" title="Theodor Waitz" label="Theodor Waitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q125057" start="5466" end="5488" title="Richard Francis Burton" label="Richard Francis Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136425" start="5514" end="5524" title="James Hunt (speech therapist)" label="James Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404386" start="5545" end="5575" title="Ethnological Society of London" label="Ethnological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q574390" start="5588" end="5621" title="Anthropological Society of London" label="Anthropological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q141037" start="6102" end="6122" title="Edward Burnett Tylor" label="Edward Burnett Tylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="6136" end="6157" title="cultural anthropology" label="cultural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723546" start="6175" end="6187" title="Alfred Tylor" label="Alfred Tylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q130318425" start="6352" end="6385" title="Anthropological Society of Madrid" label="Anthropological Society of Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588602" start="6398" end="6434" title="American Anthropological Association" label="American Anthropological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q821530" start="6650" end="6708" title="Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte" label="Berlin Society for Anthropology, Ethnology, and Prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q76432" start="6727" end="6742" title="Rudolph Virchow" label="Rudolph Virchow"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="8514" end="8524" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184992" start="8529" end="8549" title="Bronisław Malinowski" label="Bronisław Malinowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="8646" end="8679" title="cultural anthropology" label="&amp;quot;cultural&amp;quot; anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q621368" start="8762" end="8788" title="cross-cultural studies" label="cross-cultural comparisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129049" start="8866" end="8889" title="Participant observation" label="participant-observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q741550" start="8994" end="9013" title="cultural relativism" label="cultural relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="9015" end="9021" title="holism" label="holism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28850492" start="9140" end="9160" title="Boasian anthropology" label="Boas&amp;#x27; arguments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="9189" end="9197" title="ideology" label="ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q180099" start="9207" end="9220" title="Margaret Mead" label="Margaret Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="9241" end="9256" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q265425" start="9305" end="9318" title="post-colonialism" label="post-colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="9347" end="9363" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="9365" end="9376" title="Ethnography" label="Ethnography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438035" start="9399" end="9414" title="research design" label="research design"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051" start="9561" end="9580" title="social anthropology" label="social anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014552" start="9675" end="9694" title="four field approach" label="four field approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q27172" start="9746" end="9805" title="Biological anthropology" label="&amp;quot;biological&amp;quot; or &amp;quot;physical&amp;quot; anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051" start="9807" end="9825" title="social anthropology" label="&amp;quot;social&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="9827" end="9847" title="cultural anthropology" label="&amp;quot;cultural&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552777" start="9852" end="9890" title="sociocultural anthropology" label="&amp;quot;sociocultural&amp;quot; anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="9892" end="9919" title="archaeology" label="archaeological anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q772835" start="9925" end="9948" title="linguistic anthropology" label="linguistic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="10105" end="10114" title="ethnology" label="ethnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q349372" start="10145" end="10159" title="Adam František Kollár" label="Adam F. Kollár"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="10450" end="10465" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="10534" end="10546" title="Human" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769299" start="10577" end="10591" title="human behavior" label="human behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="10757" end="10771" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="11132" end="11149" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048140" start="11151" end="11165" title="global studies" label="global studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q41870" start="11179" end="11193" title="ethnic studies" label="ethnic studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q310956" start="11209" end="11224" title="Clifford Geertz" label="Clifford Geertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552777" start="11227" end="11253" title="Sociocultural anthropology" label="Sociocultural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="11285" end="11298" title="structuralism" label="structuralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="11425" end="11440" title="epistemological" label="epistemological"/>
<link wikidata="Q131015" start="11461" end="11471" title="positivist" label="positivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="11972" end="11993" title="cultural anthropology" label="cultural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051" start="11998" end="12017" title="social anthropology" label="social anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="12295" end="12305" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="12322" end="12330" title="the arts" label="the arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="12549" end="12558" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q741550" start="12897" end="12916" title="cultural relativism" label="cultural relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="13159" end="13170" title="ethnography" label="ethnography"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="13279" end="13288" title="monograph" label="monograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129049" start="13397" end="13420" title="Participant observation" label="Participant observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="13493" end="13502" title="Ethnology" label="Ethnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337916" start="13661" end="13665" title="emic" label="emic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337916" start="13683" end="13687" title="etic" label="etic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171318" start="13732" end="13739" title="kinship" label="kinship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430243" start="13744" end="13763" title="social organization" label="social organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825100" start="13830" end="13845" title="human universal" label="human universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27841" start="13886" end="13894" title="Economic anthropology" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27778" start="13899" end="13921" title="Political anthropology" label="political organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488583" start="14440" end="14470" title="Standard Cross-Cultural Sample" label="Standard Cross-Cultural Sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="14970" end="14981" title="Archaeology" label="Archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q772835" start="15550" end="15573" title="Linguistic anthropology" label="Linguistic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q29407" start="15599" end="15626" title="anthropological linguistics" label="anthropological linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="15723" end="15731" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q160845" start="16107" end="16123" title="sociolinguistics" label="sociolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181839" start="16125" end="16135" title="pragmatics" label="pragmatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q508969" start="16137" end="16158" title="cognitive linguistics" label="cognitive linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="16160" end="16169" title="semiotics" label="semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129466" start="16171" end="16189" title="discourse analysis" label="discourse analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="16195" end="16204" title="narrative" label="narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="16236" end="16247" title="Ethnography" label="Ethnography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129049" start="16323" end="16346" title="participant observation" label="participant observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073266" start="16520" end="16530" title="Tim Ingold" label="Tim Ingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="17707" end="17726" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="18084" end="18104" title="ethnography" label="ethnographic studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q601854" start="18494" end="18512" title="cyber anthropology" label="cyber anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056040" start="18539" end="18556" title="internet research" label="internet research"/>
<link wikidata="Q49773" start="18667" end="18682" title="social movement" label="social movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="18792" end="18801" title="newspaper" label="the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q683794" start="18803" end="18812" title="new media" label="new media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230276" start="19473" end="19483" title="Jaap Kunst" label="Jaap Kunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552119" start="19574" end="19589" title="Ethnomusicology (academic journal)" label="Ethnomusicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552119" start="19604" end="19630" title="Society for Ethnomusicology" label="Society of Ethnomusicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="19727" end="19739" title="ethnography" label="ethnographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q683794" start="19784" end="19793" title="new media" label="new media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371394" start="19849" end="19866" title="ethnographic film" label="ethnographic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067311" start="20031" end="20040" title="reception theory" label="reception"/>
<link wikidata="Q368325" start="20044" end="20054" title="anthropology of media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q184992" start="20678" end="20698" title="Bronisław Malinowski" label="Bronisław Malinowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q295393" start="20727" end="20739" title="Marcel Mauss" label="Marcel Mauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264987" start="20783" end="20794" title="Reciprocity (cultural anthropology)" label="reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q574833" start="21174" end="21197" title="global financial system" label="global financial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q190004" start="21347" end="21369" title="historical materialism" label="historical materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035283" start="22200" end="22212" title="world-system" label="world-system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345628" start="22932" end="22956" title="development anthropology" label="development anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773911" start="22990" end="23017" title="anthropology of development" label="anthropology of development"/>
<link wikidata="Q171318" start="23957" end="23964" title="kinship" label="descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q171318" start="23978" end="23991" title="descent group" label="descent group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517820" start="24006" end="24014" title="lineage (anthropology)" label="lineages"/>
<link wikidata="Q954007" start="24028" end="24035" title="affinity (law)" label="affines"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029725" start="24049" end="24057" title="cognatic kinship" label="cognates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446591" start="24080" end="24095" title="fictive kinship" label="fictive kinship"/>
<link wikidata="Q774347" start="24414" end="24427" title="consanguinity" label="consanguinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="24741" end="24754" title="archaeology" label="archeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q27172" start="24756" end="24766" title="biological anthropology" label="biological"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="24768" end="24776" title="cultural anthropology" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q772835" start="24778" end="24788" title="linguistic anthropology" label="linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="25130" end="25143" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516555" start="25473" end="25487" title="intersectional" label="intersectional"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517986" start="25964" end="25984" title="first-wave feminism" label="first-wave feminists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810748" start="26062" end="26077" title="feminist theory" label="feminist theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="26079" end="26086" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="26088" end="26099" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="26101" end="26112" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48277" start="26202" end="26208" title="gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="26286" end="26292" title="sexism" label="sexism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587569" start="26308" end="26323" title="St. Clair Drake" label="St. Clair Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q28746206" start="26325" end="26339" title="Vera Mae Green" label="Vera Mae Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="26395" end="26411" title="African-American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773904" start="26419" end="26433" title="anthropologist" label="anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039453" start="26449" end="26461" title="Caribbeanist" label="Caribbeanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="26510" end="26519" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="27021" end="27030" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="27035" end="27045" title="childbirth" label="childbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q273005" start="28776" end="28792" title="economic systems" label="economic systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138622" start="28794" end="28812" title="nutrition" label="nutritional status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="28817" end="28830" title="food security" label="food security"/>
<link wikidata="Q47398" start="29087" end="29102" title="economic history" label="economic trends"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="29497" end="29505" title="cultural anthropology" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="29510" end="29526" title="psychology" label="mental processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343294" start="29603" end="29616" title="enculturation" label="enculturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="29750" end="29759" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="29761" end="29768" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="29770" end="29780" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="29782" end="29792" title="motivation" label="motivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="29798" end="29811" title="mental health" label="mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q174165" start="30089" end="30099" title="innovation" label="innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="30160" end="30168" title="theories" label="theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="30176" end="30194" title="cognitive sciences" label="cognitive sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q475042" start="30207" end="30230" title="experimental psychology" label="experimental psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q840400" start="30235" end="30255" title="evolutionary biology" label="evolutionary biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q523607" start="30417" end="30431" title="interpretation (logic)" label="interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q852859" start="30718" end="30749" title="altered states of consciousness" label="altered states of consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326691" start="30771" end="30795" title="transpersonal psychology" label="transpersonal psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326691" start="30872" end="30896" title="transpersonal experience" label="transpersonal experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="31046" end="31050" title="Mythology" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="31052" end="31058" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q474191" start="31060" end="31064" title="diet (nutrition)" label="diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="31070" end="31074" title="Literature" label="text"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="31227" end="31244" title="Form of government" label="political systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210356" start="31830" end="31852" title="political organization" label="political organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="32666" end="32678" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139042" start="32680" end="32695" title="legal pluralism" label="legal pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588602" start="33244" end="33280" title="American Anthropological Association" label="American Anthropological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445082" start="33354" end="33357" title="science and technology studies" label="STS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947418" start="33366" end="33407" title="Society for the Social Studies of Science" label="Society for the Social Studies of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q253407" start="33409" end="33422" title="Donna Haraway" label="Donna Haraway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984104" start="33441" end="33457" title="Cyborg Manifesto" label="Cyborg Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="33995" end="34005" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="34046" end="34072" title="cultural anthropology" label="sociocultural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143054" start="34107" end="34123" title="material culture" label="material culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449323" start="34384" end="34403" title="cultural adaptation" label="cultural adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="34536" end="34559" title="biophysical environment" label="biophysical environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="34621" end="34628" title="beliefs" label="beliefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554076" start="34933" end="34950" title="political ecology" label="political ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="38083" end="38095" title="Ethnography" label="ethnographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="38109" end="38119" title="Indigenous peoples" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="38141" end="38159" title="History" label="historical records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="38208" end="38220" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="38524" end="38532" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q136783" start="38934" end="38950" title="magical thinking" label="magical thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q177634" start="39033" end="39042" title="community" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="39124" end="39136" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="39151" end="39164" title="neoliberalism" label="neoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q713023" start="39166" end="39177" title="Ulf Hannerz" label="Ulf Hannerz"/>
<link wikidata="Q174589" start="39258" end="39269" title="agoraphobic" label="agoraphobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="39339" end="39352" title="Western World" label="Western World"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="39377" end="39388" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39496" end="39537" title="#Focus on the &amp;quot;other cultures&amp;quot;" label="specialists in &amp;#x27;other cultures&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q650032" start="40100" end="40113" title="Anthrozoology" label="Anthrozoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="40223" end="40240" title="interdisciplinary" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155" start="40321" end="40329" title="ethology" label="ethology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="40341" end="40351" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170201" start="40353" end="40372" title="veterinary medicine" label="veterinary medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="40377" end="40384" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="40720" end="40730" title="scientific" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q339557" start="40772" end="40785" title="human biology" label="human biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q27172" start="40799" end="40823" title="Biological anthropology" label="Physical anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="40902" end="40908" title="Race (classification of human beings)" label="racial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25416184" start="40956" end="40967" title="Typology (anthropology)" label="typological"/>
<link wikidata="Q83944" start="41238" end="41247" title="human evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23852" start="41251" end="41267" title="human physiology" label="human physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769299" start="41272" end="41287" title="human behaviour" label="human behaviour"/>
<link wikidata="Q107588" start="41313" end="41321" title="hominins" label="hominins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="41338" end="41345" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="41386" end="41401" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="41406" end="41420" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347178" start="41436" end="41453" title="Human development (biology)" label="human development"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="41611" end="41621" title="scientific" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="41667" end="41678" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205637" start="41680" end="41698" title="behavioral ecology" label="behavioral ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="41700" end="41710" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q219488" start="41712" end="41723" title="primatology" label="primatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="41729" end="41737" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="41759" end="41776" title="interdisciplinary" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q27172" start="41950" end="41971" title="physical anthropology" label="physical anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q819121" start="41982" end="41991" title="osteology" label="osteology"/>
<link wikidata="Q339062" start="42103" end="42116" title="decomposition" label="decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="42460" end="42472" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q27172" start="42477" end="42498" title="physical anthropology" label="physical anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="42547" end="42553" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="42554" end="42561" title="Hominidae" label="hominid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572797" start="42579" end="42590" title="Petrifaction" label="petrifacted"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001505" start="42719" end="42734" title="enamel fracture" label="enamel fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q133772" start="42740" end="42752" title="Tooth decay" label="dental decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q553" start="42756" end="42761" title="Tooth" label="teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588602" start="43026" end="43062" title="American Anthropological Association" label="American Anthropological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376353" start="43249" end="43295" title="European Association of Social Anthropologists" label="European Association of Social Anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="43814" end="43821" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="43823" end="43830" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="43832" end="43839" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="43841" end="43853" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="43855" end="43862" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="43864" end="43876" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q50637" start="43878" end="43889" title="art history" label="art history"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="43891" end="43900" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588602" start="44015" end="44051" title="American Anthropological Association" label="American Anthropological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743699" start="44054" end="44083" title="American Ethnological Society" label="American Ethnological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651818" start="44086" end="44141" title="AIBR. Asociación de Antropólogos Iberoamericanos en Red" label="Asociación de Antropólogos Iberoamericanos en Red, AIBR"/>
<link wikidata="Q574390" start="44144" end="44177" title="Anthropological Society of London" label="Anthropological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944365" start="44180" end="44215" title="Center for World Indigenous Studies" label="Center for World Indigenous Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404386" start="44218" end="44248" title="Ethnological Society of London" label="Ethnological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376353" start="44251" end="44297" title="European Association of Social Anthropologists" label="European Association of Social Anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q682926" start="44300" end="44350" title="Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology" label="Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7001115" start="44353" end="44389" title="Network of Concerned Anthropologists" label="Network of Concerned Anthropologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201873" start="44392" end="44452" title="N.N. Miklukho-Maklai Institute of Ethnology and Anthropology" label="N.N. Miklukho-Maklai Institute of Ethnology and Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419633" start="44455" end="44515" title="Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552061" start="44518" end="44554" title="Society for Anthropological Sciences" label="Society for Anthropological Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552063" start="44557" end="44589" title="Society for Applied Anthropology" label="Society for Applied Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7866333" start="44592" end="44626" title="USC Center for Visual Anthropology" label="USC Center for Visual Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5735477" start="45591" end="45607" title="Herbert S. Lewis" label="Herbert S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214913" start="45876" end="45898" title="scientific objectivity" label="scientific objectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q741550" start="45943" end="45962" title="cultural relativism" label="cultural relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="46351" end="46359" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q916412" start="46361" end="46372" title="infanticide" label="infanticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="46374" end="46380" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q93200" start="46382" end="46388" title="sexism" label="sexism"/>
<link wikidata="Q767568" start="46390" end="46400" title="mutilation" label="mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="46412" end="46424" title="circumcision" label="circumcision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372737" start="46429" end="46440" title="subincision" label="subincision"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="46447" end="46454" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q192989" start="46604" end="46617" title="acculturation" label="acculturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="46622" end="46633" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="47078" end="47088" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="47435" end="47446" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="47581" end="47609" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630740" start="47618" end="47643" title="Office of War Information" label="Office of War Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238712" start="47664" end="47678" title="David Price (anthropologist)" label="David H. Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588602" start="48213" end="48249" title="American Anthropological Association" label="American Anthropological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="48357" end="48362" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595954" start="48464" end="48528" title="Association of Social Anthropologists of the UK and Commonwealth" label="Association of Social Anthropologists of the UK and Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q284947" start="49205" end="49234" title="The Christian Science Monitor" label="The Christian Science Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="49341" end="49355" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937607" start="49373" end="49393" title="Human Terrain System" label="Human Terrain System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067809" start="49459" end="49478" title="US military in Iraq" label="US military in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="49740" end="49744" title="WWII" label="WWII"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="50263" end="50271" title="Holism" label="holistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="51251" end="51259" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129049" start="51261" end="51284" title="participant observation" label="participant observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="51870" end="51881" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="51890" end="51899" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q746287" start="51998" end="52005" title="Olduwan" label="Olduwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q259118" start="52009" end="52019" title="Mousterian" label="Mousterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q841321" start="52023" end="52035" title="Levallois technique" label="Levalloisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q518261" start="52183" end="52198" title="culture regions" label="culture regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="52406" end="52424" title="comparative method" label="comparative method"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136952" start="52566" end="52589" title="History of anthropology" label="History of anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473510" start="52621" end="52635" title="Fossil collecting" label="fossil-hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q116967296" start="52637" end="52646" title="Exploration" label="exploring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="52673" end="52685" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q219488" start="52687" end="52698" title="primatology" label="primatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="52736" end="52745" title="philology" label="philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="52747" end="52756" title="etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="52758" end="52766" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="52787" end="52796" title="ethnology" label="ethnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="52807" end="52817" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34187" start="52823" end="52840" title="religious studies" label="religious studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q27977" start="53206" end="53224" title="urban anthropology" label="urban anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q713023" start="53226" end="53237" title="Ulf Hannerz" label="Ulf Hannerz"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="53368" end="53379" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="53772" end="53781" title="Sociology" label="Sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="53911" end="53922" title="sociologist" label="sociologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518551" start="54036" end="54043" title="Terrain (journal)" label="Terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q706078" start="54116" end="54125" title="Marc Augé" label="Marc Augé"/>
<link wikidata="Q273518" start="54133" end="54188" title="École des hautes études en sciences sociales" label="Le Centre d&amp;#x27;anthropologie des mondes contemporains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275703" start="54781" end="54803" title="Christian anthropology" label="Christian anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q488059" start="54846" end="54872" title="Philosophical anthropology" label="Philosophical anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773887" start="55225" end="55228" title="Anthropological Index Online" label="AIO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="572" wikidata="Q3606845" url="?curid=572" title="Agricultural science">
<text>Agricultural science (or agriscience for short) is a broad multidisciplinary field of biology that encompasses the parts of exact, natural, economic and social sciences that are used in the practice and understanding of agriculture. Professionals of the agricultural science are called agricultural scientists or agriculturists.

==History==
In the 18th century, Johann Friedrich Mayer conducted experiments on the use of gypsum (hydrated calcium sulfate) as a fertilizer.

In 1843, John Bennet Lawes and Joseph Henry Gilbert began a set of long-term field experiments at Rothamsted Research in England, some of which are still running as of 2018.

In the United States, a scientific revolution in agriculture began with the Hatch Act of 1887, which used the term &quot;agricultural science&quot;. The Hatch Act was driven by farmers&#x27; interest in knowing the constituents of early artificial fertilizer. The Smith–Hughes Act of 1917 shifted agricultural education back to its vocational roots, but the scientific foundation had been built. For the next 44 years after 1906, federal expenditures on agricultural research in the United States outpaced private expenditures.
==Prominent agricultural scientists==

* Wilbur Olin Atwater
* Robert Bakewell
* Norman Borlaug
* Luther Burbank
* George Washington Carver
* Carl Henry Clerk
* George C. Clerk
* René Dumont
* Sir Albert Howard
* Kailas Nath Kaul
* Thomas Lecky
* Justus von Liebig
* Jay Laurence Lush
* Gregor Mendel
* Louis Pasteur
* M. S. Swaminathan
* Jethro Tull
* Artturi Ilmari Virtanen
* Sewall Wright

==Fields or related disciplines==
==Scope==
Agriculture, agricultural science, and agronomy are closely related. However, they cover different concepts:
* Agriculture is the set of activities that transform the environment for the production of animals and plants for human use. Agriculture concerns techniques, including the application of agronomic research.
* Agronomy is research and development related to studying and improving plant-based crops.
* is the science of cultivating the earth.
*Hydroponics involves growing plants without soil, by using water-based mineral nutrient solutions in an artificial environment.

==Research topics==
Agricultural sciences include research and development on:
* Improving agricultural productivity in terms of quantity and quality (e.g., selection of drought-resistant crops and animals, development of new pesticides, yield-sensing technologies, simulation models of crop growth, in-vitro cell culture techniques)
* Minimizing the effects of pests (weeds, insects, pathogens, mollusks, nematodes) on crop or animal production systems.
* Transformation of primary products into end-consumer products (e.g., production, preservation, and packaging of dairy products)
* Prevention and correction of adverse environmental effects (e.g., soil degradation, waste management, bioremediation)
* Theoretical production ecology, relating to crop production modeling
* Traditional agricultural systems, sometimes termed subsistence agriculture, which feed most of the poorest people in the world. These systems are of interest as they sometimes retain a level of integration with natural ecological systems greater than that of industrial agriculture, which may be more sustainable than some modern agricultural systems.
* Food production and demand globally, with particular attention paid to the primary producers, such as China, India, Brazil, the US, and the EU.
* Various sciences relating to agricultural resources and the environment (e.g. soil science, agroclimatology); biology of agricultural crops and animals (e.g. crop science, animal science and their included sciences, e.g. ruminant nutrition, farm animal welfare); such fields as agricultural economics and rural sociology; various disciplines encompassed in agricultural engineering.

==See also==
* Agricultural Research Council
* Agricultural sciences basic topics
* Agriculture ministry
* Agroecology
* American Society of Agronomy
* Genomics of domestication
* History of agricultural science
* Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences
* International Assessment of Agricultural Science and Technology for Development
* International Food Policy Research Institute, IFPRI
* List of agriculture topics
* National FFA Organization
* Research Institute of Crop Production (RICP) (in the Czech Republic)
* University of Agricultural Sciences

==References==
==Further reading==
* Agricultural Research, Livelihoods, and Poverty: Studies of Economic and Social Impacts in Six Countries Edited by Michelle Adato and Ruth Meinzen-Dick (2007), Johns Hopkins University Press Food Policy Report
* Claude Bourguignon, &quot;Regenerating the Soil: From Agronomy to Agrology&quot;, Other India Press, 2005
* Pimentel David, Pimentel Marcia, &quot;Computer les kilocalories&quot;, Cérès, n. 59, sept-oct. 1977
* Russell E. Walter, &quot;Soil conditions and plant growth&quot;, Longman group, London, New York 1973
* Saltini Antonio, &quot;Storia delle scienze agrarie&quot;, 4 vols, Bologna 1984–89, , , , 
* Vavilov Nicolai I. (Starr Chester K. editor), &quot;The Origin, Variation, Immunity and Breeding of Cultivated Plants. Selected Writings&quot;, in Chronica botanica, 13: 1–6, Waltham, Mass., 1949–50
* Vavilov Nicolai I., &quot;World Resources of Cereals, Leguminous Seed Crops and Flax,&quot; Academy of Sciences of Urss, National Science Foundation, Washington, Israel Program for Scientific Translations, Jerusalem 1960
* Winogradsky Serge, &quot;Microbiologie du sol. Problèmes et methodes. Cinquante ans de recherches,&quot; Masson &amp; c.ie, Paris 1949

==External links==

* Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR)
* Agricultural Research Service
* Indian Council of Agricultural Research
* International Institute of Tropical Agriculture
* International Livestock Research Institute
* The National Agricultural Library (NAL) – the most comprehensive agricultural library in the world
* Crop Science Society of America
* American Society of Agronomy
* Soil Science Society of America
* Agricultural Science Researchers, Jobs and Discussions
* Information System for Agriculture and Food Research</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3606845" start="0" end="20" title="Agricultural science" label="Agricultural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606845" start="25" end="36" title="Agricultural science" label="agriscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="86" end="93" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="153" end="167" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="220" end="231" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781198" start="313" end="327" title="agriculturists" label="agriculturists"/>
<link wikidata="Q105314" start="363" end="385" title="Johann Friedrich Mayer (agriculturist)" label="Johann Friedrich Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="422" end="428" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q407258" start="439" end="454" title="calcium sulfate" label="calcium sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="461" end="471" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q901532" start="483" end="500" title="John Lawes" label="John Bennet Lawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q713326" start="505" end="525" title="Joseph Henry Gilbert" label="Joseph Henry Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326711" start="572" end="591" title="Rothamsted Research Station" label="Rothamsted Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q11974426" start="725" end="742" title="Hatch Act of 1887" label="Hatch Act of 1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545702" start="913" end="929" title="Smith–Hughes Act" label="Smith–Hughes Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019759" start="1218" end="1237" title="Wilbur Olin Atwater" label="Wilbur Olin Atwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499315" start="1240" end="1255" title="Robert Bakewell (farmer)" label="Robert Bakewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q154824" start="1258" end="1272" title="Norman Borlaug" label="Norman Borlaug"/>
<link wikidata="Q333419" start="1275" end="1289" title="Luther Burbank" label="Luther Burbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q296898" start="1292" end="1316" title="George Washington Carver" label="George Washington Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q29345155" start="1319" end="1335" title="Carl Henry Clerk" label="Carl Henry Clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q30237695" start="1338" end="1353" title="George C. Clerk" label="George C. Clerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q927879" start="1356" end="1367" title="René Dumont" label="René Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473903" start="1370" end="1387" title="Sir Albert Howard" label="Sir Albert Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347875" start="1390" end="1406" title="Kailas Nath Kaul" label="Kailas Nath Kaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q39050130" start="1409" end="1421" title="Thomas Lecky" label="Thomas Lecky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16571" start="1424" end="1441" title="Justus von Liebig" label="Justus von Liebig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968861" start="1444" end="1461" title="Jay Lush" label="Jay Laurence Lush"/>
<link wikidata="Q37970" start="1464" end="1477" title="Gregor Mendel" label="Gregor Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="1480" end="1493" title="Louis Pasteur" label="Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q982109" start="1496" end="1513" title="M. S. Swaminathan" label="M. S. Swaminathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q356696" start="1516" end="1527" title="Jethro Tull (agriculturist)" label="Jethro Tull"/>
<link wikidata="Q157239" start="1530" end="1553" title="Artturi Ilmari Virtanen" label="Artturi Ilmari Virtanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q221061" start="1556" end="1569" title="Sewall Wright" label="Sewall Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q173113" start="1934" end="1942" title="Agronomy" label="Agronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="1946" end="1970" title="research and development" label="research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q191667" start="2068" end="2079" title="Hydroponics" label="Hydroponics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816336" start="2288" end="2313" title="agricultural productivity" label="agricultural productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12142810" start="2367" end="2384" title="drought tolerance" label="drought-resistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="2423" end="2432" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q189082" start="2506" end="2518" title="cell culture" label="cell culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q101879" start="2566" end="2570" title="weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="2573" end="2579" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="2582" end="2590" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="2593" end="2600" title="mollusk" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="2603" end="2611" title="nematode" label="nematode"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="2766" end="2779" title="dairy product" label="dairy product"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045071" start="2850" end="2866" title="soil retrogression and degradation" label="soil degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="2868" end="2884" title="waste management" label="waste management"/>
<link wikidata="Q816441" start="2886" end="2900" title="bioremediation" label="bioremediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782371" start="2904" end="2934" title="Theoretical production ecology" label="Theoretical production ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="3026" end="3049" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347753" start="3234" end="3256" title="industrial agriculture" label="industrial agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q194118" start="3832" end="3856" title="agricultural engineering" label="agricultural engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693945" start="3874" end="3903" title="Agricultural Research Council" label="Agricultural Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112548" start="3906" end="3940" title="Agricultural sciences basic topics" label="Agricultural sciences basic topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15704556" start="3943" end="3963" title="Agriculture ministry" label="Agriculture ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q396338" start="3966" end="3977" title="Agroecology" label="Agroecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745047" start="3980" end="4008" title="American Society of Agronomy" label="American Society of Agronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="4011" end="4036" title="Genomics of domestication" label="Genomics of domestication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3974201" start="4039" end="4070" title="History of agricultural science" label="History of agricultural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969547" start="4073" end="4116" title="Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences" label="Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278202" start="4119" end="4198" title="International Assessment of Agricultural Science and Technology for Development" label="International Assessment of Agricultural Science and Technology for Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191051" start="4201" end="4245" title="International Food Policy Research Institute" label="International Food Policy Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112548" start="4255" end="4281" title="List of agriculture topics" label="List of agriculture topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039073" start="4284" end="4309" title="National FFA Organization" label="National FFA Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315100" start="4312" end="4349" title="Research Institute of Crop Production" label="Research Institute of Crop Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895017" start="4383" end="4418" title="University of Agricultural Sciences (disambiguation)" label="University of Agricultural Sciences"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="573" wikidata="Q39689" url="?curid=573" title="Alchemy">
<text>Alchemy (from the Arabic word , ) is an ancient branch of natural philosophy, a philosophical and protoscientific tradition that was historically practised in China, India, the Muslim world, and Europe. In its Western form, alchemy is first attested in a number of pseudepigraphical texts written in Greco-Roman Egypt during the first few centuries AD. Greek-speaking alchemists often referred to their craft as &quot;the Art&quot; (τέχνη) or &quot;Knowledge&quot; (ἐπιστήμη), and it was often characterised as mystic (μυστική), sacred (ἱɛρά), or divine (θɛíα).

Alchemists attempted to purify, mature, and perfect certain materials. Common aims were chrysopoeia, the transmutation of &quot;base metals&quot; (e.g., lead) into &quot;noble metals&quot; (particularly gold); the creation of an elixir of immortality; and the creation of panaceas able to cure any disease. The perfection of the human body and soul was thought to result from the alchemical &quot;magnum opus&quot; (&quot;Great Work&quot;). The concept of creating the philosophers&#x27; stone was variously connected with all of these projects.

Islamic and European alchemists developed a basic set of laboratory techniques, theories, and terms, some of which are still in use today. They did not abandon the Ancient Greek philosophical idea that everything is composed of four elements, and they tended to guard their work in secrecy, often making use of cyphers and cryptic symbolism. In Europe, the 12th-century translations of medieval Islamic works on science and the rediscovery of Aristotelian philosophy gave birth to a flourishing tradition of Latin alchemy. This late medieval tradition of alchemy would go on to play a significant role in the development of early modern science (particularly chemistry and medicine).

Modern discussions of alchemy are generally split into an examination of its practical applications and its esoteric spiritual aspects, despite criticisms by scholars such as Eric J. Holmyard and Marie-Louise von Franz that they should be understood as complementary. The former is pursued by historians of the physical sciences, who examine the subject in terms of early chemistry, medicine, and charlatanism, and the philosophical and religious contexts in which these events occurred. The latter interests historians of esotericism, psychologists, and some philosophers and spiritualists. The subject has also made an ongoing impact on literature and the arts.

== Etymology ==

The word alchemy comes from old French &quot;alquemie&quot;, &quot;alkimie&quot;, used in Medieval Latin as . This name was itself adopted from the Arabic word (). The Arabic in turn was a borrowing of the Late Greek term &quot;khēmeía&quot; (), also spelled &quot;khumeia&quot; () and &quot;khēmía&quot; (), with &quot;al-&quot; being the Arabic definite article &#x27;the&#x27;. Together this association can be interpreted as &#x27;the process of transmutation by which to fuse or reunite with the divine or original form&#x27;. Several etymologies have been proposed for the Greek term. The first was proposed by Zosimos of Panopolis (3rd–4th centuries), who derived it from the name of a book, the &quot;Khemeu.&quot; Hermann Diels argued in 1914 that it rather derived from χύμα, used to describe metallic objects formed by casting.

Others trace its roots to the Egyptian name &#x27; (hieroglyphic 𓆎𓅓𓏏𓊖 &#x27; ), meaning &#x27;black earth&#x27;, which refers to the fertile and soil of the Nile valley, as opposed to red desert sand. According to the Egyptologist Wallis Budge, the Arabic word &quot;ʾ&quot; actually means &quot;the Egyptian [science]&quot;, borrowing from the Coptic word for &quot;Egypt&quot;, &#x27; (or its equivalent in the Mediaeval Bohairic dialect of Coptic, &#x27;). This Coptic word derives from Demotic &#x27;, itself from ancient Egyptian &#x27;. The ancient Egyptian word referred to both the country and the colour &quot;black&quot; (Egypt was the &quot;black Land&quot;, by contrast with the &quot;red Land&quot;, the surrounding desert).

== History ==
Alchemy encompasses several philosophical traditions spanning some four millennia and three continents. These traditions&#x27; general penchant for cryptic and symbolic language makes it hard to trace their mutual influences and genetic relationships. One can distinguish at least three major strands, which appear to be mostly independent, at least in their earlier stages: Chinese alchemy, centered in China; Indian alchemy, centered on the Indian subcontinent; and Western alchemy, which occurred around the Mediterranean and whose center shifted over the millennia from Greco-Roman Egypt to the Islamic world, and finally medieval Europe. Chinese alchemy was closely connected to Taoism and Indian alchemy with the Dharmic faiths. In contrast, Western alchemy developed its philosophical system mostly independent of but influenced by various Western religions. It is still an open question whether these three strands share a common origin, or to what extent they influenced each other.

=== Hellenistic Egypt ===

The start of Western alchemy may generally be traced to ancient and Hellenistic Egypt, where the city of Alexandria was a center of alchemical knowledge, and retained its pre-eminence through most of the Greek and Roman periods. Following the work of André-Jean Festugière, modern scholars see alchemical practice in the Roman Empire as originating from the Egyptian goldsmith&#x27;s art, Greek philosophy and different religious traditions. Tracing the origins of the alchemical art in Egypt is complicated by the pseudepigraphic nature of texts from the Greek alchemical corpus. The treatises of Zosimos of Panopolis, the earliest historically attested author (fl. c. 300 AD), can help in situating the other authors. Zosimus based his work on that of older alchemical authors, such as Mary the Jewess, Pseudo-Democritus, and Agathodaimon, but very little is known about any of these authors. The most complete of their works, The &quot;Four Books&quot; of Pseudo-Democritus, were probably written in the first century AD.

Recent scholarship tends to emphasize the testimony of Zosimus, who traced the alchemical arts back to Egyptian metallurgical and ceremonial practices. It has also been argued that early alchemical writers borrowed the vocabulary of Greek philosophical schools but did not implement any of its doctrines in a systematic way. Zosimos of Panopolis wrote in the &quot;Final Abstinence&quot; (also known as the &quot;Final Count&quot;). Zosimos explains that the ancient practice of &quot;tinctures&quot; (the technical Greek name for the alchemical arts) had been taken over by certain &quot;demons&quot; who taught the art only to those who offered them sacrifices. Since Zosimos also called the demons &quot;the guardians of places&quot; (, ) and those who offered them sacrifices &quot;priests&quot; (, ), it is fairly clear that he was referring to the gods of Egypt and their priests. While critical of the kind of alchemy he associated with the Egyptian priests and their followers, Zosimos nonetheless saw the tradition&#x27;s recent past as rooted in the rites of the Egyptian temples.

==== Mythology ====
Zosimos of Panopolis asserted that alchemy dated back to Pharaonic Egypt where it was the domain of the priestly class, though there is little to no evidence for his assertion. Alchemical writers used Classical figures from Greek, Roman, and Egyptian mythology to illuminate their works and allegorize alchemical transmutation. These included the pantheon of gods related to the Classical planets, Isis, Osiris, Jason, and many others.

The central figure in the mythology of alchemy is Hermes Trismegistus (or Thrice-Great Hermes). His name is derived from the god Thoth and his Greek counterpart Hermes. Hermes and his caduceus or serpent-staff, were among alchemy&#x27;s principal symbols. According to Clement of Alexandria, he wrote what were called the &quot;forty-two books of Hermes&quot;, covering all fields of knowledge. The &quot;Hermetica&quot; of Thrice-Great Hermes is generally understood to form the basis for Western alchemical philosophy and practice, called the hermetic philosophy by its early practitioners. These writings were collected in the first centuries of the common era.

==== Technology ====
The dawn of Western alchemy is sometimes associated with that of metallurgy, extending back to 3500 BC. Many writings were lost when the Roman emperor Diocletian ordered the burning of alchemical books after suppressing a revolt in Alexandria (AD 292). Few original Egyptian documents on alchemy have survived, most notable among them the Stockholm papyrus and the Leyden papyrus X. Dating from AD 250–300, they contained recipes for dyeing and making artificial gemstones, cleaning and fabricating pearls, and manufacturing of imitation gold and silver. These writings lack the mystical, philosophical elements of alchemy, but do contain the works of Bolus of Mendes (or Pseudo-Democritus), which aligned these recipes with theoretical knowledge of astrology and the classical elements. Between the time of Bolus and Zosimos, the change took place that transformed this metallurgy into a Hermetic art.

==== Philosophy ====
Alexandria acted as a melting pot for philosophies of Pythagoreanism, Platonism, Stoicism and Gnosticism which formed the origin of alchemy&#x27;s character. An important example of alchemy&#x27;s roots in Greek philosophy, originated by Empedocles and developed by Aristotle, was that all things in the universe were formed from only four elements: earth, air, water, and fire. According to Aristotle, each element had a sphere to which it belonged and to which it would return if left undisturbed. The four elements of the Greek were mostly qualitative aspects of matter, not quantitative, as our modern elements are; &quot;...True alchemy never regarded earth, air, water, and fire as corporeal or chemical substances in the present-day sense of the word. The four elements are simply the primary, and most general, qualities by means of which the amorphous and purely quantitative substance of all bodies first reveals itself in differentiated form.&quot; Later alchemists extensively developed the mystical aspects of this concept.

Alchemy coexisted alongside emerging Christianity. Lactantius believed Hermes Trismegistus had prophesied its birth. St Augustine later affirmed this in the 4th and 5th centuries, but also condemned Trismegistus for idolatry. Examples of Pagan, Christian, and Jewish alchemists can be found during this period.

Most of the Greco-Roman alchemists preceding Zosimos are known only by pseudonyms, such as Moses, Isis, Cleopatra, Democritus, and Ostanes. Others authors such as Komarios, and Chymes, we only know through fragments of text. After AD 400, Greek alchemical writers occupied themselves solely in commenting on the works of these predecessors. By the middle of the 7th century alchemy was almost an entirely mystical discipline. It was at that time that Khalid Ibn Yazid sparked its migration from Alexandria to the Islamic world, facilitating the translation and preservation of Greek alchemical texts in the 8th and 9th centuries.

=== Byzantium ===
Greek alchemy was preserved in medieval Byzantine manuscripts after the fall of Egypt, and yet historians have only relatively recently begun to pay attention to the study and development of Greek alchemy in the Byzantine period.

=== India ===
The 2nd millennium BC text Vedas describe a connection between eternal life and gold. A considerable knowledge of metallurgy has been exhibited in a third-century AD text called Arthashastra which provides ingredients of explosives (Agniyoga) and salts extracted from fertile soils and plant remains (Yavakshara) such as saltpetre/nitre, perfume making (different qualities of perfumes are mentioned), granulated (refined) Sugar. Buddhist texts from the 2nd to 5th centuries mention the transmutation of base metals to gold. According to some scholars Greek alchemy may have influenced Indian alchemy but there are no hard evidences to back this claim.

The 11th-century Persian chemist and physician Abū Rayhān Bīrūnī, who visited Gujarat as part of the court of Mahmud of Ghazni, reported that they

The goals of alchemy in India included the creation of a divine body (Sanskrit &quot;divya-deham&quot;) and immortality while still embodied (Sanskrit &quot;jīvan-mukti&quot;). Sanskrit alchemical texts include much material on the manipulation of mercury and sulphur, that are homologized with the semen of the god Śiva and the menstrual blood of the goddess Devī.

Some early alchemical writings seem to have their origins in the Kaula tantric schools associated to the teachings of the personality of Matsyendranath. Other early writings are found in the Jaina medical treatise &quot;Kalyāṇakārakam&quot; of Ugrāditya, written in South India in the early 9th century.

Two famous early Indian alchemical authors were Nāgārjuna Siddha and Nityanātha Siddha. Nāgārjuna Siddha was a Buddhist monk. His book, &quot;Rasendramangalam&quot;, is an example of Indian alchemy and medicine. Nityanātha Siddha wrote &quot;Rasaratnākara&quot;, also a highly influential work. In Sanskrit, &quot;rasa&quot; translates to &quot;mercury&quot;, and Nāgārjuna Siddha was said to have developed a method of converting mercury into gold.

Scholarship on Indian alchemy is in the publication of &quot;The Alchemical Body&quot; by David Gordon White.

A modern bibliography on Indian alchemical studies has been written by White.

The contents of 39 Sanskrit alchemical treatises have been analysed in detail in G. Jan Meulenbeld&#x27;s &quot;History of Indian Medical Literature&quot;. The discussion of these works in HIML gives a summary of the contents of each work, their special features, and where possible the evidence concerning their dating. Chapter 13 of HIML, &quot;Various works on rasaśāstra and ratnaśāstra&quot; (or &quot;Various works on alchemy and gems&quot;) gives brief details of a further 655 (six hundred and fifty-five) treatises. In some cases Meulenbeld gives notes on the contents and authorship of these works; in other cases references are made only to the unpublished manuscripts of these titles.

A great deal remains to be discovered about Indian alchemical literature. The content of the Sanskrit alchemical corpus has not yet (2014) been adequately integrated into the wider general history of alchemy.

=== Islamic world ===

After the fall of the Roman Empire, the focus of alchemical development moved to the Islamic World. Much more is known about Islamic alchemy because it was better documented: indeed, most of the earlier writings that have come down through the years were preserved as Arabic translations. The word &quot;alchemy&quot; itself was derived from the Arabic word &quot;al-kīmiyā&quot; (الكيمياء). The early Islamic world was a melting pot for alchemy. Platonic and Aristotelian thought, which had already been somewhat appropriated into hermetical science, continued to be assimilated during the late 7th and early 8th centuries through Syriac translations and scholarship.

In the late ninth and early tenth centuries, the Arabic works attributed to Jābir ibn Hayyān (Latinized as &quot;Geber&quot; or &quot;Geberus&quot;) introduced a new approach to alchemy. Paul Kraus, who wrote the standard reference work on Jabir, put it as follows:

Islamic philosophers also made great contributions to alchemical hermeticism. The most influential author in this regard was arguably Jabir. Jabir&#x27;s ultimate goal was &quot;Takwin&quot;, the artificial creation of life in the alchemical laboratory, up to, and including, human life. He analysed each Aristotelian element in terms of four basic qualities of &quot;hotness&quot;, &quot;coldness&quot;, &quot;dryness&quot;, and &quot;moistness&quot;. According to Jabir, in each metal two of these qualities were interior and two were exterior. For example, lead was externally cold and dry, while gold was hot and moist. Thus, Jabir theorized, by rearranging the qualities of one metal, a different metal would result. By this reasoning, the search for the philosopher&#x27;s stone was introduced to Western alchemy. Jabir developed an elaborate numerology whereby the root letters of a substance&#x27;s name in Arabic, when treated with various transformations, held correspondences to the element&#x27;s physical properties.

The elemental system used in medieval alchemy also originated with Jabir. His original system consisted of seven elements, which included the five classical elements (aether, air, earth, fire, and water) in addition to two chemical elements representing the metals: sulphur, &quot;the stone which burns&quot;, which characterized the principle of combustibility, and mercury, which contained the idealized principle of metallic properties. Shortly thereafter, this evolved into eight elements, with the Arabic concept of the three metallic principles: sulphur giving flammability or combustion, mercury giving volatility and stability, and salt giving solidity. The atomic theory of corpuscularianism, where all physical bodies possess an inner and outer layer of minute particles or corpuscles, also has its origins in the work of Jabir.

From the 9th to 14th centuries, alchemical theories faced criticism from a variety of practical Muslim chemists, including Alkindus, Abū al-Rayhān al-Bīrūnī, Avicenna and Ibn Khaldun. In particular, they wrote refutations against the idea of the transmutation of metals.

From the 14th century onwards, many materials and practices originally belonging to Indian alchemy (Rasayana) were assimilated in the Persian texts written by Muslim scholars.

=== East Asia ===

Researchers have found evidence that Chinese alchemists and philosophers discovered complex mathematical phenomena that were shared with Arab alchemists during the medieval period. Discovered in BC China, the &quot;magic square of three&quot; was propagated to followers of Abū Mūsā Jābir ibn Ḥayyān at some point over the proceeding several hundred years. Other commonalities shared between the two alchemical schools of thought include discrete naming for ingredients and heavy influence from the natural elements. The silk road provided a clear path for the exchange of goods, ideas, ingredients, religion, and many other aspects of life with which alchemy is intertwined.
Whereas European alchemy eventually centered on the transmutation of base metals into noble metals, Chinese alchemy had a more obvious connection to medicine. The philosopher&#x27;s stone of European alchemists can be compared to the Grand Elixir of Immortality sought by Chinese alchemists. In the hermetic view, these two goals were not unconnected, and the philosopher&#x27;s stone was often equated with the universal panacea; therefore, the two traditions may have had more in common than initially appears.

As early as 317 AD, Ge Hong documented the use of metals, minerals, and elixirs in early Chinese medicine. Hong identified three ancient Chinese documents, titled &quot;Scripture of Great Clarity, Scripture of the Nine Elixirs&quot;, and &quot;Scripture of the Golden Liquor,&quot; as texts containing fundamental alchemical information. He also described alchemy, along with meditation, as the sole spiritual practices that could allow one to gain immortality or to transcend. In his work &quot;Inner Chapters of the Book of the Master Who Embraces Spontaneous Nature&quot; (317 AD), Hong argued that alchemical solutions such as elixirs were preferable to traditional medicinal treatment due to the spiritual protection they could provide. In the centuries following Ge Hong&#x27;s death, the emphasis placed on alchemy as a spiritual practice among Chinese Daoists was reduced. In 499 AD, Tao Hongjing refuted Hong&#x27;s statement that alchemy is as important a spiritual practice as Shangqing meditation. While Hongjing did not deny the power of alchemical elixirs to grant immortality or provide divine protection, he ultimately found the &quot;Scripture of the Nine Elixirs&quot; to be ambiguous and spiritually unfulfilling, aiming to implement more accessible practising techniques.

In the early 700s, Neidan (also known as internal alchemy) was adopted by Daoists as a new form of alchemy. Neidan emphasized appeasing the inner gods that inhabit the human body by practising alchemy with compounds found in the body, rather than the mixing of natural resources that was emphasized in early Dao alchemy. For example, saliva was often considered nourishment for the inner gods and did not require any conscious alchemical reaction to produce. The inner gods were not thought of as physical presences occupying each person, but rather a collection of deities that are each said to represent and protect a specific body part or region. Although those who practised Neidan prioritized meditation over external alchemical strategies, many of the same elixirs and constituents from previous Daoist alchemical schools of thought continued to be utilized in tandem with meditation. Eternal life remained a consideration for Neidan alchemists, as it was believed that one would become immortal if an inner god were to be immortalized within them through spiritual fulfilment.

Black powder may have been an important invention of Chinese alchemists. It is said that the Chinese invented gunpowder while trying to find a potion for eternal life. Described in 9th-century texts and used in fireworks in China by the 10th century, it was used in cannons by 1290. From China, the use of gunpowder spread to Japan, the Mongols, the Muslim world, and Europe. Gunpowder was used by the Mongols against the Hungarians in 1241, and in Europe by the 14th century.

Chinese alchemy was closely connected to Taoist forms of traditional Chinese medicine, such as Acupuncture and Moxibustion. In the early Song dynasty, followers of this Taoist idea (chiefly the elite and upper class) would ingest mercuric sulfide, which, though tolerable in low levels, led many to suicide. Thinking that this consequential death would lead to freedom and access to the Taoist heavens, the ensuing deaths encouraged people to eschew this method of alchemy in favour of external sources (the aforementioned Tai Chi Chuan, mastering of the qi, etc.) Chinese alchemy was introduced to the West by Obed Simon Johnson.

=== Medieval Europe ===

The introduction of alchemy to Latin Europe may be dated to 11 February 1144, with the completion of Robert of Chester&#x27;s translation of the (&quot;Book on the Composition of Alchemy&quot;) from an Arabic work attributed to Khalid ibn Yazid. Although European craftsmen and technicians pre-existed, Robert notes in his preface that alchemy (here still referring to the elixir rather than to the art itself) was unknown in Latin Europe at the time of his writing. The translation of Arabic texts concerning numerous disciplines including alchemy flourished in 12th-century Toledo, Spain, through contributors like Gerard of Cremona and Adelard of Bath. Translations of the time included the Turba Philosophorum, and the works of Avicenna and Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi. These brought with them many new words to the European vocabulary for which there was no previous Latin equivalent. Alcohol, carboy, elixir, and athanor are examples.

Meanwhile, theologian contemporaries of the translators made strides towards the reconciliation of faith and experimental rationalism, thereby priming Europe for the influx of alchemical thought. The 11th-century St Anselm put forth the opinion that faith and rationalism were compatible and encouraged rationalism in a Christian context. In the early 12th century, Peter Abelard followed Anselm&#x27;s work, laying down the foundation for acceptance of Aristotelian thought before the first works of Aristotle had reached the West. In the early 13th century, Robert Grosseteste used Abelard&#x27;s methods of analysis and added the use of observation, experimentation, and conclusions when conducting scientific investigations. Grosseteste also did much work to reconcile Platonic and Aristotelian thinking.

Through much of the 12th and 13th centuries, alchemical knowledge in Europe remained centered on translations, and new Latin contributions were not made. The efforts of the translators were succeeded by that of the encyclopaedists. In the 13th century, Albertus Magnus and Roger Bacon were the most notable of these, their work summarizing and explaining the newly imported alchemical knowledge in Aristotelian terms. Albertus Magnus, a Dominican friar, is known to have written works such as the &quot;Book of Minerals&quot; where he observed and commented on the operations and theories of alchemical authorities like Hermes Trismegistus, pseudo-Democritus and unnamed alchemists of his time. Albertus critically compared these to the writings of Aristotle and Avicenna, where they concerned the transmutation of metals. From the time shortly after his death through to the 15th century, more than 28 alchemical tracts were misattributed to him, a common practice giving rise to his reputation as an accomplished alchemist. Likewise, alchemical texts have been attributed to Albert&#x27;s student Thomas Aquinas.

Roger Bacon, a Franciscan friar who wrote on a wide variety of topics including optics, comparative linguistics, and medicine, composed his &quot;Great Work&quot; () for as part of a project towards rebuilding the medieval university curriculum to include the new learning of his time. While alchemy was not more important to him than other sciences and he did not produce allegorical works on the topic, he did consider it and astrology to be important parts of both natural philosophy and theology and his contributions advanced alchemy&#x27;s connections to soteriology and Christian theology. Bacon&#x27;s writings integrated morality, salvation, alchemy, and the prolongation of life. His correspondence with Clement highlighted this, noting the importance of alchemy to the papacy. Like the Greeks before him, Bacon acknowledged the division of alchemy into practical and theoretical spheres. He noted that the theoretical lay outside the scope of Aristotle, the natural philosophers, and all Latin writers of his time. The practical confirmed the theoretical, and Bacon advocated its uses in natural science and medicine. In later European legend, he became an archmage. In particular, along with Albertus Magnus, he was credited with the forging of a brazen head capable of answering its owner&#x27;s questions.

Soon after Bacon, the influential work of Pseudo-Geber (sometimes identified as Paul of Taranto) appeared. His &quot;Summa Perfectionis&quot; remained a staple summary of alchemical practice and theory through the medieval and renaissance periods. It was notable for its inclusion of practical chemical operations alongside sulphur-mercury theory, and the unusual clarity with which they were described. By the end of the 13th century, alchemy had developed into a fairly structured system of belief. Adepts believed in the macrocosm-microcosm theories of Hermes, that is to say, they believed that processes that affect minerals and other substances could have an effect on the human body (for example, if one could learn the secret of purifying gold, one could use the technique to purify the human soul). They believed in the four elements and the four qualities as described above, and they had a strong tradition of cloaking their written ideas in a labyrinth of coded jargon set with traps to mislead the uninitiated. Finally, the alchemists practised their art: they actively experimented with chemicals and made observations and theories about how the universe operated. Their entire philosophy revolved around their belief that man&#x27;s soul was divided within himself after the fall of Adam. By purifying the two parts of man&#x27;s soul, man could be reunited with God.
In the 14th century, alchemy became more accessible to Europeans outside the confines of Latin-speaking churchmen and scholars. Alchemical discourse shifted from scholarly philosophical debate to an exposed social commentary on the alchemists themselves. Dante, Piers Plowman, and Chaucer all painted unflattering pictures of alchemists as thieves and liars. Pope John XXII&#x27;s 1317 edict, &quot;Spondent quas non-exhibent&quot; forbade the false promises of transmutation made by pseudo-alchemists. Roman Catholic Inquisitor General Nicholas Eymerich&#x27;s &quot;Directorium Inquisitorum&quot;, written in 1376, associated alchemy with the performance of demonic rituals, which Eymerich differentiated from magic performed in accordance with scripture. This did not, however, lead to any change in the Inquisition&#x27;s monitoring or prosecution of alchemists. In 1404, Henry IV of England banned the practice of multiplying metals by the passing of the (5 Hen. 4. c. 4) (although it was possible to buy a licence to attempt to make gold alchemically, and a number were granted by Henry VI and Edward IV). These critiques and regulations centered more around pseudo-alchemical charlatanism than the actual study of alchemy, which continued with an increasingly Christian tone. The 14th century saw the Christian imagery of death and resurrection employed in the alchemical texts of Petrus Bonus, John of Rupescissa, and in works written in the name of Raymond Lull and Arnold of Villanova.
Nicolas Flamel is a well-known alchemist to the point where he had many pseudepigraphic imitators. Although the historical Flamel existed, the writings and legends assigned to him only appeared in 1612.

A common idea in European alchemy in the medieval era was a metaphysical &quot;Homeric chain of wise men that link[ed] heaven and earth&quot; that included ancient pagan philosophers and other important historical figures.

=== Renaissance and early modern Europe ===

During the Renaissance, Hermetic and Platonic foundations were restored to European alchemy. The dawn of medical, pharmaceutical, occult, and entrepreneurial branches of alchemy followed.

In the late 15th century, Marsilio Ficino translated the Corpus Hermeticum and the works of Plato into Latin. These were previously unavailable to Europeans who for the first time had a full picture of the alchemical theory that Bacon had declared absent. Renaissance Humanism and Renaissance Neoplatonism guided alchemists away from physics to refocus on mankind as the alchemical vessel.

Esoteric systems developed that blended alchemy into a broader occult Hermeticism, fusing it with magic, astrology, and Christian cabala. A key figure in this development was German Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa (1486–1535), who received his Hermetic education in Italy in the schools of the humanists. In his &quot;De Occulta Philosophia&quot;, he attempted to merge Kabbalah, Hermeticism, and alchemy. He was instrumental in spreading this new blend of Hermeticism outside the borders of Italy.

Paracelsus (Philippus Aureolus Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim, 1493–1541) cast alchemy into a new form, rejecting some of Agrippa&#x27;s occultism and moving away from chrysopoeia. Paracelsus pioneered the use of chemicals and minerals in medicine and wrote, &quot;Many have said of Alchemy, that it is for the making of gold and silver. For me such is not the aim, but to consider only what virtue and power may lie in medicines.&quot;

His hermetical views were that sickness and health in the body relied on the harmony of man the microcosm and Nature the macrocosm. He took an approach different from those before him, using this analogy not in the manner of soul-purification but in the manner that humans must have certain balances of minerals in their bodies, and that certain illnesses of the body had chemical remedies that could cure them. Iatrochemistry refers to the pharmaceutical applications of alchemy championed by Paracelsus.

John Dee (13 July 1527 – December 1608) followed Agrippa&#x27;s occult tradition. Although better known for angel summoning, divination, and his role as astrologer, cryptographer, and consultant to Queen Elizabeth I, Dee&#x27;s alchemical &quot;Monas Hieroglyphica&quot;, written in 1564 was his most popular and influential work. His writing portrayed alchemy as a sort of terrestrial astronomy in line with the Hermetic axiom &quot;As above so below&quot;. During the 17th century, a short-lived &quot;supernatural&quot; interpretation of alchemy became popular, including support by fellows of the Royal Society: Robert Boyle and Elias Ashmole. Proponents of the supernatural interpretation of alchemy believed that the philosopher&#x27;s stone might be used to summon and communicate with angels.

Entrepreneurial opportunities were common for the alchemists of Renaissance Europe. Alchemists were contracted by the elite for practical purposes related to mining, medical services, and the production of chemicals, medicines, metals, and gemstones. Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor, in the late 16th century, famously received and sponsored various alchemists at his court in Prague, including Dee and his associate Edward Kelley. King James IV of Scotland, Julius, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg, Henry V, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg, Augustus, Elector of Saxony, Julius Echter von Mespelbrunn, and Maurice, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel all contracted alchemists. John&#x27;s son Arthur Dee worked as a court physician to Michael I of Russia and Charles I of England but also compiled the alchemical book &quot;Fasciculus Chemicus&quot;.
Although most of these appointments were legitimate, the trend of pseudo-alchemical fraud continued through the Renaissance. &quot;Betrüger&quot; would use sleight of hand, or claims of secret knowledge to make money or secure patronage. Legitimate mystical and medical alchemists such as Michael Maier and Heinrich Khunrath wrote about fraudulent transmutations, distinguishing themselves from the con artists. False alchemists were sometimes prosecuted for fraud.

The terms &quot;chemia&quot; and &quot;alchemia&quot; were used as synonyms in the early modern period, and the differences between alchemy, chemistry and small-scale assaying and metallurgy were not as neat as in the present day. There were important overlaps between practitioners, and trying to classify them into alchemists, chemists and craftsmen is anachronistic. For example, Tycho Brahe (1546–1601), an alchemist better known for his astronomical and astrological investigations, had a laboratory built at his Uraniborg observatory/research institute. Michael Sendivogius (&quot;Michał Sędziwój&quot;, 1566–1636), a Polish alchemist, philosopher, medical doctor and pioneer of chemistry wrote mystical works but is also credited with distilling oxygen in a lab sometime around 1600. Sendivogious taught his technique to Cornelius Drebbel who, in 1621, applied this in a submarine. Isaac Newton devoted considerably more of his writing to the study of alchemy (see Isaac Newton&#x27;s occult studies) than he did to either optics or physics. Other early modern alchemists who were eminent in their other studies include Robert Boyle, and Jan Baptist van Helmont. Their Hermeticism complemented rather than precluded their practical achievements in medicine and science.

=== Later modern period ===
The decline of European alchemy was brought about by the rise of modern science with its emphasis on rigorous quantitative experimentation and its disdain for &quot;ancient wisdom&quot;. Although the seeds of these events were planted as early as the 17th century, alchemy still flourished for some two hundred years, and in fact may have reached its peak in the 18th century. As late as 1781 James Price claimed to have produced a powder that could transmute mercury into silver or gold. Early modern European alchemy continued to exhibit a diversity of theories, practices, and purposes: &quot;Scholastic and anti-Aristotelian, Paracelsian and anti-Paracelsian, Hermetic, Neoplatonic, mechanistic, vitalistic, and more—plus virtually every combination and compromise thereof.&quot;

Robert Boyle (1627–1691) pioneered the scientific method in chemical investigations. He assumed nothing in his experiments and compiled every piece of relevant data. Boyle would note the place in which the experiment was carried out, the wind characteristics, the position of the Sun and Moon, and the barometer reading, all just in case they proved to be relevant. This approach eventually led to the founding of modern chemistry in the 18th and 19th centuries, based on revolutionary discoveries and ideas of Lavoisier and John Dalton.

Beginning around 1720, a rigid distinction began to be drawn for the first time between &quot;alchemy&quot; and &quot;chemistry&quot;. By the 1740s, &quot;alchemy&quot; was now restricted to the realm of gold making, leading to the popular belief that alchemists were charlatans, and the tradition itself nothing more than a fraud. In order to protect the developing science of modern chemistry from the negative censure to which alchemy was being subjected, academic writers during the 18th-century scientific Enlightenment attempted to divorce and separate the &quot;new&quot; chemistry from the &quot;old&quot; practices of alchemy. This move was mostly successful, and the consequences of this continued into the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries.

During the occult revival of the early 19th century, alchemy received new attention as an occult science. The esoteric or occultist school that arose during the 19th century held the view that the substances and operations mentioned in alchemical literature are to be interpreted in a spiritual sense, less than as a practical tradition or protoscience. This interpretation claimed that the obscure language of the alchemical texts, which 19th century practitioners were not always able to decipher, were an allegorical guise for spiritual, moral or mystical processes.

Two seminal figures during this period were Mary Anne Atwood and Ethan Allen Hitchcock, who independently published similar works regarding spiritual alchemy. Both rebuffed the growing successes of chemistry, developing a completely esoteric view of alchemy. Atwood wrote: &quot;No modern art or chemistry, notwithstanding all its surreptitious claims, has any thing in common with Alchemy.&quot; Atwood&#x27;s work influenced subsequent authors of the occult revival including Eliphas Levi, Arthur Edward Waite, and Rudolf Steiner. Hitchcock, in his &quot;Remarks Upon Alchymists&quot; (1855) attempted to make a case for his spiritual interpretation with his claim that the alchemists wrote about a spiritual discipline under a materialistic guise in order to avoid accusations of blasphemy from the church and state. In 1845, Baron Carl Reichenbach, published his studies on Odic force, a concept with some similarities to alchemy, but his research did not enter the mainstream of scientific discussion.

In 1946, Louis Cattiaux published the Message Retrouvé, a work that was at once philosophical, mystical and highly influenced by alchemy. In his lineage, many researchers, including Emmanuel and Charles d&#x27;Hooghvorst, are updating alchemical studies in France and Belgium.

=== Women ===
Several women appear in the earliest history of alchemy. Michael Maier names four women who were able to make the philosophers&#x27; stone: Mary the Jewess, Cleopatra the Alchemist, Medera, and Taphnutia. Zosimos&#x27; sister Theosebia (later known as Euthica the Arab) and Isis the Prophetess also played roles in early alchemical texts.

The first alchemist whose name we know was Mary the Jewess (). Early sources claim that Mary (or Maria) devised a number of improvements to alchemical equipment and tools as well as novel techniques in chemistry. Her best known advances were in heating and distillation processes. The laboratory water-bath, known eponymously (especially in France) as the bain-marie, is said to have been invented or at least improved by her. Essentially a double-boiler, it was (and is) used in chemistry for processes that required gentle heating. The tribikos (a modified distillation apparatus) and the kerotakis (a more intricate apparatus used especially for sublimations) are two other advancements in the process of distillation that are credited to her. Although we have no writing from Mary herself, she is known from the early-fourth-century writings of Zosimos of Panopolis. After the Greco-Roman period, women&#x27;s names appear less frequently in alchemical literature.

Towards the end of the Middle Ages and beginning of the Renaissance, due to the emergence of print, women were able to access the alchemical knowledge from texts of the preceding centuries. Caterina Sforza, the Countess of Forlì and Lady of Imola, is one of the few confirmed female alchemists after Mary the Jewess. As she owned an apothecary, she would practice science and conduct experiments in her botanic gardens and laboratories. Being knowledgeable in alchemy and pharmacology, she recorded all of her alchemical ventures in a manuscript named (&#x27;Experiments&#x27;). The manuscript contained more than four hundred recipes covering alchemy as well as cosmetics and medicine. One of these recipes was for the water of talc. Talc, which makes up talcum powder, is a mineral which, when combined with water and distilled, was said to produce a solution which yielded many benefits. These supposed benefits included turning silver to gold and rejuvenation. When combined with white wine, its powder form could be ingested to counteract poison. Furthermore, if that powder was mixed and drunk with white wine, it was said to be a source of protection from any poison, sickness, or plague. Other recipes were for making hair dyes, lotions, lip colours. There was also information on how to treat a variety of ailments from fevers and coughs to epilepsy and cancer. In addition, there were instructions on producing the quintessence (or aether), an elixir which was believed to be able to heal all sicknesses, defend against diseases, and perpetuate youthfulness. She also wrote about creating the illustrious philosophers&#x27; stone.

Some women known for their interest in alchemy were Catherine de&#x27; Medici, the Queen of France, and Marie de&#x27; Medici, the following Queen of France, who carried out experiments in her personal laboratory. Also, Isabella d&#x27;Este, the Marchioness of Mantua, made perfumes herself to serve as gifts. Due to the proliferation in alchemical literature of pseudepigrapha and anonymous works, however, it is difficult to know which of the alchemists were actually women. This contributed to a broader pattern in which male authors credited prominent noblewomen for beauty products with the purpose of appealing to a female audience. For example, in (&quot;Gallant Recipe-Book&quot;), the distillation of lemons and roses was attributed to Elisabetta Gonzaga, the duchess of Urbino. In the same book, Isabella d&#x27;Aragona, the daughter of Alfonso II of Naples, is accredited for recipes involving alum and mercury. Ippolita Maria Sforza is even referred to in an anonymous manuscript about a hand lotion created with rose powder and crushed bones.

As the sixteenth century went on, scientific culture flourished and people began collecting &quot;secrets&quot;. During this period &quot;secrets&quot; referred to experiments, and the most coveted ones were not those which were bizarre, but the ones which had been proven to yield the desired outcome. In this period, the only book of secrets ascribed to a woman was (&#x27;The Secrets of Signora Isabella Cortese&#x27;). This book contained information on how to turn base metals into gold, medicine, and cosmetics. However, it is rumoured that a man, Girolamo Ruscelli, was the real author and only used a female voice to attract female readers.

In the nineteenth-century, Mary Anne Atwood&#x27;s &quot;A Suggestive Inquiry into the Hermetic Mystery&quot; (1850) marked the return of women during the occult revival.

=== Modern historical research ===
The history of alchemy has become a recognized subject of academic study. As the language of the alchemists is analysed, historians are becoming more aware of the connections between that discipline and other facets of Western cultural history, such as the evolution of science and philosophy, the sociology and psychology of the intellectual communities, kabbalism, spiritualism, Rosicrucianism, and other mystic movements. Institutions involved in this research include The Chymistry of Isaac Newton project at Indiana University, the University of Exeter Centre for the Study of Esotericism (EXESESO), the European Society for the Study of Western Esotericism (ESSWE), and the University of Amsterdam&#x27;s Sub-department for the History of Hermetic Philosophy and Related Currents. A large collection of books on alchemy is kept in the Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica in Amsterdam.

Journals which publish regularly on the topic of Alchemy include &quot;Ambix&quot;, published by the Society for the History of Alchemy and Chemistry, and &quot;Isis&quot;, published by the History of Science Society.

== Core concepts ==

Western alchemical theory corresponds to the worldview of late antiquity in which it was born. Concepts were imported from Neoplatonism and earlier Greek cosmology. As such, the classical elements appear in alchemical writings, as do the seven classical planets and the corresponding seven metals of antiquity. Similarly, the gods of the Roman pantheon who are associated with these luminaries are discussed in alchemical literature. The concepts of prima materia and anima mundi are central to the theory of the philosopher&#x27;s stone.

=== Magnum opus ===

The Great Work of Alchemy is often described as a series of four stages represented by colours.
* &quot;nigredo&quot;, a blackening or melanosis
* &quot;albedo&quot;, a whitening or leucosis
* &quot;citrinitas&quot;, a yellowing or xanthosis
* &quot;rubedo&quot;, a reddening, purpling, or iosis

== Modernity ==
Due to the complexity and obscurity of alchemical literature, and the 18th-century diffusion of remaining alchemical practitioners into the area of chemistry, the general understanding of alchemy in the 19th and 20th centuries was influenced by several distinct and radically different interpretations. Those focusing on the exoteric, such as historians of science Lawrence M. Principe and William R. Newman, have interpreted the &quot;&#x27;Decknamen&quot;&#x27; (or code words) of alchemy as physical substances. These scholars have reconstructed physicochemical experiments that they say are described in medieval and early modern texts. At the opposite end of the spectrum, focusing on the esoteric, scholars, such as Florin George Călian and Anna Marie Roos, who question the reading of Principe and Newman, interpret these same &quot;Decknamen&quot; as spiritual, religious, or psychological concepts.

New interpretations of alchemy are still perpetuated, sometimes merging in concepts from New Age or radical environmentalism movements. Groups like the Rosicrucians and Freemasons have a continued interest in alchemy and its symbolism. Since the Victorian revival of alchemy, &quot;occultists reinterpreted alchemy as a spiritual practice, involving the self-transformation of the practitioner and only incidentally or not at all the transformation of laboratory substances&quot;, which has contributed to a merger of magic and alchemy in popular thought.

=== Esoteric interpretations of historical texts ===
In the eyes of a variety of modern esoteric and Neo-Hermetic practitioners, alchemy is primarily spiritual. In this interpretation, transmutation of lead into gold is presented as an analogy for personal transmutation, purification, and perfection.

According to this view, early alchemists such as Zosimos of Panopolis () highlighted the spiritual nature of the alchemical quest, symbolic of a religious regeneration of the human soul. This approach is held to have continued in the Middle Ages, as metaphysical aspects, substances, physical states, and material processes are supposed to have been used as metaphors for spiritual entities, spiritual states, and, ultimately, transformation. In this sense, the literal meanings of &#x27;Alchemical Formulas&#x27; hid a spiritual philosophy. In the Neo-Hermeticist interpretation, both the transmutation of common metals into gold and the universal panacea are held to symbolize evolution from an imperfect, diseased, corruptible, and ephemeral state toward a perfect, healthy, incorruptible, and everlasting state, so the philosopher&#x27;s stone then represented a mystic key that would make this evolution possible. Applied to the alchemist, the twin goal symbolized their evolution from ignorance to enlightenment, and the stone represented a hidden spiritual truth or power that would lead to that goal. In texts that are believed to have been written according to this view, the cryptic alchemical symbols, diagrams, and textual imagery of late alchemical works are supposed to contain multiple layers of meanings, allegories, and references to other equally cryptic works; which must be laboriously decoded to discover their true meaning.

In his 1766 &quot;Alchemical Catechism&quot;, Théodore Henri de Tschudi suggested that the usage of the metals was symbolic:

=== Psychology ===
Alchemical symbolism has been important in analytical psychology and was revived and popularized from near extinction by the Swiss psychologist Carl Gustav Jung. Jung was initially confounded and at odds with alchemy and its images but after being given a copy of &quot;The Secret of the Golden Flower&quot;, a Chinese alchemical text translated by his friend Richard Wilhelm, he discovered a direct correlation or parallel between the symbolic images in the alchemical drawings and the inner, symbolic images coming up in his patients&#x27; dreams, visions, or fantasies. He observed these alchemical images occurring during the psychic process of transformation, a process that Jung called &quot;individuation&quot;. Specifically, he regarded the conjuring up of images of gold or Lapis as symbolic expressions of the origin and goal of this &quot;process of individuation&quot;. Together with his alchemical &quot;mystica soror&quot; (mystical sister) Jungian Swiss analyst Marie-Louise von Franz, Jung began collecting old alchemical texts, compiled a lexicon of key phrases with cross-references, and pored over them. The volumes of work he wrote shed new light onto understanding the art of transubstantiation and renewed alchemy&#x27;s popularity as a symbolic process of coming into wholeness as a human being where opposites are brought into contact and inner and outer, spirit and matter are reunited in the &quot;hieros gamos&quot;, or divine marriage. His writings are influential in general psychology, but especially to those who have an interest in understanding the importance of dreams, symbols, and the unconscious archetypal forces (archetypes) that comprise all psychic life.

Both von Franz and Jung have contributed significantly to the subject and work of alchemy and its continued presence in psychology as well as contemporary culture. Among the volumes Jung wrote on alchemy, his magnum opus is Volume 14 of his Collected Works, &quot;Mysterium Coniunctionis&quot;.

=== Literature ===

Alchemy has had a long-standing relationship with art, seen both in alchemical texts and in mainstream entertainment. &quot;Literary alchemy&quot; appears throughout the history of English literature from Shakespeare to J. K. Rowling, and also the popular Japanese manga &quot;Fullmetal Alchemist&quot;. Here, characters or plot structure follow an alchemical magnum opus. In the 14th century, Chaucer began a trend of alchemical satire that can still be seen in recent fantasy works like those of the late Sir Terry Pratchett. Another literary work taking inspiration from the alchemical tradition is the 1988 novel &quot;The Alchemist&quot; by Brazilian writer Paulo Coelho.

Visual artists have had a similar relationship with alchemy. While some used it as a source of satire, others worked with the alchemists themselves or integrated alchemical thought or symbols in their work. Music was also present in the works of alchemists and continues to influence popular performers. In the last hundred years, alchemists have been portrayed in a magical and spagyric role in fantasy fiction, film, television, novels, comics and video games.

=== Science ===

One goal of alchemy, the transmutation of base substances into gold, is now known to be impossible by means of traditional chemistry, but possible by other physical means. Although not financially worthwhile, gold was synthesized in particle accelerators as early as 1941.

== See also ==

* Alchemical symbol
* Chemistry
* Corentin Louis Kervran § Biological transmutation
* Cupellation
* Historicism
* History of chemistry
* List of alchemical substances
* List of alchemists
* List of obsolete occupations
* Nuclear transmutation
* Outline of alchemy
* Porta Alchemica
* Renaissance magic
* Spagyric
* Superseded theories in science
* Synthesis of precious metals
* Thaumaturgy
* Western esotericism
== Notes ==
== References ==

=== Citations ===
=== Sources used ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== Bibliography ==
=== Introductions and textbooks ===
* (focus on technical aspects)
* (focus on technical aspects)
* (general overview)
* (Greek and Byzantine alchemy)
* (focus on technical aspects)
* (Greek and Byzantine alchemy)
* (the second part of volume 1 was never published; the other volumes deal with the modern period and are not relevant for alchemy)
* (general overview, focus on esoteric aspects)
* (general overview, written in a highly accessible style)
* 

=== Greco-Egyptian alchemy ===
==== Texts ====
* Marcellin Berthelot and Charles-Émile Ruelle (eds.), &quot;Collection des anciens alchimistes grecs&quot; (CAAG), 3 vols., 1887–1888, Vol 1: https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k96492923, Vol 2: https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k9680734p, Vol. 3: https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k9634942s.
* André-Jean Festugière, &quot;La Révélation d&#x27;Hermès Trismégiste&quot;, Paris, Les Belles Lettres, 2014 .
* and (eds.), &quot;Les alchimistes grecs, t. 1 : Papyrus de Leyde – Papyrus de Stockholm – Recettes,&quot; Paris, Les Belles Lettres, 1981.
* Otto Lagercrantz (ed), &quot;Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis&quot;, Uppsala, A.B. Akademiska Bokhandeln, 1913, Papyrus graecus holmiensis (P. holm.); Recepte für Silber, Steine und Purpur, bearb. von Otto Lagercrantz. Hrsg. mit Unterstützung des Vilh. Ekman&#x27;schen Universitätsfonds.
* Michèle Mertens and (ed.), &quot;Les alchimistes grecs, t. 4.1 : Zosime de Panopolis. Mémoires authentiques,&quot; Paris, Les Belles Lettres, 1995.
* Andrée Collinet and (ed.), &quot;Les alchimistes grecs, t. 10 : L&#x27;Anonyme de Zuretti ou l&#x27;Art sacré and divin de la chrysopée par un anonyme&quot;, Paris, Les Belles Lettres, 2000.
* Andrée Collinet (ed), &quot;Les alchimistes grecs&quot;, &quot;t. 11 : Recettes alchimiques (Par. Gr. 2419; Holkhamicus 109) – Cosmas le Hiéromoine – Chrysopée&quot;, Paris, Les Belles Lettres, 2000.
* Matteo Martelli (ed), &quot;The Four Books of Pseudo-Democritus&quot;, Maney Publishing, 2014.

==== Studies ====
* Dylan M. Burns, &quot; μίξεώς τινι τέχνῃ κρείττονι : Alchemical Metaphor in the &quot;Paraphrase of Shem&quot; (NHC VII,1) &quot;, &quot;Aries&quot; 15 (2015), p. 79–106.
* Alberto Camplani, &quot; Procedimenti magico-alchemici e discorso filosofico ermetico &quot; in Giuliana Lanata (ed.), &quot;Il Tardoantico alle soglie del Duemila&quot;, ETS, 2000, p. 73–98.
* Alberto Camplani and Marco Zambon, &quot; Il sacrificio come problema in alcune correnti filosofice di età imperiale &quot;, &quot;Annali di storia dell&#x27;esegesi&quot; 19 (2002), p. 59–99.
* Régine Charron and Louis Painchaud, &quot; &#x27;God is a Dyer,&#x27; The Background and Significance of a Puzzling Motif in the Coptic &quot;Gospel According to Philip (CG II, 3)&quot;, &quot;Le Muséon&quot; 114 (2001), p. 41-50.
* Régine Charron, &quot; The Apocryphon of John (NHC II,1) and the Greco-Egyptian Alchemical Literature &quot;, &quot;Vigiliae Christinae&quot; 59 (2005), p. 438-456.
* Philippe Derchain, &quot;L&#x27;Atelier des Orfèvres à Dendara et les origines de l&#x27;alchimie,&quot; &quot;Chronique d&#x27;Égypte&quot;, vol. 65, no 130, 1990, p. 219–242.
* Korshi Dosoo, &quot; A History of the Theban Magical Library &quot;, &quot;Bulletin of the American Society of Papyrologists&quot; 53 (2016), p. 251–274.
* Olivier Dufault, &quot;Early Greek Alchemy, Patronage and Innovation in Late Antiquity&quot;, California Classical Studies, 2019, Early Greek Alchemy, Patronage and Innovation in Late Antiquity.
* Sergio Knipe, &quot; Sacrifice and self-transformation in the alchemical writings of Zosimus of Panopolis &quot;, in Christopher Kelly, Richard Flower, Michael Stuart Williams (eds.), &quot;Unclassical Traditions. Volume II: Perspectives from East and West in Late Antiquity,&quot; Cambridge University Press, 2011, p. 59–69.
* André-Jean Festugière, &quot;La Révélation d&#x27;Hermès Trismégiste&quot;, Paris, Les Belles Lettres, 2014 , .
* Kyle A. Fraser, &quot; Zosimos of Panopolis and the Book of Enoch: Alchemy as Forbidden Knowledge &quot;, &quot;Aries&quot; 4.2 (2004), p. 125–147.
* Kyle A. Fraser, &quot; Baptized in Gnosis: The Spiritual Alchemy of Zosimos of Panopolis &quot;, &quot;Dionysius&quot; 25 (2007), p. 33–54.
* Kyle A. Fraser, &quot; Distilling Nature&#x27;s Secrets: The Sacred Art of Alchemy &quot;, in John Scarborough and Paul Keyser (eds.), &quot;Oxford Handbook of Science and Medicine in the Classical World,&quot; Oxford University Press, 2018, p. 721–742. 2018. .
* Shannon Grimes, &quot;Becoming Gold: Zosimos of Panopolis and the Alchemical Arts in Roman Egypt&quot;, Auckland, Rubedo Press, 2018, 
* Paul T. Keyser, &quot; Greco-Roman Alchemy and Coins of Imitation Silver &quot;, &quot;American Journal of Numismatics&quot; 7–8 (1995–1996), p. 209–234.
* Paul Keyser, &quot; The Longue Durée of Alchemy &quot;, in John Scarborough and Paul Keyser (eds.), &quot;Oxford Handbook of Science and Medicine in the Classical World,&quot; Oxford University Press, 2018, p. 409–430.
* Jean Letrouit, &quot;Chronologie des alchimistes grecs,&quot; in Didier Kahn and Sylvain Matton, &quot;Alchimie: art, histoire et mythes&quot;, SEHA-Archè, 1995, p. 11–93.
* Lindsay, Jack. &quot;The Origins of Alchemy in Greco-Roman Egypt&quot;. Barnes &amp; Noble, 1970.
* Paul Magdalino and Maria Mavroudi (eds.), &quot;The Occult Sciences in Byzantium&quot;, La Pomme d&#x27;or, 2006.
* Matteo Martelli, &quot; Alchemy, Medicine and Religion: Zosimus of Panopolis and the Egyptian Priests &quot;, &quot;Religion in the Roman Empire&quot; 3.2 (2017), p. 202–220.
* 
* Daniel Stolzenberg, &quot; Unpropitious Tinctures: Alchemy, Astrology &amp; Gnosis According to Zosimos of Panopolis &quot;, &quot;Archives internationales d&#x27;histoire des sciences&quot; 49 (1999), p. 3–31.
* Cristina Viano, &quot; Byzantine Alchemy, or the Era of Systematization &quot;, in John Scarborough and Paul Keyser (eds.), &quot;Oxford Handbook of Science and Medicine in the Classical World,&quot; Oxford University Press, 2018, p. 943–964.

=== Early modern ===
* Principe, Lawrence and William Newman. &quot;Alchemy Tried in the Fire: Starkey, Boyle, and the Fate of Helmontian Chymistry&quot;. University of Chicago Press, 2002.

== External links ==

* SHAC: Society for the History of Alchemy and Chemistry
* ESSWE: European Society for the Study of Western Esotericism
* Association for the Study of Esotericism</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="0" end="7" title="Alchemy" label="Alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="18" end="24" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q269323" start="58" end="76" title="natural philosophy" label="natural philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="80" end="93" title="philosophical" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q375843" start="98" end="113" title="protoscientific" label="protoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q902482" start="159" end="164" title="Chinese alchemy" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344038" start="166" end="171" title="Rasayana" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119147" start="177" end="189" title="Alchemy and chemistry in medieval Islam" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="195" end="201" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q827597" start="265" end="282" title="pseudepigraphical" label="pseudepigraphical"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="300" end="317" title="Egypt (Roman province)" label="Greco-Roman Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="353" end="378" title="Alchemy#Hellenistic Egypt" label="Greek-speaking alchemists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967421" start="651" end="662" title="chrysopoeia" label="chrysopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q428855" start="691" end="701" title="base metal" label="base metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="716" end="720" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q585302" start="733" end="744" title="noble metal" label="noble metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="766" end="770" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q912502" start="792" end="813" title="Elixir of life" label="elixir of immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q910154" start="835" end="843" title="Panacea (medicine)" label="panaceas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="907" end="911" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4106712" start="954" end="977" title="Magnum opus (alchemy)" label="&amp;quot;magnum opus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q182053" start="1032" end="1056" title="philosophers&amp;#x27; stone" label="philosophers&amp;#x27; stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q483242" start="1167" end="1188" title="laboratory techniques" label="laboratory techniques"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="1274" end="1301" title="Ancient Greek philosophy" label="Ancient Greek philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q188520" start="1338" end="1351" title="four elements" label="four elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q467928" start="1421" end="1428" title="History of cryptography" label="cyphers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052959" start="1467" end="1492" title="Latin translations of the 12th century" label="12th-century translations"/>
<link wikidata="Q785426" start="1496" end="1529" title="Science in the medieval Islamic world" label="medieval Islamic works on science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834647" start="1538" end="1576" title="Recovery of Aristotle" label="rediscovery of Aristotelian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="1734" end="1746" title="Early modern era" label="early modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q501353" start="1769" end="1778" title="History of chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q380274" start="1783" end="1791" title="History of medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="1903" end="1911" title="esoteric" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784497" start="1970" end="1986" title="Eric John Holmyard" label="Eric J. Holmyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q60236" start="1991" end="2013" title="Marie-Louise von Franz" label="Marie-Louise von Franz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="2088" end="2123" title="History of the physical sciences" label="historians of the physical sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q501353" start="2161" end="2176" title="History of chemistry" label="early chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q380274" start="2178" end="2186" title="History of medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430956" start="2192" end="2204" title="charlatanism" label="charlatanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="2214" end="2227" title="philosophical" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="2232" end="2241" title="Religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="2318" end="2329" title="Western esotericism" label="esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q261215" start="2331" end="2344" title="History of psychology" label="psychologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="2372" end="2385" title="Spirituality" label="spiritualists"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="2505" end="2515" title="old French" label="old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="2567" end="2581" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="2625" end="2631" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208987" start="2683" end="2693" title="Late Greek" label="Late Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004293" start="2797" end="2800" title="al-" label="al-"/>
<link wikidata="Q4106712" start="2927" end="2940" title="Magnum opus (alchemy)" label="transmutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="3347" end="3355" title="Egyptian language" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316289" start="3548" end="3560" title="Wallis Budge" label="Wallis Budge"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="3662" end="3668" title="Coptic language" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q890733" start="3740" end="3748" title="Bohairic" label="Bohairic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188519" start="3807" end="3814" title="Demotic Egyptian" label="Demotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="3843" end="3851" title="Egyptian language" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q902482" start="4445" end="4460" title="Chinese alchemy" label="Chinese alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344038" start="4481" end="4495" title="Rasayana" label="Indian alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="4513" end="4532" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q72499" start="4581" end="4594" title="Mediterranean Basin" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="4644" end="4661" title="Egypt (Roman province)" label="Greco-Roman Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="4669" end="4682" title="Muslim world" label="Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4696" end="4711" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="4754" end="4760" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651597" start="4789" end="4803" title="Indian religions" label="Dharmic faiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988528" start="4917" end="4933" title="Western religion" label="Western religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="5158" end="5175" title="Hellenistic Egypt" label="Hellenistic Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="5195" end="5205" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q827597" start="5605" end="5620" title="pseudepigraphic" label="pseudepigraphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q226868" start="5688" end="5708" title="Zosimos of Panopolis" label="Zosimos of Panopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36424" start="5753" end="5756" title="Floruit" label="fl."/>
<link wikidata="Q7499" start="5878" end="5893" title="Mary the Jewess" label="Mary the Jewess"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409585" start="5895" end="5912" title="Pseudo-Democritus" label="Pseudo-Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666011" start="5918" end="5930" title="Agathodaemon (alchemist)" label="Agathodaimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409585" start="6049" end="6066" title="Pseudo-Democritus" label="Pseudo-Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="7285" end="7300" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Pharaonic Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q79876" start="7626" end="7630" title="Isis" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46491" start="7632" end="7638" title="Osiris" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q176758" start="7640" end="7645" title="Jason" label="Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q192358" start="7715" end="7734" title="Hermes Trismegistus" label="Hermes Trismegistus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="7790" end="7793" title="deity" label="god"/>
<link wikidata="Q146921" start="7794" end="7799" title="Thoth" label="Thoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="7826" end="7832" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q238577" start="7849" end="7857" title="caduceus" label="caduceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="7934" end="7955" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q14941935" start="8070" end="8079" title="Hermetica" label="Hermetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q192933" start="8210" end="8229" title="hermeticism" label="hermetic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="8417" end="8427" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="8489" end="8502" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="8503" end="8513" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269426" start="8691" end="8708" title="Stockholm papyrus" label="Stockholm papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q464233" start="8717" end="8733" title="Leyden papyrus X" label="Leyden papyrus X"/>
<link wikidata="Q645774" start="9004" end="9019" title="Bolus of Mendes" label="Bolus of Mendes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409585" start="9024" end="9041" title="Pseudo-Democritus" label="Pseudo-Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188520" start="9120" end="9138" title="classical elements" label="classical elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="9331" end="9345" title="Pythagoreanism" label="Pythagoreanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193589" start="9347" end="9356" title="Platonism" label="Platonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="9358" end="9366" title="Stoicism" label="Stoicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="9371" end="9381" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83375" start="9515" end="9525" title="Empedocles" label="Empedocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488752" start="9627" end="9632" title="Earth (classical element)" label="earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637489" start="9634" end="9637" title="Air (classical element)" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637515" start="9639" end="9644" title="Water (classical element)" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723512" start="9650" end="9654" title="Fire (classical element)" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="10352" end="10364" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q209102" start="10366" end="10376" title="Lactantius" label="Lactantius"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="10432" end="10444" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="St Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976534" start="10718" end="10723" title="Moses of Alexandria" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460" start="10731" end="10740" title="Cleopatra the Alchemist" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409585" start="10742" end="10752" title="Pseudo-Democritus" label="Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q740989" start="10758" end="10765" title="Ostanes" label="Ostanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23641178" start="10804" end="10810" title="Chymes" label="Chymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165518" start="11078" end="11094" title="Khalid Ibn Yazid" label="Khalid Ibn Yazid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="11316" end="11325" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="11356" end="11361" title="Roman Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="11548" end="11553" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q323133" start="11699" end="11711" title="Arthashastra" label="Arthashastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11183742" start="11852" end="11857" title="Niter" label="nitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="11951" end="11959" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119147" start="12192" end="12207" title="Alchemy and chemistry in medieval Islam" label="Persian chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q624029" start="12212" end="12221" title="Medicine in medieval Islam" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="12222" end="12239" title="Abū Rayhān Bīrūnī" label="Abū Rayhān Bīrūnī"/>
<link wikidata="Q189271" start="12285" end="12301" title="Mahmud of Ghazni" label="Mahmud of Ghazni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431374" start="12755" end="12760" title="Kaula (Hinduism)" label="Kaula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420753" start="12827" end="12841" title="Matsyendranath" label="Matsyendranath"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347300" start="13043" end="13059" title="Nagarjuna (metallurgist)" label="Nāgārjuna Siddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552572" start="13717" end="13734" title="Gerrit Jan Meulenbeld" label="G. Jan Meulenbeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="14573" end="14601" title="the Fall of the Roman Empire" label="the fall of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="14692" end="14697" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="15014" end="15019" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="15027" end="15039" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="15199" end="15205" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q167852" start="15313" end="15329" title="Jābir ibn Hayyān" label="Jābir ibn Hayyān"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916044" start="15424" end="15434" title="Paul Kraus (Arabist)" label="Paul Kraus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752785" start="15682" end="15688" title="Takwin" label="Takwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q182053" start="16264" end="16288" title="philosopher&amp;#x27;s stone" label="philosopher&amp;#x27;s stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q140732" start="16353" end="16363" title="numerology" label="numerology"/>
<link wikidata="Q188520" start="16682" end="16699" title="classical element" label="classical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q381913" start="16702" end="16708" title="aether (classical element)" label="aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637489" start="16710" end="16713" title="Air (classical element)" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488752" start="16715" end="16720" title="Earth (classical element)" label="earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723512" start="16722" end="16726" title="Fire (classical element)" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637515" start="16732" end="16737" title="Water (classical element)" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="16758" end="16774" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="16801" end="16808" title="Sulfur" label="sulphur"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="16902" end="16909" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="17175" end="17179" title="Salt (chemistry)" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q210553" start="17201" end="17214" title="atomic theory" label="atomic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593909" start="17218" end="17235" title="corpuscularianism" label="corpuscularianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="17498" end="17506" title="Al-Kindi" label="Alkindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="17508" end="17531" title="Abū al-Rayhān al-Bīrūnī" label="Abū al-Rayhān al-Bīrūnī"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="17533" end="17541" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294" start="17546" end="17557" title="Ibn Khaldun" label="Ibn Khaldun"/>
<link wikidata="Q182053" start="17621" end="17644" title="Philosopher&amp;#x27;s stone" label="transmutation of metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344038" start="17747" end="17755" title="Rasayana" label="Rasayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q167852" start="18117" end="18142" title="Jabir ibn Hayyan" label="Abū Mūsā Jābir ibn Ḥayyān"/>
<link wikidata="Q912502" start="18753" end="18780" title="Elixir of life" label="Grand Elixir of Immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q910154" start="18931" end="18948" title="Panacea (medicine)" label="universal panacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q553678" start="19053" end="19060" title="Ge Hong" label="Ge Hong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="19893" end="19900" title="Taoism" label="Daoists"/>
<link wikidata="Q981888" start="19925" end="19937" title="Tao Hongjing" label="Tao Hongjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382581" start="20345" end="20351" title="Neidan" label="Neidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="21411" end="21423" title="Black powder" label="Black powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249918" start="21554" end="21560" title="potion" label="potion"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="21622" end="21631" title="fireworks" label="fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="21677" end="21683" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="21717" end="21726" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="21748" end="21754" title="Mongol" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="21930" end="21936" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="21946" end="21974" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q121713" start="21984" end="21995" title="Acupuncture" label="Acupuncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q937737" start="22000" end="22011" title="Moxibustion" label="Moxibustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="22026" end="22038" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q104614" start="22119" end="22135" title="cinnabar" label="mercuric sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q202742" start="22444" end="22446" title="qi" label="qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q106950176" start="22500" end="22518" title="Obed Simon Johnson" label="Obed Simon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q715419" start="22647" end="22664" title="Robert of Chester" label="Robert of Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165518" start="22774" end="22790" title="Khalid ibn Yazid" label="Khalid ibn Yazid"/>
<link wikidata="Q182053" start="22919" end="22925" title="philosophers&amp;#x27; stone" label="elixir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="23122" end="23135" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q367240" start="23163" end="23180" title="Gerard of Cremona" label="Gerard of Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q312372" start="23185" end="23200" title="Adelard of Bath" label="Adelard of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q900529" start="23240" end="23259" title="Turba Philosophorum" label="Turba Philosophorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="23278" end="23286" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q169234" start="23291" end="23320" title="Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi" label="Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi"/>
<link wikidata="Q23660" start="23447" end="23453" title="carboy" label="carboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005626" start="23455" end="23461" title="elixir" label="elixir"/>
<link wikidata="Q749324" start="23467" end="23474" title="athanor" label="athanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43939" start="23703" end="23712" title="Anselm of Canterbury" label="St Anselm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295" start="23856" end="23869" title="Peter Abelard" label="Peter Abelard"/>
<link wikidata="Q256541" start="24050" end="24068" title="Robert Grosseteste" label="Robert Grosseteste"/>
<link wikidata="Q60059" start="24553" end="24568" title="Albertus Magnus" label="Albertus Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171677" start="24573" end="24584" title="Roger Bacon" label="Roger Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="24737" end="24752" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192358" start="24920" end="24939" title="Hermes Trismegistus" label="Hermes Trismegistus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409585" start="24941" end="24958" title="pseudo-Democritus" label="pseudo-Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="25399" end="25413" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="25431" end="25447" title="Franciscan Order" label="Franciscan friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="25496" end="25502" title="optics" label="optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q878226" start="25504" end="25527" title="comparative linguistics" label="comparative linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373704" start="25562" end="25572" title="Opus Majus" label="Great Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143413" start="25630" end="25649" title="medieval university" label="medieval university"/>
<link wikidata="Q326255" start="25977" end="25988" title="soteriology" label="soteriology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958594" start="26675" end="26686" title="brazen head" label="brazen head"/>
<link wikidata="Q906862" start="26779" end="26791" title="Pseudo-Geber" label="Pseudo-Geber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372514" start="26817" end="26832" title="Paul of Taranto" label="Paul of Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="27532" end="27542" title="soul" label="human soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q17951" start="27711" end="27717" title="jargon" label="jargon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="27857" end="27868" title="observation" label="observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="27874" end="27882" title="theory" label="theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="28375" end="28380" title="Dante" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757630" start="28382" end="28395" title="Piers Plowman" label="Piers Plowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="28401" end="28408" title="Chaucer" label="Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="28479" end="28493" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966963" start="28519" end="28545" title="Spondent quas non-exhibent" label="Spondent quas non-exhibent"/>
<link wikidata="Q718567" start="28657" end="28674" title="Nicholas Eymerich" label="Nicholas Eymerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142427" start="28688" end="28712" title="Directorium Inquisitorum" label="Directorium Inquisitorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q126003302" start="29081" end="29089" title="5 Hen. 4" label="5 Hen. 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377681" start="29508" end="29520" title="Petrus Bonus" label="Petrus Bonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273936" start="29522" end="29540" title="John of Rupescissa" label="John of Rupescissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q213330" start="29616" end="29630" title="Nicolas Flamel" label="Nicolas Flamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q827597" start="29688" end="29703" title="pseudepigraphy" label="pseudepigraphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="29899" end="29904" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="29990" end="30002" title="Philosophy" label="philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="30100" end="30111" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q192374" start="30304" end="30319" title="Marsilio Ficino" label="Marsilio Ficino"/>
<link wikidata="Q205612" start="30335" end="30352" title="Corpus Hermeticum" label="Corpus Hermeticum"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="30534" end="30554" title="Renaissance Humanism" label="Renaissance Humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202435" start="30559" end="30583" title="Renaissance Neoplatonism" label="Renaissance Neoplatonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="30612" end="30619" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q76568" start="30851" end="30877" title="Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa" label="Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="31034" end="31042" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q83428" start="31164" end="31174" title="Paracelsus" label="Paracelsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967421" start="31338" end="31349" title="chrysopoeia" label="chrysopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q898906" start="32020" end="32034" title="Iatrochemistry" label="Iatrochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q201484" start="32115" end="32123" title="John Dee" label="John Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="32268" end="32278" title="astrologer" label="astrologer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="32313" end="32330" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="32716" end="32729" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q43393" start="32731" end="32743" title="Robert Boyle" label="Robert Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q471406" start="32748" end="32761" title="Elias Ashmole" label="Elias Ashmole"/>
<link wikidata="Q150586" start="33168" end="33197" title="Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q127080" start="33332" end="33345" title="Edward Kelley" label="Edward Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q137906" start="33347" end="33372" title="James IV of Scotland" label="King James IV of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62953" start="33374" end="33408" title="Julius, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Julius, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q61435" start="33410" end="33445" title="Henry V, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Henry V, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q435016" start="33447" end="33474" title="Augustus, Elector of Saxony" label="Augustus, Elector of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q450861" start="33476" end="33505" title="Julius Echter von Mespelbrunn" label="Julius Echter von Mespelbrunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q551420" start="33511" end="33545" title="Maurice, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel" label="Maurice, Landgrave of Hesse-Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q709102" start="33589" end="33599" title="Arthur Dee" label="Arthur Dee"/>
<link wikidata="Q181915" start="33631" end="33650" title="Michael I of Russia" label="Michael I of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="33655" end="33675" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436640" start="33720" end="33739" title="Fasciculus Chemicus" label="Fasciculus Chemicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q901303" start="34036" end="34049" title="Michael Maier" label="Michael Maier"/>
<link wikidata="Q73366" start="34054" end="34071" title="Heinrich Khunrath" label="Heinrich Khunrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="34146" end="34156" title="con artist" label="con artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="34597" end="34608" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="34656" end="34668" title="astronomical" label="astronomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="34673" end="34685" title="astrological" label="astrological"/>
<link wikidata="Q79220" start="34732" end="34741" title="Uraniborg" label="Uraniborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q552684" start="34774" end="34793" title="Michał Sędziwój" label="Michael Sendivogius"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="34838" end="34844" title="Poland" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="34967" end="34973" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q365463" start="35042" end="35059" title="Cornelius Drebbel" label="Cornelius Drebbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="35103" end="35115" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558152" start="35186" end="35220" title="Isaac Newton&amp;#x27;s occult studies" label="Isaac Newton&amp;#x27;s occult studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43393" start="35341" end="35353" title="Robert Boyle" label="Robert Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q294169" start="35359" end="35382" title="Jan Baptist van Helmont" label="Jan Baptist van Helmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806705" start="35913" end="35924" title="James Price (chemist)" label="James Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q43393" start="36305" end="36317" title="Robert Boyle" label="Robert Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39607" start="36816" end="36825" title="Antoine Lavoisier" label="Lavoisier"/>
<link wikidata="Q41284" start="36830" end="36841" title="John Dalton" label="John Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778933" start="38208" end="38224" title="Mary Anne Atwood" label="Mary Anne Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q904631" start="38229" end="38250" title="Ethan A. Hitchcock (general)" label="Ethan Allen Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q274681" start="38642" end="38654" title="Eliphas Levi" label="Eliphas Levi"/>
<link wikidata="Q553124" start="38656" end="38675" title="Arthur Edward Waite" label="Arthur Edward Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q78484" start="38681" end="38695" title="Rudolf Steiner" label="Rudolf Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q61147" start="38999" end="39015" title="Carl Reichenbach" label="Carl Reichenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748897" start="39042" end="39052" title="Odic force" label="Odic force"/>
<link wikidata="Q907401" start="39181" end="39195" title="Louis Cattiaux" label="Louis Cattiaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q901303" start="39521" end="39534" title="Michael Maier" label="Michael Maier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499" start="39604" end="39619" title="Mary the Jewess" label="Mary the Jewess"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460" start="39621" end="39644" title="Cleopatra the Alchemist" label="Cleopatra the Alchemist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39646" end="39652" title="Medera" label="Medera"/>
<link wikidata="Q27576457" start="39658" end="39667" title="Paphnutia the Virgin" label="Taphnutia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39738" end="39757" title="Isis the Prophetess" label="Isis the Prophetess"/>
<link wikidata="Q803889" start="40160" end="40170" title="bain-marie" label="bain-marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q226868" start="40653" end="40673" title="Zosimos of Panopolis" label="Zosimos of Panopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80992" start="40964" end="40979" title="Caterina Sforza" label="Caterina Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q134583" start="41509" end="41513" title="Talc" label="Talc"/>
<link wikidata="Q381913" start="42216" end="42222" title="Aether (classical element)" label="aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q182053" start="42389" end="42413" title="philosophers&amp;#x27; stone" label="philosophers&amp;#x27; stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q131552" start="42468" end="42493" title="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Catherine de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q182021" start="42520" end="42541" title="Marie de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Marie de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q593626" start="42636" end="42656" title="Isabella d&amp;#x27;Este" label="Isabella d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q827597" start="42779" end="42793" title="pseudepigrapha" label="pseudepigrapha"/>
<link wikidata="Q453113" start="43161" end="43179" title="Elisabetta Gonzaga" label="Elisabetta Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799532" start="43222" end="43245" title="Isabella d&amp;#x27;Aragona" label="Isabella d&amp;#x27;Aragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q190527" start="43321" end="43325" title="alum" label="alum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469233" start="43339" end="43360" title="Ippolita Maria Sforza" label="Ippolita Maria Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903986" start="44027" end="44044" title="Girolamo Ruscelli" label="Girolamo Ruscelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778933" start="44150" end="44166" title="Mary Anne Atwood" label="Mary Anne Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="44278" end="44292" title="occult revival" label="occult revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="44612" end="44622" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="44686" end="44695" title="Kabbalah" label="kabbalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578143" start="44697" end="44709" title="Spiritualism (beliefs)" label="spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194267" start="44711" end="44725" title="Rosicrucianism" label="Rosicrucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608367" start="44843" end="44861" title="Indiana University" label="Indiana University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414861" start="44867" end="44887" title="University of Exeter" label="University of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413203" start="44939" end="44992" title="European Society for the Study of Western Esotericism" label="European Society for the Study of Western Esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q214341" start="45010" end="45033" title="University of Amsterdam" label="University of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q315883" start="45171" end="45205" title="Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica" label="Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741520" start="45292" end="45297" title="Ambix" label="Ambix"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063115" start="45322" end="45370" title="Society for the History of Alchemy and Chemistry" label="Society for the History of Alchemy and Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q689414" start="45382" end="45386" title="Isis (journal)" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621074" start="45411" end="45437" title="History of Science Society" label="History of Science Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="45584" end="45596" title="Neoplatonism" label="Neoplatonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="45615" end="45624" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q188520" start="45639" end="45656" title="classical element" label="classical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135397" start="45705" end="45721" title="classical planet" label="classical planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478925" start="45751" end="45770" title="metals of antiquity" label="metals of antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209773" start="45799" end="45813" title="List of Roman deities" label="Roman pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251333" start="45911" end="45924" title="prima materia" label="prima materia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147295" start="45929" end="45940" title="anima mundi" label="anima mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q182053" start="45974" end="45998" title="philosopher&amp;#x27;s stone" label="philosopher&amp;#x27;s stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q683745" start="46126" end="46133" title="nigredo" label="nigredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110050" start="46175" end="46181" title="Albedo (alchemy)" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2770148" start="46221" end="46231" title="citrinitas" label="citrinitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18087977" start="46272" end="46278" title="rubedo" label="rubedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="46483" end="46492" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420700" start="46660" end="46668" title="exoteric" label="exoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504357" start="46700" end="46720" title="Lawrence M. Principe" label="Lawrence M. Principe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017256" start="46725" end="46742" title="William R. Newman" label="William R. Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="47029" end="47037" title="Western esotericism" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q90018693" start="47057" end="47077" title="Florin George Călian" label="Florin George Călian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80407169" start="47082" end="47097" title="Anna Marie Roos" label="Anna Marie Roos"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="47333" end="47340" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q194267" start="47396" end="47408" title="Rosicrucianism" label="Rosicrucians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="47413" end="47423" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="47526" end="47532" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="47762" end="47767" title="Magic (supernatural)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="47889" end="47897" title="Western esotericism" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q368173" start="47902" end="47914" title="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn" label="Neo-Hermetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="48003" end="48007" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="48013" end="48017" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q226868" start="48153" end="48173" title="Zosimos of Panopolis" label="Zosimos of Panopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578130" start="48624" end="48644" title="spiritual philosophy" label="spiritual philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192933" start="48653" end="48668" title="Hermeticism" label="Neo-Hermeticist"/>
<link wikidata="Q850227" start="48753" end="48760" title="panacea" label="panacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q182053" start="48927" end="48951" title="philosopher&amp;#x27;s stone" label="philosopher&amp;#x27;s stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451472" start="49297" end="49314" title="alchemical symbol" label="alchemical symbol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49597" end="49622" title="Théodore Henri de Tschudi" label="Théodore Henri de Tschudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451472" start="49696" end="49713" title="Alchemical symbol" label="Alchemical symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q245179" start="49739" end="49760" title="analytical psychology" label="analytical psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="49840" end="49856" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Gustav Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018679" start="49966" end="49997" title="The Secret of the Golden Flower" label="The Secret of the Golden Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q62126" start="50056" end="50071" title="Richard Wilhelm (sinologist)" label="Richard Wilhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q681449" start="50394" end="50407" title="individuation" label="individuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182053" start="50471" end="50484" title="philosopher&amp;#x27;s stone" label="gold or Lapis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60236" start="50673" end="50695" title="Marie-Louise von Franz" label="Marie-Louise von Franz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="50752" end="50759" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q214500" start="50893" end="50911" title="transubstantiation" label="transubstantiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334402" start="51120" end="51132" title="hieros gamos" label="hieros gamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="51200" end="51210" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q785653" start="51348" end="51358" title="Jungian archetypes" label="archetypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60236" start="51398" end="51407" title="Marie-Louise von Franz" label="von Franz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="51412" end="51416" title="Carl Jung" label="Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281370" start="51657" end="51680" title="Mysterium Coniunctionis" label="Mysterium Coniunctionis"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="51914" end="51925" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="51929" end="51942" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q189562" start="51986" end="52005" title="Fullmetal Alchemist" label="Fullmetal Alchemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q46248" start="52220" end="52235" title="Terry Pratchett" label="Terry Pratchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q179021" start="52332" end="52345" title="The Alchemist (novel)" label="The Alchemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12881" start="52372" end="52384" title="Paulo Coelho" label="Paulo Coelho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133818" start="52766" end="52774" title="Paracelsianism" label="spagyric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53077" end="53097" title="Synthesis of precious metals#Gold" label="gold was synthesized"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="53101" end="53121" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451472" start="53160" end="53177" title="Alchemical symbol" label="Alchemical symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="53180" end="53189" title="Chemistry" label="Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53192" end="53241" title="Corentin Louis Kervran#Biological transmutation" label="Corentin Louis Kervran § Biological transmutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q903707" start="53244" end="53255" title="Cupellation" label="Cupellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q460501" start="53258" end="53269" title="Historicism" label="Historicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q501353" start="53272" end="53292" title="History of chemistry" label="History of chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605546" start="53295" end="53324" title="List of alchemical substances" label="List of alchemical substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052474" start="53327" end="53345" title="List of alchemists" label="List of alchemists"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160772" start="53348" end="53376" title="List of obsolete occupations" label="List of obsolete occupations"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="53379" end="53400" title="Nuclear transmutation" label="Nuclear transmutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112543" start="53403" end="53421" title="Outline of alchemy" label="Outline of alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304975" start="53424" end="53439" title="Porta Alchemica" label="Porta Alchemica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312469" start="53442" end="53459" title="Renaissance magic" label="Renaissance magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133818" start="53462" end="53470" title="Spagyric" label="Spagyric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115113" start="53473" end="53503" title="Superseded theories in science" label="Superseded theories in science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662712" start="53506" end="53534" title="Synthesis of precious metals" label="Synthesis of precious metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q60042658" start="53537" end="53548" title="Thaumaturgy" label="Thaumaturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="53551" end="53570" title="Western esotericism" label="Western esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18425" start="54188" end="54207" title="Marcellin Berthelot" label="Marcellin Berthelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q481307" start="54493" end="54514" title="André-Jean Festugière" label="André-Jean Festugière"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931040" start="54746" end="54762" title="Otto Lagercrantz" label="Otto Lagercrantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q10403942" start="54823" end="54844" title="The Academic Bookstore" label="Akademiska Bokhandeln"/>
<link wikidata="Q481307" start="57514" end="57535" title="André-Jean Festugière" label="André-Jean Festugière"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522496" start="58972" end="58986" title="Paul Magdalino" label="Paul Magdalino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017256" start="59771" end="59785" title="William R. Newman" label="William Newman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="579" wikidata="Q226391" url="?curid=579" title="Alien">
<text>Alien primarily refers to:
* Alien (law), a person in a country who is not a national of that country
** Enemy alien, the above in times of war
* Extraterrestrial life, life which does not originate from Earth
** Specifically, a lifeform with extraterrestrial intelligence
** For fictional extraterrestrial life, see Extraterrestrials in fiction
* Introduced species, a species not native to its environment
** Adventive plants or alien plants, species that are foreign to the native flora 

Alien(s), or The Alien(s) may also refer to:

== Science and technology ==
* AliEn (ALICE Environment), a grid framework
* Alien (file converter), a Linux program
* Alien Technology, a manufacturer of RFID technology

== Arts and entertainment ==
* &quot;Alien&quot; (franchise), a media franchise
** &quot;Xenomorph&quot;, the titular alien in the franchise

===Films===
* &quot;Alien&quot; (film), a 1979 film by Ridley Scott
** &quot;Aliens&quot; (film), second film in the franchise from 1986 by James Cameron
** &quot;Alien 3&quot;, third film in the franchise from 1992 by David Fincher
** &quot;Alien Resurrection&quot;, fourth film in the franchise from 1997 by Jean-Pierre Jeunet
** &quot;Alien vs. Predator&quot; (film), fifth film in the franchise from 2004 by Paul W. S. Anderson
** &quot;Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem&quot;, sixth film in the franchise from 2007 by the Brothers Strause
** &quot;Prometheus&quot; (2012 film), seventh film in the franchise from 2012 by Ridley Scott
** &quot;&quot;, eighth film in the franchise from 2017 by Ridley Scott
** &quot;&quot;, ninth film in the franchise from 2024 by Fede Álvarez
* &quot;Alien 2: On Earth&quot;, a 1980 unofficial sequel of the 1979 &quot;Alien&quot; film
*&quot;Alien Visitor&quot; (also titled &quot;Epsilon&quot;) (1995 film) AustralianItalian science fiction film by Rolf de Heer
* &quot;The Alien&quot; (2016 film), a 2016 Mexican film
* &quot;The Alien&quot; (unproduced film), an incomplete 1960s IndianAmerican film
* &quot;Alienoid&quot;, a 2022 South Korean film

=== Literature ===
* &quot;Alien&quot; novels, an extension of the &quot;Alien&quot; franchise
* &quot;&quot;, a 1995 book by Lee Brimmicombe-Wood, a guide to the fictional United States Colonial Marines
* &quot;Aliens&quot; (Tappan Wright novel), a 1902 novel by Mary Tappan Wright
* &quot;Aliens!&quot; (anthology) a 1980 anthology of science fiction edited by Gardner Dozois and Jack Dann
* The Alien (novel), the eighth book in the &quot;Animorphs&quot; series by Katherine Applegate
* &quot;The Aliens&quot; (play), a 2010 play by Annie Baker

=== Music ===
==== Performers ====
* Alien (band), a 1980s Swedish rock group
* The Aliens (Australian band), a 1970s new wave group
* The Aliens (Scottish band), a 2005–2008 rock group
* The Aliens, the backing band for the American musician Jared Louche on his 1999 solo debut album &quot;Covergirl&quot;

==== Albums ====
* &quot;Alien&quot; (soundtrack), 1979
* &quot;Alien&quot; (Beam album), 2022
* &quot;Alien&quot; (Northlane album), 2019
* &quot;Alien&quot; (Strapping Young Lad album), 2005
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a 1989 EP by Tankard
* &quot;Aliens&quot; (soundtrack), 1987

==== Songs ====
* &quot;Alien&quot; (Britney Spears song), 2013
* &quot;Alien&quot; (Jonas Blue and Sabrina Carpenter song), 2018
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by Atlanta Rhythm from the album &quot;Quinella&quot;, 1981
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by Bush from the album &quot;Sixteen Stone&quot;, 1994
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by Dead Letter Circus from the EP &quot;Dead Letter Circus&quot;, 2007
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by The Devil Wears Prada from the EP &quot;Space&quot;, 2014
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by Erasure from the album &quot;Loveboat&quot;, 2000
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by Japan from the album &quot;Quiet Life&quot;, 1979
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by Lamb from the album &quot;Fear of Fours&quot;, 1999
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by Nerina Pallot from the album &quot;Dear Frustrated Superstar&quot;, 2001
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by P-Model from the album &quot;Landsale&quot;, 1980
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by Pennywise from the album &quot;Straight Ahead&quot;, 1999
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by Stray Kids from the album &quot;SKZ-Replay&quot;, 2022
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by Structures from the album &quot;Life Through a Window&quot;, 2014
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by the National from the album &quot;First Two Pages of Frankenstein&quot;, 2023
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by Third Day from the album &quot;Conspiracy No. 5&quot;, 1997
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by Thriving Ivory from the album Thriving Ivory, 2003
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a song by Tokio Hotel from the album &quot;Humanoid&quot;, 2009
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a 2018 song by Beach House
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a 2020 song by Lee Su-hyun
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a 2020 song by Dennis Lloyd
* &quot;Aliens&quot; (song), a 2017 song by Coldplay
* &quot;Aliens&quot;, a 1984 song by Warlord
* &quot;The Alien&quot;, a song by Dream Theater from the album &quot;A View from the Top of the World&quot;, 2021

=== Video games ===
====Based on the 1979 and 1986 films====
* &quot;Alien&quot; (1982 video game), a 1982 maze game based on the 1979 film
* &quot;Alien&quot; (1984 video game), based on the 1979 film
* , a 1986 game by Activision based on the 1986 film of the same name
* , a 1986 game by Electric Dreams based on the 1986 film
* &quot;Aliens&quot; (1990 video game), a game by Konami, based on the 1986 film
* &quot;&quot;, a 2014 video game based on the &quot;Alien&quot; science fiction horror film series
====Other video games====
* &quot;Aliens&quot; (1982 video game), a text-only clone of &quot;Space Invaders&quot; written for the CP/M operating system on the Kaypro computer

=== Other media ===
* &quot;Alien&quot; (Armenian TV series), a 2017 melodrama series
* &quot;&quot;, web series in the &quot;Alien&quot; franchise from 2019 by Fabien Dubois
** &quot;&quot;, an upcoming science fiction horror television series in the franchise by Noah Hawley
* &quot;Alien&quot; (sculpture), a 2012 work by David Breuer-Weil, in Mottisfont, Hampshire, England
* &quot;Aliens&quot; (Dark Horse Comics line)
* &quot;The Aliens&quot; (TV series), 2016 British sci-fi television series
* &quot;Aliens&quot; (&quot;Roseanne&quot;), a 1992 television episode

== Other uses ==
* Alien (shipping company), a Russian company
* Alien Sun (born 1974), Singaporean actress
* &quot;Alien&quot;, a perfume by Thierry Mugler
* Alian District (Alien), in Taiwan

== See also ==
* Alians, an Islamic order
* Alien Project (disambiguation)
* Alien 4 (disambiguation)
* Alien vs. Predator (disambiguation)
* Astrobiology, the study of hypothetical alien life
* &quot;ATLiens&quot;, a 1996 album by OutKast
* Predator (disambiguation)
* UFO (disambiguation)
* Unidentified flying object (disambiguation)
* Outsider (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q226391" start="0" end="5" title="Alien" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q473741" start="29" end="40" title="Alien (law)" label="Alien (law)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341127" start="105" end="116" title="Enemy alien" label="Enemy alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="146" end="167" title="Extraterrestrial life" label="Extraterrestrial life"/>
<link wikidata="Q15107669" start="243" end="272" title="extraterrestrial intelligence" label="extraterrestrial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307329" start="317" end="345" title="Extraterrestrials in fiction" label="Extraterrestrials in fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="348" end="366" title="Introduced species" label="Introduced species"/>
<link wikidata="Q12377381" start="411" end="426" title="Adventive plant" label="Adventive plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q226391" start="492" end="497" title="Alien" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q226391" start="498" end="499" title="Alien" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q226391" start="505" end="514" title="Alien" label="The Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q226391" start="515" end="516" title="Alien" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q294437" start="569" end="594" title="AliEn (ALICE Environment)" label="AliEn (ALICE Environment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q284436" start="615" end="637" title="Alien (file converter)" label="Alien (file converter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726469" start="657" end="673" title="Alien Technology" label="Alien Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990792" start="741" end="770" title="Alien (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; (franchise)"/>
<link wikidata="Q209758" start="799" end="808" title="Xenomorph" label="Xenomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q103569" start="866" end="890" title="Alien (film)" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104814" start="923" end="948" title="Aliens (film)" label="&amp;quot;Aliens&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108543" start="1015" end="1022" title="Alien 3" label="Alien 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q458314" start="1094" end="1112" title="Alien Resurrection" label="Alien Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q155163" start="1184" end="1221" title="Alien vs. Predator (film)" label="&amp;quot;Alien vs. Predator&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1293" end="1321" title="Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem" label="Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="Q192686" start="1394" end="1428" title="Prometheus (2012 film)" label="&amp;quot;Prometheus&amp;quot; (2012 film)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1637" end="1654" title="Alien 2: On Earth" label="Alien 2: On Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415982" start="1729" end="1742" title="Alien Visitor" label="Alien Visitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27825337" start="1852" end="1885" title="The Alien (2016 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Alien&amp;quot; (2016 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713108" start="1909" end="1948" title="The Alien (unproduced film)" label="&amp;quot;The Alien&amp;quot; (unproduced film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111589656" start="1998" end="2006" title="Alienoid" label="Alienoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611781" start="2061" end="2085" title="Alien novels" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726518" start="2246" end="2286" title="Aliens (Tappan Wright novel)" label="&amp;quot;Aliens&amp;quot; (Tappan Wright novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405589" start="2325" end="2356" title="Aliens!" label="&amp;quot;Aliens!&amp;quot; (anthology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561758" start="2434" end="2451" title="The Alien (novel)" label="The Alien (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q260730" start="2508" end="2527" title="Katherine Applegate" label="Katherine Applegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16740244" start="2530" end="2559" title="The Aliens (play)" label="&amp;quot;The Aliens&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611749" start="2626" end="2638" title="Alien (band)" label="Alien (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713117" start="2669" end="2697" title="The Aliens (Australian band)" label="The Aliens (Australian band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14158712" start="2724" end="2750" title="The Aliens (Scottish band)" label="The Aliens (Scottish band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97959405" start="2880" end="2889" title="Covergirl (Jared Louche and The Aliens album)" label="Covergirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836801" start="2916" end="2946" title="Alien (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; (soundtrack)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111169761" start="2955" end="2985" title="Alien (Beam album)" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; (Beam album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q65069671" start="2994" end="3029" title="Alien (Northlane album)" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; (Northlane album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616514" start="3038" end="3083" title="Alien (Strapping Young Lad album)" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; (Strapping Young Lad album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q318311" start="3124" end="3131" title="Tankard (band)" label="Tankard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726520" start="3134" end="3165" title="Aliens (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;Aliens&amp;quot; (soundtrack)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15630589" start="3191" end="3230" title="Alien (Britney Spears song)" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; (Britney Spears song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603641" start="3239" end="3296" title="Alien (Jonas Blue and Sabrina Carpenter song)" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; (Jonas Blue and Sabrina Carpenter song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880892" start="3364" end="3384" title="Quinella (album)" label="&amp;quot;Quinella&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931436" start="3448" end="3461" title="Sixteen Stone" label="Sixteen Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245249" start="3542" end="3560" title="Dead Letter Circus (EP)" label="Dead Letter Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20992471" start="3644" end="3649" title="Space (The Devil Wears Prada EP)" label="Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084870" start="3722" end="3730" title="Loveboat (album)" label="Loveboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q250629" start="3801" end="3811" title="Quiet Life" label="Quiet Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439374" start="3881" end="3894" title="Fear of Fours" label="Fear of Fours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181192" start="3973" end="3998" title="Dear Frustrated Superstar" label="Dear Frustrated Superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485030" start="4071" end="4079" title="Landsale (album)" label="Landsale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620714" start="4154" end="4168" title="Straight Ahead (Pennywise album)" label="Straight Ahead"/>
<link wikidata="Q115733570" start="4244" end="4254" title="SKZ-Replay" label="SKZ-Replay"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074306" start="4330" end="4351" title="Life Through a Window" label="Life Through a Window"/>
<link wikidata="Q116254848" start="4429" end="4460" title="First Two Pages of Frankenstein" label="First Two Pages of Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283165" start="4535" end="4551" title="Conspiracy No. 5" label="Conspiracy No. 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887743" start="4625" end="4639" title="Thriving Ivory (album)" label="Thriving Ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457948" start="4710" end="4718" title="Humanoid (Tokio Hotel album)" label="Humanoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q812842" start="4767" end="4778" title="Beach House" label="Beach House"/>
<link wikidata="Q18697707" start="4815" end="4826" title="Lee Su-hyun" label="Lee Su-hyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q51033104" start="4863" end="4875" title="Dennis Lloyd" label="Dennis Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q32390944" start="4878" end="4903" title="Aliens (song)" label="&amp;quot;Aliens&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q680508" start="4966" end="4973" title="Warlord (California band)" label="Warlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q107695417" start="5044" end="5076" title="A View from the Top of the World" label="A View from the Top of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611745" start="5153" end="5188" title="Alien (1982 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; (1982 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611748" start="5232" end="5267" title="Alien (1984 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; (1984 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707439" start="5422" end="5458" title="Aliens (1990 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Aliens&amp;quot; (1990 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726519" start="5629" end="5665" title="Aliens (1982 video game)" label="&amp;quot;Aliens&amp;quot; (1982 video game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48814814" start="5799" end="5837" title="Alien (Armenian TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; (Armenian TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870673" start="6056" end="6085" title="Alien (sculpture)" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; (sculpture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q92573" start="6157" end="6200" title="Aliens (Dark Horse Comics line)" label="&amp;quot;Aliens&amp;quot; (Dark Horse Comics line)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23013527" start="6203" end="6237" title="The Aliens (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Aliens&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233757" start="6279" end="6320" title="Aliens (Roseanne)" label="&amp;quot;Aliens&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Roseanne&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726397" start="6368" end="6392" title="Alien (shipping company)" label="Alien (shipping company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726467" start="6414" end="6423" title="Alien Sun" label="Alien Sun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6491" end="6505" title="Thierry Mugler#Fragrances" label="Thierry Mugler"/>
<link wikidata="Q708264" start="6508" end="6522" title="Alian District" label="Alian District"/>
<link wikidata="Q808817" start="6560" end="6566" title="Alians" label="Alians"/>
<link wikidata="Q96102541" start="6587" end="6617" title="Alien Project (disambiguation)" label="Alien Project (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124651205" start="6620" end="6644" title="Alien 4 (disambiguation)" label="Alien 4 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q423082" start="6647" end="6682" title="Alien vs. Predator (disambiguation)" label="Alien vs. Predator (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q411" start="6685" end="6697" title="Astrobiology" label="Astrobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q299003" start="6744" end="6751" title="ATLiens" label="ATLiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q224403" start="6785" end="6810" title="Predator (disambiguation)" label="Predator (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q225344" start="6813" end="6833" title="UFO (disambiguation)" label="UFO (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47245734" start="6836" end="6879" title="Unidentified flying object (disambiguation)" label="Unidentified flying object (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q409974" start="6882" end="6907" title="Outsider (disambiguation)" label="Outsider (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="580" wikidata="Q11063" url="?curid=580" title="Astronomer">
<text>An astronomer is a scientist in the field of astronomy who focuses on a specific question or field outside the scope of Earth. Astronomers observe astronomical objects, such as stars, planets, moons, comets and galaxies – in either observational (by analyzing the data) or theoretical astronomy. Examples of topics or fields astronomers study include planetary science, solar astronomy, the origin or evolution of stars, or the formation of galaxies. A related but distinct subject is physical cosmology, which studies the Universe as a whole.

==Types==
Astronomers typically fall under either of two main types: observational and theoretical. Observational astronomers make direct observations of celestial objects and analyze the data. In contrast, theoretical astronomers create and investigate models of things that cannot be observed. Because it takes millions to billions of years for a system of stars or a galaxy to complete a life cycle, astronomers must observe snapshots of different systems at unique points in their evolution to determine how they form, evolve, and die. They use this data to create models or simulations to theorize how different celestial objects work.

Further subcategories under these two main branches of astronomy include planetary astronomy, astrobiology, stellar astronomy, astrometry, galactic astronomy, extragalactic astronomy, or physical cosmology. Astronomers can also specialize in certain specialties of observational astronomy, such as infrared astronomy, neutrino astronomy, x-ray astronomy, and gravitational-wave astronomy.

== Academic ==

===History===


Historically, astronomy was more concerned with the classification and description of phenomena in the sky, while astrophysics attempted to explain these phenomena and the differences between them using physical laws. Today, that distinction has mostly disappeared and the terms &quot;astronomer&quot; and &quot;astrophysicist&quot; are interchangeable. Professional astronomers are highly educated individuals who typically have a PhD in physics or astronomy and are employed by research institutions or universities. They spend the majority of their time working on research, although they quite often have other duties such as teaching, building instruments, or aiding in the operation of an observatory.

The American Astronomical Society, which is the major organization of professional astronomers in North America, has approximately 8,200 members (as of 2024). This number includes scientists from other fields such as physics, geology, and engineering, whose research interests are closely related to astronomy. The International Astronomical Union comprises about 12,700 members from 92 countries who are involved in astronomical research at the PhD level and beyond (as of 2024).
Contrary to the classical image of an old astronomer peering through a telescope through the dark hours of the night, it is far more common to use a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera to record a long, deep exposure, allowing a more sensitive image to be created because the light is added over time. Before CCDs, photographic plates were a common method of observation. Modern astronomers spend relatively little time at telescopes, usually just a few weeks per year. Analysis of observed phenomena, along with making predictions as to the causes of what they observe, takes the majority of observational astronomers&#x27; time.

===Activities and graduate degree training===
Astronomers who serve as faculty spend much of their time teaching undergraduate and graduate classes. Most universities also have outreach programs, including public telescope time and sometimes planetariums, as a public service to encourage interest in the field.

Those who become astronomers usually have a broad background in physics, mathematics, sciences, and computing in high school. Taking courses that teach how to research, write, and present papers are part of the higher education of an astronomer, while most astronomers attain both a Master&#x27;s degree and eventually a PhD degree in astronomy, physics or astrophysics.

PhD training typically involves 5-6 years of study, including completion of upper-level courses in the core sciences, a competency examination, experience with teaching undergraduates and participating in outreach programs, work on research projects under the student&#x27;s supervising professor, completion of a PhD thesis, and passing a final oral exam. Throughout the PhD training, a successful student is financially supported with a stipend.

== Amateur astronomers ==

While there is a relatively low number of professional astronomers, the field is popular among amateurs. Most cities have amateur astronomy clubs that meet on a regular basis and often host star parties. The Astronomical Society of the Pacific is the largest general astronomical society in the world, comprising both professional and amateur astronomers as well as educators from 70 different nations. 

As with any hobby, most people who practice amateur astronomy may devote a few hours a month to stargazing and reading the latest developments in research. However, amateurs span the range from so-called &quot;armchair astronomers&quot; to people who own science-grade telescopes and instruments with which they are able to make their own discoveries, create astrophotographs, and assist professional astronomers in research.

== See also ==
* List of astronomers
* List of women astronomers
* List of Muslim astronomers
* List of French astronomers
* List of Hungarian astronomers
* List of Russian astronomers and astrophysicists
* List of Slovenian astronomers

== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 

== External links ==
* American Astronomical Society
* European Astronomical Society
* International Astronomical Union
* Astronomical Society of the Pacific
* Space&#x27;s astronomy news</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="3" end="13" title="Astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="19" end="28" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="45" end="54" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="120" end="125" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="147" end="166" title="astronomical object" label="astronomical object"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="177" end="181" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="184" end="190" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="193" end="198" title="natural satellite" label="moons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="200" end="205" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="211" end="219" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q818557" start="232" end="245" title="observational astronomy" label="observational"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635271" start="273" end="294" title="theoretical astronomy" label="theoretical astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104499" start="351" end="368" title="planetary science" label="planetary science"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="370" end="385" title="Sun" label="solar astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="391" end="397" title="Star formation" label="origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6472" start="401" end="419" title="stellar evolution" label="evolution of stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995140" start="428" end="449" title="galaxy formation and evolution" label="formation of galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="485" end="503" title="physical cosmology" label="physical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="523" end="531" title="Universe" label="Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q818557" start="614" end="627" title="observational astronomy" label="observational"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635271" start="632" end="643" title="theoretical astronomy" label="theoretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="683" end="694" title="observation" label="observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="699" end="716" title="Astronomical object" label="celestial objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623243" start="799" end="804" title="Conceptual model" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="1124" end="1134" title="simulation" label="simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465832" start="1230" end="1238" title="branches of science" label="branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q104499" start="1260" end="1279" title="Planetary science" label="planetary astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q411" start="1281" end="1293" title="astrobiology" label="astrobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="1295" end="1312" title="stellar astronomy" label="stellar astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181505" start="1314" end="1324" title="astrometry" label="astrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q58908" start="1326" end="1344" title="galactic astronomy" label="galactic astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q502038" start="1346" end="1369" title="extragalactic astronomy" label="extragalactic astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="1374" end="1392" title="physical cosmology" label="physical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q899970" start="1485" end="1503" title="infrared astronomy" label="infrared astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801478" start="1505" end="1523" title="neutrino astronomy" label="neutrino astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852" start="1525" end="1540" title="x-ray astronomy" label="x-ray astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392871" start="1546" end="1574" title="gravitational-wave astronomy" label="gravitational-wave astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50056" start="1609" end="1621" title="History of astronomy" label="Historically"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582682" start="1661" end="1675" title="classification" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="1695" end="1704" title="phenomena" label="phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="1723" end="1735" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="1812" end="1825" title="Scientific law" label="physical laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="2041" end="2044" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="2048" end="2055" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q463435" start="2322" end="2351" title="American Astronomical Society" label="American Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="2416" end="2429" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="2544" end="2551" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="2557" end="2568" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="2633" end="2665" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="2870" end="2879" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q189880" start="2948" end="2969" title="charge-coupled device" label="charge-coupled device"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="3074" end="3079" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138868" start="3113" end="3132" title="photographic plates" label="photographic plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11640" start="3607" end="3615" title="outreach" label="outreach"/>
<link wikidata="Q148319" start="3672" end="3683" title="planetarium" label="planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3816" end="3827" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="3843" end="3852" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="4026" end="4046" title="Master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="4100" end="4112" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="4429" end="4439" title="Thesis" label="PhD thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099387" start="4461" end="4470" title="oral exam" label="oral exam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968259" start="4554" end="4561" title="stipend" label="stipend"/>
<link wikidata="Q455595" start="4686" end="4694" title="amateurs" label="amateurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q381977" start="4781" end="4793" title="star party" label="star parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q751779" start="4799" end="4834" title="Astronomical Society of the Pacific" label="Astronomical Society of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="5008" end="5013" title="hobby" label="hobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q560575" start="5092" end="5102" title="stargazing" label="stargazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q280855" start="5355" end="5371" title="Astrophotography" label="astrophotographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11073" start="5440" end="5459" title="List of astronomers" label="List of astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243688" start="5462" end="5487" title="List of women astronomers" label="List of women astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255366" start="5490" end="5516" title="List of Muslim astronomers" label="List of Muslim astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q21471156" start="5519" end="5545" title="List of French astronomers" label="List of French astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q928135" start="5548" end="5577" title="List of Hungarian astronomers" label="List of Hungarian astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11793459" start="5580" end="5627" title="List of Russian astronomers and astrophysicists" label="List of Russian astronomers and astrophysicists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597256" start="5630" end="5659" title="List of Slovenian astronomers" label="List of Slovenian astronomers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="586" wikidata="Q8815" url="?curid=586" title="ASCII">
<text>ASCII ( ), an acronym for American Standard Code for Information Interchange, is a character encoding standard for electronic communication. ASCII codes represent text in computers, telecommunications equipment, and other devices. ASCII has just 128 code points, of which only 95 are , which severely limit its scope. The set of available punctuation had significant impact on the syntax of computer languages and text markup. ASCII hugely influenced the design of character sets used by modern computers; for example the first 128 code points of Unicode are the same as ASCII.

The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) prefers the name US-ASCII for this character encoding.

ASCII is one of the IEEE milestones.

==Overview==
ASCII was developed in part from telegraph code. Its first commercial use was in the Teletype Model 33 and the Teletype Model 35 as a seven-bit teleprinter code promoted by Bell data services. Work on the ASCII standard began in May 1961, with the first meeting of the American Standards Association&#x27;s (ASA) (now the American National Standards Institute or ANSI) X3.2 subcommittee. The first edition of the standard was published in 1963, underwent a major revision during 1967, and experienced its most recent update during 1986. Compared to earlier telegraph codes, the proposed Bell code and ASCII were both ordered for more convenient sorting (i.e., alphabetization) of lists and added features for devices other than teleprinters.

The use of ASCII format for Network Interchange was described in 1969. That document was formally elevated to an Internet Standard in 2015.

Originally based on the (modern) English alphabet, ASCII encodes 128 specified characters into seven-bit integers as shown by the ASCII chart in this article. Ninety-five of the encoded characters are printable: these include the digits &quot;0&quot; to &quot;9&quot;, lowercase letters &quot;a&quot; to &quot;z&quot;, uppercase letters &quot;A&quot; to &quot;Z&quot;, and punctuation symbols. In addition, the original ASCII specification included 33 non-printing control codes which originated with s; most of these are now obsolete, although a few are still commonly used, such as the carriage return, line feed, and tab codes.

For example, lowercase &quot;i&quot; would be represented in the ASCII encoding by binary 1101001 = hexadecimal 69 (&quot;i&quot; is the ninth letter) = decimal 105.

Despite being an American standard, ASCII does not have a code point for the cent (¢). It also does not support English terms with diacritical marks such as résumé and jalapeño, or proper nouns with diacritical marks such as Beyoncé (although on certain devices characters could be combined with punctuation such as Tilde (~) and Backtick (`) to approximate such characters.)

==History==

The American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) was developed under the auspices of a committee of the American Standards Association (ASA), called the X3 committee, by its X3.2 (later X3L2) subcommittee, and later by that subcommittee&#x27;s X3.2.4 working group (now INCITS). The ASA later became the United States of America Standards Institute (USASI) and ultimately became the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).

With the other special characters and control codes filled in, ASCII was published as ASA X3.4-1963, leaving 28 code positions without any assigned meaning, reserved for future standardization, and one unassigned control code. There was some debate at the time whether there should be more control characters rather than the lowercase alphabet. The indecision did not last long: during May 1963 the CCITT Working Party on the New Telegraph Alphabet proposed to assign lowercase characters to &quot;sticks&quot; 6 and 7, and International Organization for Standardization TC 97 SC 2 voted during October to incorporate the change into its draft standard. The X3.2.4 task group voted its approval for the change to ASCII at its May 1963 meeting. Locating the lowercase letters in &quot;sticks&quot; 6 and 7 caused the characters to differ in bit pattern from the upper case by a single bit, which simplified case-insensitive character matching and the construction of keyboards and printers.

The X3 committee made other changes, including other new characters (the brace and vertical bar characters), renaming some control characters (SOM became start of header (SOH)) and moving or removing others (RU was removed). ASCII was subsequently updated as USAS X3.4-1967, then USAS X3.4-1968, ANSI X3.4-1977, and finally, ANSI X3.4-1986.

===Revisions===

* ASA X3.4-1963
* ASA X3.4-1965 (approved, but not published, nevertheless used by IBM 2260 &amp; 2265 Display Stations and IBM 2848 Display Control)
* USAS X3.4-1967
* USAS X3.4-1968
* ANSI X3.4-1977
* ANSI X3.4-1986
* ANSI X3.4-1986 (R1992)
* ANSI X3.4-1986 (R1997)
* ANSI INCITS 4-1986 (R2002)
* ANSI INCITS 4-1986 (R2007)
* INCITS 4-1986 (R2012)
* INCITS 4-1986 (R2017)
* INCITS 4-1986 (R2022)

In the X3.15 standard, the X3 committee also addressed how ASCII should be transmitted (least significant bit first) and recorded on perforated tape. They proposed a 9-track standard for magnetic tape and attempted to deal with some punched card formats.
==Design considerations==

===Bit width===
The X3.2 subcommittee designed ASCII based on the earlier teleprinter encoding systems. Like other character encodings, ASCII specifies a correspondence between digital bit patterns and character symbols (i.e. graphemes and control characters). This allows digital devices to communicate with each other and to process, store, and communicate character-oriented information such as written language. Before ASCII was developed, the encodings in use included 26 alphabetic characters, 10 numerical digits, and from 11 to 25 special graphic symbols. To include all these, and control characters compatible with the Comité Consultatif International Téléphonique et Télégraphique (CCITT) International Telegraph Alphabet No. 2 (ITA2) standard of 1932, FIELDATA (1956), and early EBCDIC (1963), more than 64 codes were required for ASCII.

ITA2 was in turn based on Baudot code, the 5-bit telegraph code Émile Baudot invented in 1870 and patented in 1874.

The committee debated the possibility of a shift function (like in ITA2), which would allow more than 64 codes to be represented by a six-bit code. In a shifted code, some character codes determine choices between options for the following character codes. It allows compact encoding, but is less reliable for data transmission, as an error in transmitting the shift code typically makes a long part of the transmission unreadable. The standards committee decided against shifting, and so ASCII required at least a seven-bit code.

The committee considered an eight-bit code, since eight bits (octets) would allow two four-bit patterns to efficiently encode two digits with binary-coded decimal. However, it would require all data transmission to send eight bits when seven could suffice. The committee voted to use a seven-bit code to minimize costs associated with data transmission. Since perforated tape at the time could record eight bits in one position, it also allowed for a parity bit for error checking if desired. Eight-bit machines (with octets as the native data type) that did not use parity checking typically set the eighth bit to 0.

===Internal organization===
The code itself was patterned so that most control codes were together and all graphic codes were together, for ease of identification. The first two so-called &quot;ASCII sticks&quot; (32 positions) were reserved for control characters. The &quot;space&quot; character had to come before graphics to make sorting easier, so it became position 20hex; for the same reason, many special signs commonly used as separators were placed before digits. The committee decided it was important to support uppercase 64-character alphabets, and chose to pattern ASCII so it could be reduced easily to a usable 64-character set of graphic codes, as was done in the DEC SIXBIT code (1963). Lowercase letters were therefore not interleaved with uppercase. To keep options available for lowercase letters and other graphics, the special and numeric codes were arranged before the letters, and the letter &quot;A&quot; was placed in position 41hex to match the draft of the corresponding British standard. The digits 0–9 are prefixed with 011, but the remaining 4 bits correspond to their respective values in binary, making conversion with binary-coded decimal straightforward (for example, 5 in encoded to 011&quot;0101&quot;, where 5 is &quot;0101&quot; in binary).

Many of the non-alphanumeric characters were positioned to correspond to their shifted position on typewriters; an important subtlety is that these were based on &quot;mechanical&quot; typewriters, not &quot;electric&quot; typewriters. Mechanical typewriters followed the &quot;de facto&quot; standard set by the Remington No. 2 (1878), the first typewriter with a shift key, and the shifted values of codice_1 were codice_2 early typewriters omitted &quot;0&quot; and &quot;1&quot;, using &quot;O&quot; (capital letter &quot;o&quot;) and &quot;l&quot; (lowercase letter &quot;L&quot;) instead, but codice_3 and codice_4 pairs became standard once 0 and 1 became common. Thus, in ASCII codice_5 were placed in the second stick, positions 1–5, corresponding to the digits 1–5 in the adjacent stick. The parentheses could not correspond to &quot;9&quot; and &quot;0&quot;, however, because the place corresponding to &quot;0&quot; was taken by the space character. This was accommodated by removing codice_6 (underscore) from &quot;6&quot; and shifting the remaining characters, which corresponded to many European typewriters that placed the parentheses with &quot;8&quot; and &quot;9&quot;. This discrepancy from typewriters led to bit-paired keyboards, notably the Teletype Model 33, which used the left-shifted layout corresponding to ASCII, differently from traditional mechanical typewriters.

Electric typewriters, notably the IBM Selectric (1961), used a somewhat different layout that has become &quot;de facto&quot; standard on computers following the IBM PC (1981), especially Model M (1984) and thus shift values for symbols on modern keyboards do not correspond as closely to the ASCII table as earlier keyboards did. The codice_7 pair also dates to the No. 2, and the codice_8 pairs were used on some keyboards (others, including the No. 2, did not shift codice_9 (comma) or codice_10 (full stop) so they could be used in uppercase without unshifting). However, ASCII split the codice_11 pair (dating to No. 2), and rearranged mathematical symbols (varied conventions, commonly codice_12) to codice_13.

Some then-common typewriter characters were not included, notably codice_14, while codice_15 were included as diacritics for international use, and codice_16 for mathematical use, together with the simple line characters codice_17 (in addition to common codice_18). The &quot;@&quot; symbol was not used in continental Europe and the committee expected it would be replaced by an accented &quot;À&quot; in the French variation, so the &quot;@&quot; was placed in position 40hex, right before the letter A.

The control codes felt essential for data transmission were the start of message (SOM), end of address (EOA), end of message (EOM), end of transmission (EOT), &quot;who are you?&quot; (WRU), &quot;are you?&quot; (RU), a reserved device control (DC0), synchronous idle (SYNC), and acknowledge (ACK). These were positioned to maximize the Hamming distance between their bit patterns.

===Character order===
ASCII-code order is also called &quot;ASCIIbetical&quot; order. Collation of data is sometimes done in this order rather than &quot;standard&quot; alphabetical order (collating sequence). The main deviations in ASCII order are:
* All uppercase come before lowercase letters; for example, &quot;Z&quot; precedes &quot;a&quot;
* Digits and many punctuation marks come before letters

An intermediate order converts uppercase letters to lowercase before comparing ASCII values.

==Character set==


==Character groups==

===Control characters===
ASCII reserves the first 32 code points (numbers 0–31 decimal) and the last one (number 127 decimal) for control characters. These are codes intended to control peripheral devices (such as printers), or to provide meta-information about data streams, such as those stored on magnetic tape. Despite their name, these code points do not represent printable characters (i.e. they are not characters at all, but signals). For debugging purposes, &quot;placeholder&quot; symbols (such as those given in ISO 2047 and its predecessors) are assigned to them.

For example, character 0x0A represents the &quot;line feed&quot; function (which causes a printer to advance its paper), and character 8 represents &quot;backspace&quot;. refers to control characters that do not include carriage return, line feed or white space as non-whitespace control characters. Except for the control characters that prescribe elementary line-oriented formatting, ASCII does not define any mechanism for describing the structure or appearance of text within a document. Other schemes, such as markup languages, address page and document layout and formatting.

The original ASCII standard used only short descriptive phrases for each control character. The ambiguity this caused was sometimes intentional, for example where a character would be used slightly differently on a terminal link than on a data stream, and sometimes accidental, for example the standard is unclear about the meaning of &quot;delete&quot;.

Probably the most influential single device affecting the interpretation of these characters was the Teletype Model 33 ASR, which was a printing terminal with an available paper tape reader/punch option. Paper tape was a very popular medium for long-term program storage until the 1980s, less costly and in some ways less fragile than magnetic tape. In particular, the Teletype Model 33 machine assignments for codes 17 (control-Q, DC1, also known as XON), 19 (control-S, DC3, also known as XOFF), and 127 (delete) became &quot;de facto&quot; standards. The Model 33 was also notable for taking the description of control-G (code 7, BEL, meaning audibly alert the operator) literally, as the unit contained an actual bell which it rang when it received a BEL character. Because the keytop for the O key also showed a left-arrow symbol (from ASCII-1963, which had this character instead of underscore), a noncompliant use of code 15 (control-O, shift in) interpreted as &quot;delete previous character&quot; was also adopted by many early timesharing systems but eventually became neglected.

When a Teletype 33 ASR equipped with the automatic paper tape reader received a control-S (XOFF, an abbreviation for transmit off), it caused the tape reader to stop; receiving control-Q (XON, transmit on) caused the tape reader to resume. This so-called flow control technique became adopted by several early computer operating systems as a &quot;handshaking&quot; signal warning a sender to stop transmission because of impending buffer overflow; it persists to this day in many systems as a manual output control technique. On some systems, control-S retains its meaning, but control-Q is replaced by a second control-S to resume output.

The 33 ASR also could be configured to employ control-R (DC2) and control-T (DC4) to start and stop the tape punch; on some units equipped with this function, the corresponding control character lettering on the keycap above the letter was TAPE and TAPE respectively.

====Delete vs backspace====
The Teletype could not move its typehead backwards, so it did not have a key on its keyboard to send a BS (backspace). Instead, there was a key marked that sent code 127 (DEL). The purpose of this key was to erase mistakes in a manually-input paper tape: the operator had to push a button on the tape punch to back it up, then type the rubout, which punched all holes and replaced the mistake with a character that was intended to be ignored. Teletypes were commonly used with the less-expensive computers from Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC); these systems had to use what keys were available, and thus the DEL character was assigned to erase the previous character. Because of this, DEC video terminals (by default) sent the DEL character for the key marked &quot;Backspace&quot; while the separate key marked &quot;Delete&quot; sent an escape sequence; many other competing terminals sent a BS character for the backspace key.

The early Unix tty drivers, unlike some modern implementations, allowed only one character to be set to erase the previous character in canonical input processing (where a very simple line editor is available); this could be set to BS &quot;or&quot; DEL, but not both, resulting in recurring situations of ambiguity where users had to decide depending on what terminal they were using (shells that allow line editing, such as ksh, bash, and zsh, understand both). The assumption that no key sent a BS character allowed Ctrl+H to be used for other purposes, such as the &quot;help&quot; prefix command in GNU Emacs.

====Escape====
Many more of the control characters have been assigned meanings quite different from their original ones. The &quot;escape&quot; character (ESC, code 27), for example, was intended originally to allow sending of other control characters as literals instead of invoking their meaning, an &quot;escape sequence&quot;. This is the same meaning of &quot;escape&quot; encountered in URL encodings, C language strings, and other systems where certain characters have a reserved meaning. Over time this interpretation has been co-opted and has eventually been changed.

In modern usage, an ESC sent &quot;to&quot; the terminal usually indicates the start of a command sequence, which can be used to address the cursor, scroll a region, set/query various terminal properties, and more. They are usually in the form of a so-called &quot;ANSI escape code&quot; (often starting with a &quot;Control Sequence Introducer&quot;, &quot;CSI&quot;, &quot;&quot;) from ECMA-48 (1972) and its successors. Some escape sequences do not have introducers, like the &quot;Reset to Initial State&quot;, &quot;RIS&quot; command &quot;&quot;.

In contrast, an ESC read &quot;from&quot; the terminal is most often used as an out-of-band character used to terminate an operation or special mode, as in the TECO and vi text editors. In graphical user interface (GUI) and windowing systems, ESC generally causes an application to abort its current operation or to exit (terminate) altogether.

====End of line====
The inherent ambiguity of many control characters, combined with their historical usage, created problems when transferring &quot;plain text&quot; files between systems. The best example of this is the newline problem on various operating systems. Teletype machines required that a line of text be terminated with both &quot;carriage return&quot; (which moves the printhead to the beginning of the line) and &quot;line feed&quot; (which advances the paper one line without moving the printhead). The name &quot;carriage return&quot; comes from the fact that on a manual typewriter the carriage holding the paper moves while the typebars that strike the ribbon remain stationary. The entire carriage had to be pushed (returned) to the right in order to position the paper for the next line.

DEC operating systems (OS/8, RT-11, RSX-11, RSTS, TOPS-10, etc.) used both characters to mark the end of a line so that the console device (originally Teletype machines) would work. By the time so-called &quot;glass TTYs&quot; (later called CRTs or &quot;dumb terminals&quot;) came along, the convention was so well established that backward compatibility necessitated continuing to follow it. When Gary Kildall created CP/M, he was inspired by some of the command line interface conventions used in DEC&#x27;s RT-11 operating system.

Until the introduction of PC DOS in 1981, IBM had no influence in this because their 1970s operating systems used EBCDIC encoding instead of ASCII, and they were oriented toward punch-card input and line printer output on which the concept of &quot;carriage return&quot; was meaningless. IBM&#x27;s PC DOS (also marketed as MS-DOS by Microsoft) inherited the convention by virtue of being loosely based on CP/M, and Windows in turn inherited it from MS-DOS.

Requiring two characters to mark the end of a line introduces unnecessary complexity and ambiguity as to how to interpret each character when encountered by itself. To simplify matters, plain text data streams, including files, on Multics used line feed (LF) alone as a line terminator. The tty driver would handle the LF to CRLF conversion on output so files can be directly printed to terminal, and NL (newline) is often used to refer to CRLF in UNIX documents. Unix and Unix-like systems, and Amiga systems, adopted this convention from Multics. On the other hand, the original Macintosh OS, Apple DOS, and ProDOS used carriage return (CR) alone as a line terminator; however, since Apple later replaced these obsolete operating systems with their Unix-based macOS (formerly named OS X) operating system, they now use line feed (LF) as well. The Radio Shack TRS-80 also used a lone CR to terminate lines.

Computers attached to the ARPANET included machines running operating systems such as TOPS-10 and TENEX using CR-LF line endings; machines running operating systems such as Multics using LF line endings; and machines running operating systems such as OS/360 that represented lines as a character count followed by the characters of the line and which used EBCDIC rather than ASCII encoding. The Telnet protocol defined an ASCII &quot;Network Virtual Terminal&quot; (NVT), so that connections between hosts with different line-ending conventions and character sets could be supported by transmitting a standard text format over the network. Telnet used ASCII along with CR-LF line endings, and software using other conventions would translate between the local conventions and the NVT. The File Transfer Protocol adopted the Telnet protocol, including use of the Network Virtual Terminal, for use when transmitting commands and transferring data in the default ASCII mode. This adds complexity to implementations of those protocols, and to other network protocols, such as those used for E-mail and the World Wide Web, on systems not using the NVT&#x27;s CR-LF line-ending convention.

====End of file/stream====
The PDP-6 monitor, and its PDP-10 successor TOPS-10, used control-Z (SUB) as an end-of-file indication for input from a terminal. Some operating systems such as CP/M tracked file length only in units of disk blocks, and used control-Z to mark the end of the actual text in the file. For these reasons, EOF, or end-of-file, was used colloquially and conventionally as a three-letter acronym for control-Z instead of SUBstitute. The end-of-text character (ETX), also known as control-C, was inappropriate for a variety of reasons, while using control-Z as the control character to end a file is analogous to the letter Z&#x27;s position at the end of the alphabet, and serves as a very convenient mnemonic aid. A historically common and still prevalent convention uses the ETX character convention to interrupt and halt a program via an input data stream, usually from a keyboard.

The Unix terminal driver uses the end-of-transmission character (EOT), also known as control-D, to indicate the end of a data stream.

In the C programming language, and in Unix conventions, the null character is used to terminate text strings; such null-terminated strings can be known in abbreviation as ASCIZ or ASCIIZ, where here Z stands for &quot;zero&quot;.

==Table of codes==
===Control code table===
Other representations might be used by specialist equipment, for example ISO 2047 graphics or hexadecimal numbers.

===Printable character table===

At the time of adoption, the codes 20hex to 7Ehex would cause the printing of a visible character (a glyph), and thus were designated &quot;printable characters&quot;. These codes represent letters, digits, punctuation marks, and a few miscellaneous symbols. There are 95 printable characters in total.

The empty space between words, as produced by the space bar of a keyboard, is character code 20hex. Since the space character is visible in printed text it considered a &quot;printable character&quot;, even though it is unique in having no visible glyph. It is listed in the printable character table, as per the ASCII standard, instead of in the control character table.

Code 7Fhex corresponds to the non-printable &quot;delete&quot; (DEL) control character and is listed in the control character table.

Earlier versions of ASCII used the up arrow instead of the caret (5Ehex) and the left arrow instead of the underscore (5Fhex).
]]
|111 1110 ||style=&quot;background:lightblue;&quot;| 176 || style=&quot;background:#cff;&quot;| 126 ||style=&quot;background:lightblue;&quot;| 7E || ESC || | || ~

==Usage==
ASCII was first used commercially during 1963 as a seven-bit teleprinter code for American Telephone &amp; Telegraph&#x27;s TWX (TeletypeWriter eXchange) network. TWX originally used the earlier five-bit ITA2, which was also used by the competing Telex teleprinter system. Bob Bemer introduced features such as the escape sequence. His British colleague Hugh McGregor Ross helped to popularize this work according to Bemer, &quot;so much so that the code that was to become ASCII was first called the &quot;Bemer–Ross Code&quot; in Europe&quot;. Because of his extensive work on ASCII, Bemer has been called &quot;the father of ASCII&quot;.

On March 11, 1968, US President Lyndon B. Johnson mandated that all computers purchased by the United States Federal Government support ASCII, stating:
I have also approved recommendations of the Secretary of Commerce [Luther H. Hodges] regarding standards for recording the Standard Code for Information Interchange on magnetic tapes and paper tapes when they are used in computer operations.
All computers and related equipment configurations brought into the Federal Government inventory on and after July 1, 1969, must have the capability to use the Standard Code for Information Interchange and the formats prescribed by the magnetic tape and paper tape standards when these media are used.

ASCII was the most common character encoding on the World Wide Web until December 2007, when UTF-8 encoding surpassed it; UTF-8 is backward compatible with ASCII.

==Variants and derivations==
As computer technology spread throughout the world, different standards bodies and corporations developed many variations of ASCII to facilitate the expression of non-English languages that used Roman-based alphabets. One could class some of these variations as &quot;ASCII extensions&quot;, although some misuse that term to represent all variants, including those that do not preserve ASCII&#x27;s character-map in the 7-bit range. Furthermore, the ASCII extensions have also been mislabelled as ASCII.

===7-bit codes===

From early in its development, ASCII was intended to be just one of several national variants of an international character code standard.
Other international standards bodies have ratified character encodings such as ISO 646 (1967) that are identical or nearly identical to ASCII, with extensions for characters outside the English alphabet and symbols used outside the United States, such as the symbol for the United Kingdom&#x27;s pound sterling (£); e.g. with code page 1104. Almost every country needed an adapted version of ASCII, since ASCII suited the needs of only the US and a few other countries. For example, Canada had its own version that supported French characters.

Many other countries developed variants of ASCII to include non-English letters (e.g. é, ñ, ß, Ł), currency symbols (e.g. £, ¥), etc. See also YUSCII (Yugoslavia).

It would share most characters in common, but assign other locally useful characters to several code points reserved for &quot;national use&quot;. However, the four years that elapsed between the publication of ASCII-1963 and ISO&#x27;s first acceptance of an international recommendation during 1967 caused ASCII&#x27;s choices for the national use characters to seem to be &quot;de facto&quot; standards for the world, causing confusion and incompatibility once other countries did begin to make their own assignments to these code points.

ISO/IEC 646, like ASCII, is a 7-bit character set. It does not make any additional codes available, so the same code points encoded different characters in different countries. Escape codes were defined to indicate which national variant applied to a piece of text, but they were rarely used, so it was often impossible to know what variant to work with and, therefore, which character a code represented, and in general, text-processing systems could cope with only one variant anyway.

Because the bracket and brace characters of ASCII were assigned to &quot;national use&quot; code points that were used for accented letters in other national variants of ISO/IEC 646, a German, French, or Swedish, etc. programmer using their national variant of ISO/IEC 646, rather than ASCII, had to write, and thus read, something such as

:codice_19

instead of

:codice_20

C trigraphs were created to solve this problem for ANSI C, although their late introduction and inconsistent implementation in compilers limited their use. Many programmers kept their computers on ASCII, so plain-text in Swedish, German etc. (for example, in e-mail or Usenet) contained &quot;{, }&quot; and similar variants in the middle of words, something those programmers got used to. For example, a Swedish programmer mailing another programmer asking if they should go for lunch, could get &quot;N{ jag har sm|rg}sar&quot; as the answer, which should be &quot;Nä jag har smörgåsar&quot; meaning &quot;No I&#x27;ve got sandwiches&quot;.

In Japan and Korea, still a variation of ASCII is used, in which the backslash (5C hex) is rendered as ¥ (a Yen sign, in Japan) or ₩ (a Won sign, in Korea). This means that, for example, the file path C:\Users\Smith is shown as C:¥Users¥Smith (in Japan) or C:₩Users₩Smith (in Korea).

In Europe, teletext character sets, which are variants of ASCII, are used for broadcast TV subtitles, defined by World System Teletext and broadcast using the DVB-TXT standard for embedding teletext into DVB transmissions. In the case that the subtitles were initially authored for teletext and converted, the derived subtitle formats are constrained to the same character sets.

===8-bit codes===
Eventually, as 8-, 16-, and 32-bit (and later 64-bit) computers began to replace 12-, 18-, and 36-bit computers as the norm, it became common to use an 8-bit byte to store each character in memory, providing an opportunity for extended, 8-bit relatives of ASCII. In most cases these developed as true extensions of ASCII, leaving the original character-mapping intact, but adding additional character definitions after the first 128 (i.e., 7-bit) characters. ASCII itself remained a seven-bit code: the term &quot;extended ASCII&quot; has no official status.

For some countries, 8-bit extensions of ASCII were developed that included support for characters used in local languages; for example, ISCII for India and VISCII for Vietnam. Kaypro CP/M computers used the &quot;upper&quot; 128 characters for the Greek alphabet.

Even for markets where it was not necessary to add many characters to support additional languages, manufacturers of early home computer systems often developed their own 8-bit extensions of ASCII to include additional characters, such as box-drawing characters, semigraphics, and video game sprites. Often, these additions also replaced control characters (index 0 to 31, as well as index 127) with even more platform-specific extensions. In other cases, the extra bit was used for some other purpose, such as toggling inverse video; this approach was used by ATASCII, an extension of ASCII developed by Atari.

Most ASCII extensions are based on ASCII-1967 (the current standard), but some extensions are instead based on the earlier ASCII-1963. For example, PETSCII, which was developed by Commodore International for their 8-bit systems, is based on ASCII-1963. Likewise, many Sharp MZ character sets are based on ASCII-1963.

IBM defined code page 437 for the IBM PC, replacing the control characters with graphic symbols such as smiley faces, and mapping additional graphic characters to the upper 128 positions. Digital Equipment Corporation developed the Multinational Character Set (DEC-MCS) for use in the popular VT220 terminal as one of the first extensions designed more for international languages than for block graphics. Apple defined Mac OS Roman for the Macintosh and Adobe defined the PostScript Standard Encoding for PostScript; both sets contained &quot;international&quot; letters, typographic symbols and punctuation marks instead of graphics, more like modern character sets.

The ISO/IEC 8859 standard (derived from the DEC-MCS) provided a standard that most systems copied (or at least were based on, when not copied exactly). A popular further extension designed by Microsoft, Windows-1252 (often mislabeled as ISO-8859-1), added the typographic punctuation marks needed for traditional text printing. ISO-8859-1, Windows-1252, and the original 7-bit ASCII were the most common character encoding methods on the World Wide Web until 2008, when UTF-8 overtook them.

ISO/IEC 4873 introduced 32 additional control codes defined in the 80–9F hexadecimal range, as part of extending the 7-bit ASCII encoding to become an 8-bit system.

===Unicode===

Unicode and the ISO/IEC 10646 Universal Character Set (UCS) have a much wider array of characters and their various encoding forms have begun to supplant ISO/IEC 8859 and ASCII rapidly in many environments. While ASCII is limited to 128 characters, Unicode and the UCS support more characters by separating the concepts of unique identification (using natural numbers called &quot;code points&quot;) and encoding (to 8-, 16-, or 32-bit binary formats, called UTF-8, UTF-16, and UTF-32, respectively).

ASCII was incorporated into the Unicode (1991) character set as the first 128 symbols, so the 7-bit ASCII characters have the same numeric codes in both sets. This allows UTF-8 to be backward compatible with 7-bit ASCII, as a UTF-8 file containing only ASCII characters is identical to an ASCII file containing the same sequence of characters. Even more importantly, forward compatibility is ensured as software that recognizes only 7-bit ASCII characters as special and does not alter bytes with the highest bit set (as is often done to support 8-bit ASCII extensions such as ISO-8859-1) will preserve UTF-8 data unchanged.

==See also==

* 3568 ASCII – an asteroid named after the character encoding
* 
* 
* Basic Latin (Unicode block) – ASCII as a subset of Unicode
* HTML decimal character rendering
* Jargon File – a glossary of computer programmer slang which includes a list of common slang names for ASCII characters
* List of computer character sets
* List of Unicode characters
==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* from:
** 
* (facsimile, not machine readable)
* 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="0" end="5" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="26" end="76" title="ASCII" label="American Standard Code for Information Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q184759" start="83" end="101" title="character encoding" label="character encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780509" start="182" end="210" title="telecommunications equipment" label="telecommunications equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105784" start="250" end="260" title="code point" label="code point"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="547" end="554" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q242540" start="583" end="618" title="Internet Assigned Numbers Authority" label="Internet Assigned Numbers Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="643" end="651" title="ASCII" label="US-ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q130851148" start="702" end="717" title="List of IEEE Milestones" label="IEEE milestones"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141351" start="766" end="780" title="telegraph code" label="telegraph code"/>
<link wikidata="Q297987" start="818" end="835" title="Teletype Model 33" label="Teletype Model 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="873" end="876" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="877" end="888" title="teleprinter" label="teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="1055" end="1092" title="American National Standards Institute" label="American National Standards Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q754673" start="1650" end="1666" title="English alphabet" label="English alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q32483" start="1696" end="1706" title="character (computing)" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q82622" start="1990" end="2008" title="punctuation symbol" label="punctuation symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q617945" start="2082" end="2094" title="control code" label="control code"/>
<link wikidata="Q283976" start="2205" end="2220" title="carriage return" label="carriage return"/>
<link wikidata="Q184914" start="2222" end="2231" title="line feed" label="line feed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2237" end="2240" title="Tab key#Tab characters" label="tab"/>
<link wikidata="Q9893" start="2278" end="2279" title="i" label="i"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="2332" end="2338" title="binary number" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="2349" end="2360" title="hexadecimal" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="2402" end="2409" title="decimal" label="decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q58093" start="2493" end="2497" title="Cent (currency)" label="cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378673" start="2528" end="2564" title="English terms with diacritical marks" label="English terms with diacritical marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q950511" start="2573" end="2579" title="résumé" label="résumé"/>
<link wikidata="Q504133" start="2584" end="2592" title="jalapeño" label="jalapeño"/>
<link wikidata="Q147276" start="2597" end="2609" title="proper nouns" label="proper nouns"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="2641" end="2648" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q11167" start="2732" end="2737" title="Tilde" label="Tilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q14594695" start="2746" end="2754" title="Backtick" label="Backtick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426611" start="3090" end="3096" title="INCITS" label="INCITS"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="3203" end="3240" title="American National Standards Institute" label="American National Standards Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="3774" end="3820" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q257869" start="4156" end="4172" title="case-insensitive" label="case-insensitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q174565" start="4314" end="4319" title="brace (punctuation)" label="brace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132051" start="4324" end="4336" title="vertical bar" label="vertical bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968599" start="4683" end="4691" title="IBM 2260" label="IBM 2260"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968599" start="4698" end="4702" title="IBM 2265" label="2265"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968599" start="4724" end="4732" title="IBM 2848" label="IBM 2848"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885225" start="5087" end="5108" title="least significant bit" label="least significant bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032660" start="5165" end="5172" title="9-track" label="9-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="5232" end="5244" title="punched card" label="punched card"/>
<link wikidata="Q184759" start="5396" end="5414" title="character encoding" label="character encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q32483" start="5483" end="5492" title="character (computing)" label="character"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545446" start="5507" end="5515" title="grapheme" label="grapheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q617945" start="5521" end="5538" title="control character" label="control character"/>
<link wikidata="Q173285" start="5554" end="5561" title="Digital data" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q754673" start="5758" end="5768" title="English alphabet" label="alphabetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82990" start="5784" end="5799" title="numerical digit" label="numerical digit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007363" start="5910" end="5972" title="CCITT" label="Comité Consultatif International Téléphonique et Télégraphique"/>
<link wikidata="Q753170" start="5981" end="6019" title="International Telegraph Alphabet No. 2" label="International Telegraph Alphabet No. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411578" start="6045" end="6053" title="FIELDATA" label="FIELDATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q627945" start="6072" end="6078" title="EBCDIC" label="EBCDIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q753170" start="6158" end="6169" title="Baudot code" label="Baudot code"/>
<link wikidata="Q827156" start="6292" end="6297" title="Shift code" label="shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q753170" start="6316" end="6320" title="ITA2" label="ITA2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485669" start="6383" end="6395" title="six-bit character code" label="six-bit code"/>
<link wikidata="Q389772" start="6559" end="6576" title="data transmission" label="data transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q851872" start="6843" end="6848" title="octet (computing)" label="octet"/>
<link wikidata="Q276582" start="6923" end="6943" title="binary-coded decimal" label="binary-coded decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q625502" start="7232" end="7242" title="parity bit" label="parity bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="7247" end="7261" title="error checking" label="error checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="7274" end="7283" title="8-bit computing" label="Eight-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q380933" start="7670" end="7697" title="Space (punctuation)" label="&amp;quot;space&amp;quot; character"/>
<link wikidata="Q181593" start="7734" end="7741" title="sorting algorithm" label="sorting"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="7774" end="7777" title="hexadecimal" label="hex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485669" start="7934" end="7956" title="sixbit code pages" label="64-character alphabets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485669" start="8081" end="8091" title="DEC SIXBIT" label="DEC SIXBIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="8105" end="8114" title="Lower case" label="Lowercase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="8159" end="8168" title="uppercase" label="uppercase"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="8356" end="8359" title="hexadecimal" label="hex"/>
<link wikidata="Q740943" start="8474" end="8480" title="Nibble" label="4 bits"/>
<link wikidata="Q276582" start="8553" end="8573" title="binary-coded decimal" label="binary-coded decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q385853" start="8954" end="8983" title="de facto standard" label="&amp;quot;de facto&amp;quot; standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064618" start="8995" end="9010" title="Remington No. 2" label="Remington No. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149153" start="9914" end="9933" title="bit-paired keyboard" label="bit-paired keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q297987" start="9948" end="9965" title="Teletype Model 33" label="Teletype Model 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q429066" start="10114" end="10127" title="IBM Selectric" label="IBM Selectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="10242" end="10248" title="IBM PC" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132822" start="10268" end="10275" title="Model M" label="Model M"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="11272" end="11275" title="hexadecimal" label="hex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340231" start="11415" end="11429" title="end of message" label="end of message"/>
<link wikidata="Q272172" start="11642" end="11658" title="Hamming distance" label="Hamming distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953108" start="11774" end="11783" title="Collation" label="Collation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953108" start="11877" end="11895" title="collating sequence" label="collating sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105784" start="12281" end="12291" title="code point" label="code point"/>
<link wikidata="Q617945" start="12358" end="12375" title="control character" label="control character"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="12414" end="12431" title="peripheral device" label="peripheral device"/>
<link wikidata="Q82" start="12442" end="12450" title="computer printer" label="printers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="12467" end="12483" title="Metadata" label="meta-information"/>
<link wikidata="Q14925018" start="12751" end="12759" title="ISO 2047" label="ISO 2047"/>
<link wikidata="Q798515" start="12959" end="12968" title="backspace" label="backspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q591615" start="13055" end="13066" title="Whitespace (computer science)" label="white space"/>
<link wikidata="Q37045" start="13320" end="13335" title="markup language" label="markup language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172540" start="13627" end="13638" title="data stream" label="data stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q297987" start="13845" end="13862" title="Teletype Model 33" label="Teletype Model 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241" start="13916" end="13926" title="punched tape" label="paper tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339493" start="14251" end="14257" title="Delete key" label="delete"/>
<link wikidata="Q11199" start="14633" end="14643" title="underscore" label="underscore"/>
<link wikidata="Q612457" start="15091" end="15103" title="Flow control (data)" label="flow control"/>
<link wikidata="Q19423" start="15268" end="15283" title="buffer overflow" label="buffer overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="16286" end="16315" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366300" start="16618" end="16633" title="escape sequence" label="escape sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109" start="17096" end="17102" title="Shell (computing)" label="shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q204222" start="17136" end="17139" title="KornShell" label="ksh"/>
<link wikidata="Q189248" start="17141" end="17145" title="Bash (Unix shell)" label="bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q227308" start="17151" end="17154" title="Z shell" label="zsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252773" start="17314" end="17323" title="GNU Emacs" label="GNU Emacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="17734" end="17744" title="C (programming language)" label="C language"/>
<link wikidata="Q760000" start="18169" end="18185" title="ANSI escape code" label="ANSI escape code"/>
<link wikidata="Q760000" start="18221" end="18248" title="Control Sequence Introducer" label="Control Sequence Introducer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146123" start="18538" end="18549" title="out-of-band data" label="out-of-band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547448" start="18618" end="18622" title="Text Editor and Corrector" label="TECO"/>
<link wikidata="Q214743" start="18627" end="18629" title="Vi (text editor)" label="vi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131212" start="18630" end="18641" title="text editor" label="text editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="18647" end="18671" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q835016" start="18682" end="18691" title="window (computing)" label="windowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487968" start="18774" end="18778" title="exit (system call)" label="exit"/>
<link wikidata="Q184914" start="19026" end="19033" title="newline" label="newline"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="19053" end="19069" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="19394" end="19404" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072964" start="19638" end="19642" title="OS/8" label="OS/8"/>
<link wikidata="Q305216" start="19644" end="19649" title="RT-11" label="RT-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637948" start="19651" end="19657" title="RSX-11" label="RSX-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366908" start="19659" end="19663" title="RSTS/E" label="RSTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670222" start="19665" end="19672" title="TOPS-10" label="TOPS-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="19948" end="19970" title="backward compatibility" label="backward compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q92627" start="20014" end="20026" title="Gary Kildall" label="Gary Kildall"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="20035" end="20039" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="20193" end="20196" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="20475" end="20481" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="20567" end="20574" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145976" start="20796" end="20806" title="plain text" label="plain text"/>
<link wikidata="Q739186" start="20841" end="20848" title="Multics" label="Multics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="21058" end="21062" title="UNIX" label="UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="21074" end="21078" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="21083" end="21092" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="21106" end="21111" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q43627" start="21191" end="21203" title="Macintosh OS" label="Macintosh OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q621234" start="21205" end="21214" title="Apple DOS" label="Apple DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q621328" start="21220" end="21226" title="ProDOS" label="ProDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="21372" end="21377" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q610305" start="21471" end="21477" title="TRS-80" label="TRS-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="21545" end="21552" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992529" start="21617" end="21622" title="TENEX (operating system)" label="TENEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690495" start="21770" end="21776" title="OS/360" label="OS/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q160470" start="21914" end="21920" title="Telnet" label="Telnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="22308" end="22330" title="File Transfer Protocol" label="File Transfer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148480" start="23041" end="23052" title="end-of-file" label="end-of-file"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257438" start="23100" end="23120" title="three-letter acronym" label="three-letter acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375769" start="23185" end="23188" title="End-of-text character" label="ETX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165802" start="23205" end="23214" title="control-C" label="control-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="23426" end="23438" title="Mnemonic device" label="mnemonic aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658211" start="23676" end="23679" title="End-of-Transmission character" label="EOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="23753" end="23775" title="C programming language" label="C programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q861529" start="23806" end="23820" title="null character" label="null character"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="23847" end="23854" title="string (computer science)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q9357437" start="23861" end="23883" title="null-terminated string" label="null-terminated string"/>
<link wikidata="Q14925018" start="24094" end="24102" title="ISO 2047" label="ISO 2047"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="24115" end="24126" title="hexadecimal" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82622" start="24377" end="24393" title="punctuation mark" label="punctuation mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646412" start="25040" end="25045" title="caret (computing)" label="caret"/>
<link wikidata="Q998991" start="25260" end="25263" title="Escape character" label="ESC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132051" start="25267" end="25268" title="Vertical bar" label="|"/>
<link wikidata="Q11167" start="25272" end="25273" title="Tilde" label="~"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="25367" end="25401" title="American Telephone &amp;amp; Telegraph" label="American Telephone &amp;amp; Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q753170" start="25489" end="25493" title="ITA2" label="ITA2"/>
<link wikidata="Q66175" start="25532" end="25537" title="Telex" label="Telex"/>
<link wikidata="Q92953" start="25558" end="25567" title="Robert William Bemer" label="Bob Bemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q998991" start="25600" end="25615" title="Escape character" label="escape sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142291" start="25639" end="25657" title="Hugh McGregor Ross" label="Hugh McGregor Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="25959" end="25976" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="26022" end="26054" title="United States Federal Government" label="United States Federal Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003296" start="26123" end="26144" title="Secretary of Commerce" label="Secretary of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26145" end="26162" title="[Luther H. Hodges" label="[Luther H. Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="26676" end="26690" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="26717" end="26722" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="26755" end="26774" title="backward compatible" label="backward compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q369577" start="26879" end="26895" title="Standardization" label="standards bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610482" start="27085" end="27100" title="ASCII extension" label="ASCII extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q764925" start="27560" end="27567" title="ISO 646" label="ISO 646"/>
<link wikidata="Q9779" start="27675" end="27683" title="alphabet" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="27777" end="27791" title="pound sterling" label="pound sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591647" start="27807" end="27821" title="code page 1104" label="code page 1104"/>
<link wikidata="Q9995" start="28112" end="28113" title="é" label="é"/>
<link wikidata="Q476" start="28115" end="28116" title="ñ" label="ñ"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="28118" end="28119" title="ß" label="ß"/>
<link wikidata="Q345137" start="28121" end="28122" title="Ł" label="Ł"/>
<link wikidata="Q249306" start="28148" end="28149" title="£" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q249321" start="28151" end="28152" title="¥" label="¥"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053427" start="28169" end="28175" title="YUSCII" label="YUSCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105784" start="28287" end="28297" title="code point" label="code point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454322" start="29599" end="29609" title="C trigraph" label="C trigraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931402" start="29650" end="29656" title="ANSI C" label="ANSI C"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="29868" end="29874" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11185" start="30312" end="30321" title="backslash" label="backslash"/>
<link wikidata="Q249321" start="30351" end="30359" title="Yen sign" label="Yen sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q426520" start="30379" end="30387" title="Won sign" label="Won sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q22937538" start="30539" end="30561" title="teletext character set" label="teletext character set"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036281" start="30641" end="30662" title="World System Teletext" label="World System Teletext"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="30945" end="30948" title="16-bit computing" label="16-"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="30954" end="30960" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q252132" start="30972" end="30978" title="64-bit computing" label="64-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271420" start="31007" end="31010" title="12-bit computing" label="12-"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271413" start="31012" end="31015" title="18-bit computing" label="18-"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271378" start="31021" end="31027" title="36-bit computing" label="36-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661279" start="31622" end="31627" title="ISCII" label="ISCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811300" start="31642" end="31648" title="VISCII" label="VISCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q914171" start="31662" end="31668" title="Kaypro" label="Kaypro"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="31669" end="31673" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787014" start="31990" end="32012" title="box-drawing characters" label="box-drawing characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937822" start="32014" end="32026" title="semigraphics" label="semigraphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="32032" end="32050" title="Sprite (computer graphics)" label="video game sprites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877862" start="32271" end="32284" title="inverse video" label="inverse video"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183065" start="32312" end="32319" title="ATASCII" label="ATASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q207922" start="32356" end="32361" title="Atari" label="Atari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022979" start="32512" end="32519" title="PETSCII" label="PETSCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q208305" start="32544" end="32567" title="Commodore International" label="Commodore International"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="32578" end="32583" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q59340841" start="32632" end="32654" title="Sharp MZ character set" label="Sharp MZ character set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105757" start="32694" end="32707" title="code page 437" label="code page 437"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="32716" end="32722" title="IBM PC" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q31963" start="32786" end="32798" title="Emoticon" label="smiley faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="32870" end="32899" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152919" start="32914" end="32941" title="Multinational Character Set" label="Multinational Character Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553018" start="32975" end="32980" title="VT220" label="VT220"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="32981" end="32989" title="computer terminal" label="terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="33088" end="33093" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751276" start="33102" end="33114" title="Mac OS Roman" label="Mac OS Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11463" start="33137" end="33142" title="Adobe Inc." label="Adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q30591563" start="33155" end="33183" title="PostScript Standard Encoding" label="PostScript Standard Encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="33188" end="33198" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q221738" start="33356" end="33368" title="ISO/IEC 8859" label="ISO/IEC 8859"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736131" start="33555" end="33567" title="Windows-1252" label="Windows-1252"/>
<link wikidata="Q935289" start="33589" end="33599" title="ISO-8859-1" label="ISO-8859-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="33790" end="33804" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="33822" end="33827" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197730" start="33844" end="33856" title="ISO/IEC 4873" label="ISO/IEC 4873"/>
<link wikidata="Q82828" start="33917" end="33928" title="hexadecimal" label="hexadecimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="34025" end="34032" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q777955" start="34055" end="34078" title="Universal Character Set" label="Universal Character Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="34377" end="34391" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="34484" end="34489" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q740701" start="34491" end="34497" title="UTF-16" label="UTF-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q736068" start="34503" end="34509" title="UTF-32" label="UTF-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="34698" end="34703" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="34710" end="34729" title="Backward compatibility" label="backward compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192648" start="34894" end="34915" title="forward compatibility" label="forward compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q151842" start="35169" end="35179" title="3568 ASCII" label="3568 ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493832" start="35237" end="35264" title="Basic Latin (Unicode block)" label="Basic Latin (Unicode block)"/>
<link wikidata="Q184756" start="35298" end="35330" title="HTML decimal character rendering" label="HTML decimal character rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535068" start="35333" end="35344" title="Jargon File" label="Jargon File"/>
<link wikidata="Q25305358" start="35454" end="35485" title="List of computer character sets" label="List of computer character sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081188" start="35488" end="35514" title="List of Unicode characters" label="List of Unicode characters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590" wikidata="Q218287" url="?curid=590" title="Austin">
<text>Austin refers to:

==Common meanings==
* Austin, Texas, United States, a city
* Austin (given name), a list of people and fictional characters
* Austin (surname), a list of people and fictional characters
* Austin Motor Company, a British car manufacturer

==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Austin&quot; (album), by Post Malone, 2023
* &quot;Austin&quot; (Blake Shelton song), 2001
* &quot;Austin&quot; (Dasha song), 2023
* &quot;Austin&quot; (TV series), a 2024 Australian comedy series

==Businesses and organisations==
===Businesses===
* American Austin Car Company, short-lived American automobile maker
* Austin Automobile Company, short-lived American automobile company
* Austin Motor Company, British car manufacturer
** &quot;Austin&quot; magazine, produced for the Austin Motor Company by in-house Nuffield Press
* Austin Airways, a former Canadian passenger airline and freight carrier
* Austin cookies and crackers, a Keebler Company brand

=== Education ===
* Austin College, in Sherman, Texas, U.S.
* Austin High School (disambiguation), several schools 
* University of Austin, in Austin, Texas, U.S.
* University of Texas at Austin, in Austin, Texas, U.S.

==Military==
* USS &quot;Austin&quot;, the name of three ships
* &quot;Austin&quot;-class amphibious transport dock, a former US Navy ship class
* Austin Armoured Car, a British First World War armoured car

==People==
* Austin (given name), including a list of people with the name
* Austin (surname), including a list of people with the name
* Augustine of Hippo (354–430), also known as St. Austin, Christian theologian and saint

==Places==
===Canada===
* Austin, Manitoba, an unincorporated community
* Austin, Ontario, a neighbourhood
* Austin, Quebec, a municipality
* Austin Island, Nunavut

===United States===
* Austin, Arkansas, a city
* Austin, Colorado, an unincorporated community
* Austin, Chicago, Illinois, a community area
* Austin, Indiana, a city
* Austin, Kentucky
* Austin, Minnesota, a city
* Austin, Missouri, an unincorporated community
* Austin, Nevada, an unincorporated town and census-designated place
* Austin, Ohio, an unincorporated community
* Austin, Oregon, an unincorporated community considered a ghost town
* Austin, Pennsylvania, a borough
* Austin, Texas, the capital city of Texas
* Austin County, Texas
* Austin Lake, Michigan
* Lake Austin, a reservoir in Austin, Texas
* Austin Township (disambiguation)

===Elsewhere===
* Austin, Western Australia, Australia, a ghost town
* Mount Austin (Antarctica), Palmer Land
* Austin Peak, part of the Mirabito Range in Victoria Land, Antarctica
* Mount Austin, Hong Kong, a hill also known as Victoria Peak
==Sports==
* Austin FC, an American soccer club
** Austin FC II, reserve team for Austin FC
* Austin Spurs, an American basketball team
* Austin Bruins, an American ice hockey team

==Other uses==
* &quot;Austin&quot; (building), a building designed by artist Ellsworth Kelly in Austin, Texas 
* Austin, an adjective in England for Augustinian friars

==See also==

* Austin station (disambiguation)
* Austins (disambiguation)
* Austen (disambiguation)
* Austin Airport (disambiguation)
* Austin Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
* Austin Road, Hong Kong</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q218287" start="0" end="6" title="Austin" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="41" end="54" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q19816555" start="80" end="99" title="Austin (given name)" label="Austin (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q780883" start="145" end="161" title="Austin (surname)" label="Austin (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q781156" start="207" end="227" title="Austin Motor Company" label="Austin Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q118414972" start="286" end="312" title="Austin (album)" label="&amp;quot;Austin&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822945" start="337" end="376" title="Austin (Blake Shelton song)" label="&amp;quot;Austin&amp;quot; (Blake Shelton song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q125371893" start="385" end="416" title="Austin (Dasha song)" label="&amp;quot;Austin&amp;quot; (Dasha song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q126652890" start="425" end="455" title="Austin (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Austin&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q463449" start="542" end="569" title="American Austin Car Company" label="American Austin Car Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822978" start="611" end="636" title="Austin Automobile Company" label="Austin Automobile Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q781156" start="680" end="700" title="Austin Motor Company" label="Austin Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="809" end="823" title="Nuffield Press#Publications" label="Nuffield Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822957" start="826" end="840" title="Austin Airways" label="Austin Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382670" start="931" end="946" title="Keebler Company" label="Keebler Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823037" start="974" end="988" title="Austin College" label="Austin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823121" start="1016" end="1051" title="Austin High School (disambiguation)" label="Austin High School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q109539822" start="1072" end="1092" title="University of Austin" label="University of Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="1119" end="1148" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867511" start="1189" end="1211" title="USS Austin" label="USS &amp;quot;Austin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q780866" start="1239" end="1289" title="Austin-class amphibious transport dock" label="&amp;quot;Austin&amp;quot;-class amphibious transport dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q780878" start="1321" end="1340" title="Austin Armoured Car" label="Austin Armoured Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q19816555" start="1395" end="1414" title="Austin (given name)" label="Austin (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q780883" start="1459" end="1475" title="Austin (surname)" label="Austin (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="1520" end="1538" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246825" start="1634" end="1650" title="Austin, Manitoba" label="Austin, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028244" start="1682" end="1697" title="Austin, Ontario" label="Austin, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1802718" start="1717" end="1731" title="Austin, Quebec" label="Austin, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823144" start="1750" end="1763" title="Austin Island" label="Austin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q80158" start="1796" end="1812" title="Austin, Arkansas" label="Austin, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822929" start="1823" end="1839" title="Austin, Colorado" label="Austin, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872106" start="1871" end="1886" title="Austin, Chicago" label="Austin, Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810383" start="1917" end="1932" title="Austin, Indiana" label="Austin, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822923" start="1943" end="1959" title="Austin, Kentucky" label="Austin, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q780944" start="1962" end="1979" title="Austin, Minnesota" label="Austin, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q27984326" start="1990" end="2006" title="Austin, Missouri" label="Austin, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q780913" start="2038" end="2052" title="Austin, Nevada" label="Austin, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q28153627" start="2107" end="2119" title="Austin, Ohio" label="Austin, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474176" start="2151" end="2165" title="Austin, Oregon" label="Austin, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131435" start="2221" end="2241" title="Austin, Pennsylvania" label="Austin, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="2255" end="2268" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q108386" start="2298" end="2318" title="Austin County, Texas" label="Austin County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823161" start="2321" end="2332" title="Austin Lake" label="Austin Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128082" start="2345" end="2356" title="Lake Austin" label="Lake Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q781178" start="2389" end="2421" title="Austin Township (disambiguation)" label="Austin Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822932" start="2441" end="2466" title="Austin, Western Australia" label="Austin, Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q278342" start="2494" end="2519" title="Mount Austin (Antarctica)" label="Mount Austin (Antarctica)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872336" start="2535" end="2546" title="Austin Peak" label="Austin Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q17541" start="2652" end="2665" title="Victoria Peak" label="Victoria Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q60643348" start="2679" end="2688" title="Austin FC" label="Austin FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q115907719" start="2717" end="2729" title="Austin FC II" label="Austin FC II"/>
<link wikidata="Q781184" start="2760" end="2772" title="Austin Spurs" label="Austin Spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823002" start="2804" end="2817" title="Austin Bruins" label="Austin Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073172" start="2865" end="2894" title="Austin (building)" label="&amp;quot;Austin&amp;quot; (building)"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="2998" end="3009" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823296" start="3034" end="3065" title="Austin station (disambiguation)" label="Austin station (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q92783480" start="3068" end="3092" title="Austins (disambiguation)" label="Austins (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q422803" start="3095" end="3118" title="Austen (disambiguation)" label="Austen (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822958" start="3121" end="3152" title="Austin Airport (disambiguation)" label="Austin Airport (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823132" start="3155" end="3170" title="Austin Hospital" label="Austin Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823264" start="3205" end="3216" title="Austin Road" label="Austin Road"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="593" wikidata="Q11425" url="?curid=593" title="Animation">
<text>Animation is a filmmaking technique whereby still images are manipulated to create moving images. In traditional animation, images are drawn or painted by hand on transparent celluloid sheets to be photographed and exhibited on film. Animation has been recognized as an artistic medium, specifically within the entertainment industry. Many animations are either traditional animations or computer animations made with computer-generated imagery (CGI). Stop motion animation, in particular claymation, has continued to exist alongside these other forms.

Animation is contrasted with live action, although the two do not exist in isolation. Many moviemakers have produced films that are a hybrid of the two. As CGI increasingly approximates photographic imagery, filmmakers can easily composite 3D animations into their film rather than using practical effects for showy visual effects (VFX).

== General overview ==

Computer animation can be very detailed 3D animation, while 2D computer animation (which may have the look of traditional animation) can be used for stylistic reasons, low bandwidth, or faster real-time renderings. Other common animation methods apply a stop motion technique to two- and three-dimensional objects like paper cutouts, puppets, or clay figures.

An animated cartoon or simply cartoon is an animated film, usually short, featuring an exaggerated visual style. The style takes inspiration from comic strips, gag cartoons, and other non-animated or still cartoons. It often features anthropomorphic animals, superheroes, or the adventures of human protagonists. Especially with animals that form a natural predator/prey relationship (e.g. cats and mice, coyotes and birds), the action often centers on violent pratfalls such as falls, collisions, and explosions that would be lethal in real life as well. 
During in the 1980s, &quot;cartoon&quot; was shortened to toon, referring to characters in animated productions. This term was first popularized in 1988 by the combined live-action/animated film &quot;Who Framed Roger Rabbit&quot;, which introduced ToonTown, a world inhabited by animated characters, followed in 1990 by the animated TV series &quot;Tiny Toon Adventures&quot;, which embraced the classic cartoon spirit with a new generation of characters.

The illusion of animation—as in motion pictures in general—has traditionally been attributed to the persistence of vision and later to the phi phenomenon and beta movement, but the exact neurological causes are still uncertain. The illusion of motion caused by a rapid succession of images that minimally differ from each other, with unnoticeable interruptions, is a stroboscopic effect. While animators traditionally used to draw each part of the movements and changes of figures on transparent cels that could be moved over a separate background, computer animation is usually based on programming paths between key frames to maneuver digitally created figures throughout a digitally created environment.

Analog mechanical animation media that rely on the rapid display of sequential images include the phenakistiscope, zoetrope, flip book, praxinoscope, and film. Television and video are popular electronic animation media that originally were analog and now operate digitally. For display on computers, technology such as the animated GIF and Flash animation were developed.

In addition to short films, feature films, television series, animated GIFs, and other media dedicated to the display of moving images, animation is also prevalent in video games, motion graphics, user interfaces, and visual effects.

The physical movement of image parts through simple mechanics—for instance, moving images in magic lantern shows—can also be considered animation. The mechanical manipulation of three-dimensional puppets and objects to emulate living beings has a very long history in automata. Electronic automata were popularized by Disney as animatronics.

==Etymology==
The word &quot;animation&quot; comes to the Latin word &quot;animātiō&quot;, meaning &#x27;bestowing of life&#x27;. The earlier meaning of the English word is &#x27;liveliness&#x27; and has been in use much longer than the meaning of &#x27;moving image medium&#x27;.

==History==

===Before cinematography===

Long before modern animation began, audiences around the world were captivated by the magic of moving characters. For centuries, master artists and craftsmen have brought puppets, automatons, shadow puppets, and fantastical lanterns to life, inspiring the imagination through physically manipulated wonders.

In 1833, the stroboscopic disc (better known as the phenakistiscope) introduced the principle of modern animation, which would also be applied in the zoetrope (introduced in 1866), the flip book (1868), the praxinoscope (1877) and film.

===Silent era===
When cinematography eventually broke through in the 1890s, the wonder of the realistic details in the new medium was seen as its biggest accomplishment. It took years before animation found its way to the cinemas. The successful short &quot;The Haunted Hotel&quot; (1907) by J. Stuart Blackton popularized stop motion and reportedly inspired Émile Cohl to create &quot;Fantasmagorie&quot; (1908), regarded as the oldest known example of a complete traditional (hand-drawn) animation on standard cinematographic film. Other great artistic and very influential short films were created by Ladislas Starevich with his puppet animations since 1910 and by Winsor McCay with detailed hand-drawn animation in films such as &quot;Little Nemo&quot; (1911) and &quot;Gertie the Dinosaur&quot; (1914).

During the 1910s, the production of animated &quot;cartoons&quot; became an industry in the US. Successful producer John Randolph Bray and animator Earl Hurd, patented the cel animation process that dominated the animation industry for the rest of the century. Felix the Cat, who debuted in 1919, became the first fully realized anthropomorphic animal character in the history of American animation.
===American golden age===

In 1928, &quot;Steamboat Willie&quot;, featuring Mickey Mouse and Minnie Mouse, popularized film-with-synchronized-sound and put Walt Disney&#x27;s studio at the forefront of the animation industry. Although Disney Animation&#x27;s actual output relative to total global animation output has always been very small, the studio has overwhelmingly dominated the &quot;aesthetic norms&quot; of animation ever since.

The enormous success of Mickey Mouse is seen as the start of the golden age of American animation that would last until the 1960s. The United States dominated the world market of animation with a plethora of cel-animated theatrical shorts. Several studios would introduce characters that would become very popular and would have long-lasting careers, including Walt Disney Productions&#x27; Goofy (1932) and Donald Duck (1934), Fleischer Studios/Paramount Cartoon Studios&#x27; Out of the Inkwell&#x27; Koko the Clown (1918), Bimbo and Betty Boop (1930), Popeye (1933) and Casper the Friendly Ghost (1945), Warner Bros. Cartoon Studios&#x27; Looney Tunes&#x27; Porky Pig (1935), Daffy Duck (1937), Elmer Fudd (1937–1940), Bugs Bunny (1938–1940), Tweety (1942), Sylvester the Cat (1945), Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner (1949), MGM cartoon studio&#x27;s Tom and Jerry (1940) and Droopy, Universal Cartoon Studios&#x27; Woody Woodpecker (1940), Terrytoons/20th Century Fox&#x27;s Mighty Mouse (1942), and United Artists&#x27; Pink Panther (1963).

===Features before CGI===

In 1917, Italian-Argentine director Quirino Cristiani made the first feature-length film &quot;El Apóstol&quot; (now lost), which became a critical and commercial success. It was followed by Cristiani&#x27;s &quot;Sin dejar rastros&quot; in 1918, but one day after its premiere, the film was confiscated by the government.

After working on it for three years, Lotte Reiniger released the German feature-length silhouette animation &quot;Die Abenteuer des Prinzen Achmed&quot; in 1926, the oldest extant animated feature.

In 1937, Walt Disney Studios premiered their first animated feature &quot;Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs&quot;, still one of the highest-grossing traditional animation features . The Fleischer studios followed this example in 1939 with &quot;Gulliver&#x27;s Travels&quot; with some success. Partly due to foreign markets being cut off by the Second World War, Disney&#x27;s next features &quot;Pinocchio&quot;, &quot;Fantasia&quot; (both 1940), Fleischer Studios&#x27; second animated feature &quot;Mr. Bug Goes to Town&quot; (1941–1942) and Disney&#x27;s feature films &quot;Cinderella&quot; (1950), &quot;Alice in Wonderland&quot; (1951) and &quot;Lady and the Tramp&quot; (1955) failed at the box office. For several decades, Disney was the only American studio to regularly produce animated features, until Ralph Bakshi became the first to release more than a handful of features. Sullivan-Bluth Studios began to regularly produce animated features starting with &quot;An American Tail&quot; in 1986.

Although relatively few titles became as successful as Disney&#x27;s features, other countries developed their own animation industries that produced both short and feature theatrical animations in a wide variety of styles, relatively often including stop motion and cutout animation techniques. Soviet Soyuzmultfilm animation studio, founded in 1936, produced 20 films (including shorts) per year on average and reached 1,582 titles in 2018. China, Czechoslovakia / Czech Republic, Italy, France, and Belgium were other countries that more than occasionally released feature films, while Japan became a true powerhouse of animation production, with its own recognizable and influential anime style of effective limited animation.

===Television===
Animation became very popular on television since the 1950s, when television sets started to become common in most developed countries. Cartoons were mainly programmed for children, on convenient time slots, and especially US youth spent many hours watching Saturday-morning cartoons. Many classic cartoons found a new life on the small screen and by the end of the 1950s, the production of new animated cartoons started to shift from theatrical releases to TV series. Hanna-Barbera Productions was especially prolific and had huge hit series, such as &quot;The Flintstones&quot; (1960–1966) (the first prime time animated series), &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; (since 1969) and Belgian co-production &quot;The Smurfs&quot; (1981–1989). The constraints of American television programming and the demand for an enormous quantity resulted in cheaper and quicker limited animation methods and much more formulaic scripts. Quality dwindled until more daring animation surfaced in the late 1980s and in the early 1990s with hit series, the first cartoon of The Simpsons (1987), which later developed into its own show (in 1989) and &quot;SpongeBob SquarePants&quot; (since 1999) as part of a &quot;renaissance&quot; of American animation.

While US animated series also spawned successes internationally, many other countries produced their own child-oriented programming, relatively often preferring stop motion and puppetry over cel animation. Japanese anime TV series became very successful internationally since the 1960s, and European producers looking for affordable cel animators relatively often started co-productions with Japanese studios, resulting in hit series such as &quot;Barbapapa&quot; (The Netherlands/Japan/France 1973–1977), &quot;Wickie und die starken Männer/小さなバイキング ビッケ (Vicky the Viking)&quot; (Austria/Germany/Japan 1974), &quot;Maya the Honey Bee&quot; (Japan/Germany 1975) and &quot;The Jungle Book&quot; (Italy/Japan 1989).

===Switch from cels to computers===

Computer animation was gradually developed since the 1940s. 3D wireframe animation started popping up in the mainstream in the 1970s, with an early (short) appearance in the sci-fi thriller &quot;Futureworld&quot; (1976).

&quot;The Rescuers Down Under&quot; was the first feature film to be completely created digitally without a camera. It was produced using the Computer Animation Production System (CAPS), developed by Pixar in collaboration with The Walt Disney Company in the late 1980s, in a style similar to traditional cel animation.

The so-called 3D style, more often associated with computer animation, became the dominant technique following the success of Pixar&#x27;s &quot;Toy Story&quot; (1995), the first computer-animated feature in this style.

Most of the cel animation studios switched to producing mostly computer-animated films around the 1990s, as it proved cheaper and more profitable. Not only the very popular 3D animation style was generated with computers, but also most of the films and series with a more traditional hand-crafted appearance, in which the charming characteristics of cel animation could be emulated with software, while new digital tools helped developing new styles and effects.

==Economic status==
In 2010, the animation market was estimated to be worth circa US$80 billion. By 2021, the value had increased to an estimated US$370 billion. Animated feature-length films returned the highest gross margins (around 52%) of all film genres between 2004 and 2013. Animation as an art and industry continues to thrive as of the early 2020s.

==Education, propaganda and commercials==
The clarity of animation makes it a powerful tool for instruction, while its total malleability also allows exaggeration that can be employed to convey strong emotions and to thwart reality. It has therefore been widely used for other purposes than mere entertainment.

During World War II, animation was widely exploited for propaganda. Many American studios, including Warner Bros. and Disney, lent their talents and their cartoon characters to convey to the public certain war values. Some countries, including China, Japan and the United Kingdom, produced their first feature-length animation for their war efforts.

Animation has been very popular in television commercials, both due to its graphic appeal, and the humour it can provide. Some animated characters in commercials have survived for decades, such as Snap, Crackle and Pop in advertisements for Kellogg&#x27;s cereals. Tex Avery was the producer of the first Raid &quot;Kills Bugs Dead&quot; commercials in 1966, which were very successful for the company.

==Other media, merchandise and theme parks==
Apart from their success in movie theaters and television series, many cartoon characters would also prove lucrative when licensed for all kinds of merchandise and for other media.

Animation has traditionally been very closely related to comic books. While many comic book characters found their way to the screen (which is often the case in Japan, where many manga are adapted into anime), original animated characters also commonly appear in comic books and magazines. Somewhat similarly, characters and plots for video games (an interactive form of animation that became its own medium) have been derived from films and vice versa.

Some of the original content produced for the screen can be used and marketed in other media. Stories and images can easily be adapted into children&#x27;s books and other printed media. Songs and music have appeared on records and as streaming media.

While very many animation companies commercially exploit their creations outside moving image media, The Walt Disney Company is the best known and most extreme example. Since first being licensed for a children&#x27;s writing tablet in 1929, their Mickey Mouse mascot has been depicted on an enormous amount of products, as have many other Disney characters. This may have influenced some pejorative use of Mickey&#x27;s name, but licensed Disney products sell well, and the so-called Disneyana has many avid collectors, and even a dedicated Disneyana Fan Club (since 1984).

Disneyland opened in 1955 and features many attractions that were based on Disney&#x27;s cartoon characters. Its enormous success spawned several other Disney theme parks and resorts. Disney&#x27;s earnings from the theme parks have relatively often been higher than those from their movies.

==Awards==

As with any other form of media, animation has instituted awards for excellence in the field. Many are part of general or regional film award programs, like the China&#x27;s Golden Rooster Award for Best Animation (since 1981). Awards programs dedicated to animation, with many categories, include ASIFA-Hollywood&#x27;s Annie Awards, the Emile Awards in Europe and the Anima Mundi awards in Brazil.

===Academy Awards===

Apart from Academy Awards for Best Animated Short Film (since 1932) and Best Animated Feature (since 2002), animated movies have been nominated and rewarded in other categories, relatively often for Best Original Song and Best Original Score.

&quot;Beauty and the Beast&quot; was the first animated film nominated for Best Picture, in 1991. &quot;Up&quot; (2009) and &quot;Toy Story 3&quot; (2010) also received Best Picture nominations, after the academy expanded the number of nominees from five to ten.

==Production==

The creation of non-trivial animation works (i.e., longer than a few seconds) has developed as a form of filmmaking, with certain unique aspects. Traits common to both live-action and animated feature films are labor intensity and high production costs.

The most important difference is that once a film is in the production phase, the marginal cost of one more shot is higher for animated films than live-action films. It is relatively easy for a director to ask for one more take during principal photography of a live-action film, but every take on an animated film must be manually rendered by animators (although the task of rendering slightly different takes has been made less tedious by modern computer animation). It is pointless for a studio to pay the salaries of dozens of animators to spend weeks creating a visually dazzling five-minute scene if that scene fails to effectively advance the plot of the film. Thus, animation studios starting with Disney began the practice in the 1930s of maintaining story departments where storyboard artists develop every single scene through storyboards, then handing the film over to the animators only after the production team is satisfied that all the scenes make sense as a whole. While live-action films are now also storyboarded, they enjoy more latitude to depart from storyboards (i.e., real-time improvisation).

Another problem unique to animation is the requirement to maintain a film&#x27;s consistency from start to finish, even as films have grown longer and teams have grown larger. Animators, like all artists, necessarily have individual styles, but must subordinate their individuality in a consistent way to whatever style is employed on a particular film. Since the early 1980s, teams of about 500 to 600 people, of whom 50 to 70 are animators, typically have created feature-length animated films. It is relatively easy for two or three artists to match their styles; synchronizing those of dozens of artists is more difficult.

This problem is usually solved by having a separate group of visual development artists develop an overall look and palette for each film before the animation begins. While animators must &quot;sacrifice their personal drawing styles so that the work of many hands appears to be that of one&quot;, visual development artists are allowed to &quot;create new worlds, new characters, and new entertainment possibilities in their own individualistic graphic styles&quot;. Character designers on the visual development team draw model sheets to show how each character should look like with different facial expressions, posed in different positions, and viewed from different angles. On traditionally animated projects, maquettes were often sculpted to further help the animators see how characters would look from different angles.

Unlike live-action films, animated films were traditionally developed beyond the synopsis stage through the storyboard format; the storyboard artists would then receive credit for writing the film. The traditional approach worked for several decades because prior to the 1960s, no one except Disney was attempting to regularly produce feature-length animated films. All other animation studios, with occasional exceptions, were producing short films only a few minutes in length. For short films, it was enough for the storyboard artists to work up a few visual gags and then string them together to form a crude plot.

In 1960, Hanna-Barbera pioneered the longer animated sitcom format for television with &quot;The Flintstones&quot;. Hanna-Barbera and the other early television animation studios soon discovered that storyboarding was far too inefficient to fill up a half-hour episode on the extremely tight budgets typical of television. During the 1960s, these studios experimented with a more efficient method for developing story material: a screenwriter is hired to draft a written screenplay which is approved and handed over to the storyboard artists for storyboarding. This method creates significant tension between screenwriters and storyboard artists, in that some artists feel that people who cannot draw should not be writing for animation, while some writers feel that artists do not understand how to write. Despite that tension, it has become and remains the dominant method by which animation studios develop both feature-length films and television shows.

==Techniques==
===Traditional===
Traditional animation (also called cel animation or hand-drawn animation) is the process that was used for most animated films of the 20th century. The individual frames of a traditionally animated film are photographs of drawings, first drawn on paper. To create the illusion of movement, each drawing differs slightly from the one before it. The animators&#x27; drawings are traced or photocopied onto transparent acetate sheets called cels, which are filled in with paints in assigned colors or tones on the side opposite the line drawings. The completed character cels are photographed one-by-one against a painted background by a rostrum camera onto motion picture film.

The traditional cel animation process became obsolete by the beginning of the 21st century. In modern traditionally animated films, animators&#x27; drawings and the backgrounds are either scanned into or drawn directly into a computer system. Various software programs are used to color the drawings and simulate camera movement and effects. The final animated piece is output to one of several delivery media, including traditional 35 mm film and newer media with digital video. The &quot;look&quot; of traditional cel animation is still preserved, and the character animators&#x27; work has remained essentially the same over the past 90 years. Some animation producers have used the term &quot;tradigital&quot; (a play on the words &quot;traditional&quot; and &quot;digital&quot;) to describe cel animation that uses significant computer technology.

Examples of traditionally animated feature films include &quot;Pinocchio&quot; (United States, 1940), &quot;Animal Farm&quot; (United Kingdom, 1954), &quot;Lucky and Zorba&quot; (Italy, 1998), and &quot;The Illusionist&quot; (British-French, 2010). Traditionally animated films produced with the aid of computer technology include &quot;The Lion King&quot; (US, 1994), &quot;Anastasia&quot; (US, 1997), &quot;The Prince of Egypt&quot; (US, 1998), &quot;Akira&quot; (Japan, 1988), &quot;Spirited Away&quot; (Japan, 2001), &quot;The Triplets of Belleville&quot; (France, 2003), and &quot;The Secret of Kells&quot; (Irish-French-Belgian, 2009).

====Full====
Full animation is the process of producing high-quality traditionally animated films that regularly use detailed drawings and plausible movement, having a smooth animation. Fully animated films can be made in a variety of styles, from more realistically animated works like those produced by the Walt Disney studio (&quot;The Little Mermaid&quot;, &quot;Beauty and the Beast&quot;, &quot;Aladdin&quot;, &quot;The Lion King&quot;) to the more &#x27;cartoon&#x27; styles of the Warner Bros. animation studio. Many of the Disney animated features are examples of full animation, as are non-Disney works, &quot;The Secret of NIMH&quot; (US, 1982), &quot;The Iron Giant&quot; (US, 1999), and &quot;Nocturna&quot; (Spain, 2007). Fully animated films are often animated on &quot;twos&quot;, sometimes on &quot;ones&quot;, which means that 12 to 24 drawings are required for a single second of film.

====Limited====

Limited animation involves the use of less detailed or more stylized drawings and methods of movement usually a choppy or &quot;skippy&quot; movement animation. Limited animation uses fewer drawings per second, thereby limiting the fluidity of the animation. This is a more economic technique. Pioneered by the artists at the American studio United Productions of America, limited animation can be used as a method of stylized artistic expression, as in &quot;Gerald McBoing-Boing&quot; (US, 1951), &quot;Yellow Submarine&quot; (UK, 1968), and certain anime produced in Japan. Its primary use, however, has been in producing cost-effective animated content for media for television (the work of Hanna-Barbera, Filmation, and other TV animation studios) and later the Internet (web cartoons).

====Rotoscoping====

Rotoscoping is a technique patented by Max Fleischer in 1917 where animators trace live-action movement, frame by frame. The source film can be directly copied from actors&#x27; outlines into animated drawings, as in &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; (US, 1978), or used in a stylized and expressive manner, as in &quot;Waking Life&quot; (US, 2001) and &quot;A Scanner Darkly&quot; (US, 2006). Some other examples are &quot;Fire and Ice&quot; (US, 1983), &quot;Heavy Metal&quot; (1981), and &quot;Aku no Hana&quot; (Japan, 2013).

====Live-action blending====

Live-action/animation is a technique combining hand-drawn characters into live action shots or live-action actors into animated shots. One of the earlier uses was in Koko the Clown when Koko was drawn over live-action footage. Walt Disney and Ub Iwerks created a series of &quot;Alice Comedies&quot; (1923–1927), in which a live-action girl enters an animated world. Other examples include &quot;Allegro Non Troppo&quot; (Italy, 1976), &quot;Who Framed Roger Rabbit&quot; (US, 1988), &quot;Volere volare&quot; (Italy 1991), &quot;Space Jam&quot; (US, 1996) and &quot;Osmosis Jones&quot; (US, 2001).

===Stop motion===

Stop motion is used to describe animation created by physically manipulating real-world objects and photographing them one frame of film at a time to create the illusion of movement. There are many different types of stop-motion animation, usually named after the materials used to create the animation. Computer software is widely available to create this type of animation; traditional stop-motion animation is usually less expensive but more time-consuming to produce than current computer animation.
; Stop motion : Typically involves stop-motion puppet figures interacting in a constructed environment, in contrast to real-world interaction in model animation. The puppets generally have an armature inside of them to keep them still and steady to constrain their motion to particular joints. Examples include &quot;The Tale of the Fox&quot; (France, 1937), &quot;The Nightmare Before Christmas&quot; (US, 1993), &quot;Corpse Bride&quot; (US, 2005), &quot;Coraline&quot; (US, 2009), the films of Jiří Trnka and the adult animated sketch-comedy television series &quot;Robot Chicken&quot; (US, 2005–present).
:; Puppetoons : Created using techniques developed by George Pal, are puppet-animated films that typically use a different version of a puppet for different frames, rather than manipulating one existing puppet.

; Clay animation or Plasticine animation : (Often called &quot;claymation&quot;, which, however, is a trademarked name). It uses figures made of clay or a similar malleable material to create stop-motion animation. The figures may have an armature or wire frame inside, similar to the related puppet animation (below), that can be manipulated to pose the figures. Alternatively, the figures may be made entirely of clay, in the films of Bruce Bickford, where clay creatures morph into a variety of different shapes. Examples of clay-animated works include &quot;The Gumby Show&quot; (US, 1957–1967), &quot;Mio Mao&quot; (Italy, 1974–2005), &quot;Morph&quot; shorts (UK, 1977–2000), &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit&quot; shorts (UK, as of 1989), Jan Švankmajer&#x27;s &quot;Dimensions of Dialogue&quot; (Czechoslovakia, 1982), &quot;The Trap Door&quot; (UK, 1984). Films include &quot;Wallace &amp; Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit&quot;, &quot;Chicken Run&quot; and &quot;The Adventures of Mark Twain&quot;.
:; Strata-cut animation : Most commonly a form of clay animation in which a long bread-like &quot;loaf&quot; of clay, internally packed tight and loaded with varying imagery, is sliced into thin sheets, with the animation camera taking a frame of the end of the loaf for each cut, eventually revealing the movement of the internal images within.
; Cutout animation : A type of stop-motion animation produced by moving two-dimensional pieces of material paper or cloth. Examples include Terry Gilliam&#x27;s animated sequences from &quot;Monty Python&#x27;s Flying Circus&quot; (UK, 1969–1974); &quot;Fantastic Planet&quot; (France/Czechoslovakia, 1973); &quot;Tale of Tales&quot; (Russia, 1979), Matt Stone and Trey Parker the first cutout animation South Park (1992), the pilot episode of the adult television sitcom series (and sometimes in episodes) of &quot;South Park&quot; (US, 1997) and the music video Live for the moment, from Verona Riots band (produced by Alberto Serrano and Nívola Uyá, Spain 2014).
:; Silhouette animation : A variant of cutout animation in which the characters are backlit and only visible as silhouettes. Examples include &quot;The Adventures of Prince Achmed&quot; (Weimar Republic, 1926) and &quot;Princes et Princesses&quot; (France, 2000).
; Model animation : Stop-motion animation created to interact with and exist as a part of a live-action world. Intercutting, matte effects and split screens are often employed to blend stop-motion characters or objects with live actors and settings. Examples include the work of Ray Harryhausen, as seen in films, &quot;Jason and the Argonauts&quot; (1963), and the work of Willis H. O&#x27;Brien on films, &quot;King Kong&quot; (1933).
:;Go motion : A variant of model animation that uses various techniques to create motion blur between frames of film, which is not present in traditional stop motion. The technique was invented by Industrial Light &amp; Magic and Phil Tippett to create special effect scenes for the film &quot;Star Wars: Episode V – The Empire Strikes Back&quot; (1980). Another example is the dragon named &quot;Vermithrax&quot; from the 1981 film &quot;Dragonslayer&quot;.
; Object animation : The use of regular inanimate objects in stop-motion animation, as opposed to specially created items.
:; Graphic animation : Uses non-drawn flat visual graphic material (photographs, newspaper clippings, magazines, etc.), which are sometimes manipulated frame by frame to create movement. At other times, the graphics remain stationary, while the stop-motion camera is moved to create on-screen action.
:; Brickfilm : A subgenre of object animation involving using Lego or other similar brick toys to make an animation. These have had a recent boost in popularity with the advent of video sharing sites, YouTube and the availability of cheap cameras and animation software.
; Pixilation : Involves the use of live humans as stop-motion characters. This allows for a number of surreal effects, including disappearances and reappearances, allowing people to appear to slide across the ground, and other effects. Examples of pixilation include &quot;The Secret Adventures of Tom Thumb&quot; and &quot;Angry Kid&quot; shorts, and the Academy Award-winning &quot;Neighbours&quot; by Norman McLaren.

===Computer===

Computer animation encompasses a variety of techniques, the unifying factor being that the animation is created digitally on a computer. 2D animation techniques tend to focus on image manipulation while 3D techniques usually build virtual worlds in which characters and objects move and interact. 3D animation can create images that seem real to the viewer.

====2D====

2D animation figures are created or edited on the computer using 2D bitmap graphics and 2D vector graphics. This includes automated computerized versions of traditional animation techniques, interpolated morphing, onion skinning and interpolated rotoscoping. 2D animation has many applications, including After Effects Animation, analog computer animation, Flash animation, and PowerPoint animation. Cinemagraphs are still photographs in the form of an animated GIF file of which part is animated.

Final line advection animation is a technique used in 2D animation, to give artists and animators more influence and control over the final product as everything is done within the same department. Speaking about using this approach in &quot;Paperman&quot;, John Kahrs said that &quot;Our animators can change things, actually erase away the CG underlayer if they want, and change the profile of the arm.&quot;

When working with game animations, skeletal 2D animations are commonly created using tools like Spine, DragonBones, Blender COA Tools, Rive, and the built-in Unity editor. The primary benefit of this approach is the ability to reuse images, which reduces the amount of graphics stored in RAM. This principle of maximizing resource efficiency means that by reusing existing elements, you can enhance the visual appeal of animations without needing to create additional graphics.

====3D====
3D animation is digitally modeled and manipulated by an animator. The 3D model maker usually starts by creating a 3D polygon mesh for the animator to manipulate. A mesh typically includes many vertices that are connected by edges and faces, which give the visual appearance of form to a 3D object or 3D environment. Sometimes, the mesh is given an internal digital skeletal structure called an armature that can be used to control the mesh by weighting the vertices. This process is called rigging and can be used in conjunction with key frames to create movement.

Other techniques can be applied, mathematical functions (e.g., gravity, particle simulations), simulated fur or hair, and effects, fire and water simulations. These techniques fall under the category of 3D dynamics.

=====Terms=====
* Cel shading is used to mimic traditional animation using computer software. The shading looks stark, with less blending of colors. Examples include &quot;Skyland&quot; (2007, France), &quot;The Iron Giant&quot; (1999, U.S.), &quot;Futurama&quot; (1999, U.S.) &quot;Appleseed Ex Machina&quot; (2007, Japan), &quot;The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker&quot; (2002, Japan), &quot;The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild&quot; (2017, Japan)
* Machinima – Films created by screen capturing in video games and virtual worlds. The term originated from the software introduction in the 1980s demoscene, as well as the 1990s recordings of the first-person shooter video game &quot;Quake&quot;.
* Motion capture is used when live-action actors wear special suits that allow computers to copy their movements into CG characters. Examples include &quot;Polar Express&quot; (2004, US), &quot;Beowulf&quot; (2007, US), &quot;A Christmas Carol&quot; (2009, US), &quot;The Adventures of Tintin&quot; (2011, US) &quot;kochadiiyan&quot; (2014, India)
* Computer animation is used primarily for animation that attempts to resemble real life while having a stylized cartoonish appearance, using advanced rendering that mimics in detail skin, plants, water, fire, clouds, etc. Examples include &quot;Up&quot; (2009, US), &quot;How to Train Your Dragon&quot; (2010, US)
* Physically based animation is animation using computer simulations.

===Mechanical===
* Animatronics is the use of mechatronics to create machines that seem animate rather than robotic.
** Audio-Animatronics is a form of robotics animation, combined with 3-D animation, created by Walt Disney Imagineering for shows and attractions at Disney theme parks move and make noise (generally a recorded speech or song). They are fixed to whatever supports them. They can sit and stand, and they cannot walk. An Audio-Animatron is different from an android-type robot in that it uses prerecorded movements and sounds, rather than responding to external stimuli. In 2009, Disney created an interactive version of the technology called Autonomatronics.
** Linear Animation Generator is a form of animation by using static picture frames installed in a tunnel or a shaft. The animation illusion is created by putting the viewer in a linear motion, parallel to the installed picture frames.
* Chuckimation is a type of animation created by the makers of the television series &quot;Action League Now!&quot; in which characters/props are thrown, or chucked from off camera or wiggled around to simulate talking by unseen hands.
* The Magic Lantern used mechanical slides to project moving images. Christiaan Huygens was thought to have invented the Magic Lantern in the mid-1600s.

=== Other ===

* Hydrotechnics: a technique that includes lights, water, fire, fog, and lasers, with high-definition projections on mist screens.
* Drawn-on-film animation: a technique where footage is produced by creating the images directly on film stock; for example, by Norman McLaren, Len Lye and Stan Brakhage.
* Paint-on-glass animation: a technique for making animated films by manipulating slow drying oil paints on sheets of glass, for example by Aleksandr Petrov.
* Erasure animation: a technique using traditional 2D media, photographed over time as the artist manipulates the image. For example, William Kentridge is famous for his charcoal erasure films, and Piotr Dumała for his auteur technique of animating scratches on plaster.
* Pinscreen animation: makes use of a screen filled with movable pins that can be moved in or out by pressing an object onto the screen. The screen is lit from the side so that the pins cast shadows. The technique has been used to create animated films with a range of textural effects difficult to achieve with traditional cel animation.
* Sand animation: sand is moved around on a back- or front-lighted piece of glass to create each frame for an animated film. This creates an interesting effect when animated because of the light contrast.
* Flip book: a flip book (sometimes, especially in British English, called a flick book) is a book with a series of pictures that vary gradually from one page to the next, so that when the pages are turned rapidly, the pictures appear to animate by simulating motion or some other change. Flip books are often illustrated books for children, they also are geared towards adults and employ a series of photographs rather than drawings. Flip books are not always separate books, they appear as an added feature in ordinary books or magazines, often in the page corners. Software packages and websites are also available that convert digital video files into custom-made flip books.
* Character animation
* Multi-sketch animation
* Special effects animation
* 2.5D Animation: A mix of 2D and 3D animation elements that emphasize the illusion of depth utilizing the pseudo-3D effect. During the 1970s, the term &quot;2.5D&quot; started to gain recognition. But its background comes from anime and manga during the 1920s where theatrical stage productions were popular. Stage adaptations of well-liked anime series featured live performances by voice actors called 2.5D.

==See also==
* Animated war film
* Animation department
* Animated series
* Anime
* Architectural animation
* Avar
* Independent animation
* International Animation Day
* International Animated Film Association
* International Tournée of Animation
* List of film-related topics
* Motion graphic design
* Society for Animation Studies
* Twelve basic principles of animation
* Wire-frame model

==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
====Journal articles====
* 
====Books====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


====Online sources====
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* The making of an 8-minute cartoon short
* &quot;Animando&quot;, a 12-minute film demonstrating 10 different animation techniques (and teaching how to use them) (archived 1 October 2009).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="0" end="9" title="Animation" label="Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="15" end="25" title="filmmaking" label="filmmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q478798" start="44" end="56" title="image" label="still images"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="83" end="96" title="Motion picture" label="moving images"/>
<link wikidata="Q184781" start="101" end="122" title="traditional animation" label="traditional animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052736" start="163" end="190" title="cel" label="transparent celluloid sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q125191" start="198" end="208" title="photograph" label="photograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="228" end="232" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="311" end="333" title="Entertainment#Industry" label="entertainment industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="388" end="406" title="computer animation" label="computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="418" end="444" title="computer-generated imagery" label="computer-generated imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="452" end="473" title="Stop motion animation" label="Stop motion animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q870889" start="489" end="499" title="claymation" label="claymation"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="583" end="594" title="live action" label="live action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091779" start="671" end="705" title="Films with live action and animation" label="films that are a hybrid of the two"/>
<link wikidata="Q939559" start="727" end="760" title="Photorealism" label="approximates photographic imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121886" start="784" end="793" title="Compositing" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237336" start="842" end="858" title="practical effect" label="practical effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q8317" start="870" end="884" title="visual effects" label="visual effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="917" end="935" title="Computer animation" label="Computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="957" end="969" title="Computer animation#Animation methods" label="3D animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816476" start="1110" end="1129" title="real-time rendering" label="real-time rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="1171" end="1182" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291325" start="1236" end="1249" title="cutout animation" label="paper cutouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913135" start="1251" end="1257" title="puppet" label="puppet"/>
<link wikidata="Q870889" start="1263" end="1275" title="Claymation" label="clay figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="1424" end="1435" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543088" start="1438" end="1449" title="gag cartoon" label="gag cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q627603" start="1484" end="1491" title="cartoon" label="cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="1512" end="1534" title="anthropomorphic animal" label="anthropomorphic animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="1537" end="1546" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684044" start="1731" end="1738" title="cartoon violence" label="violent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189589" start="1739" end="1748" title="physical comedy" label="pratfalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q379873" start="2036" end="2059" title="Who Framed Roger Rabbit" label="Who Framed Roger Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q387943" start="2185" end="2205" title="Tiny Toon Adventures" label="Tiny Toon Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q508993" start="2393" end="2414" title="persistence of vision" label="persistence of vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q785272" start="2432" end="2446" title="phi phenomenon" label="phi phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306492" start="2451" end="2464" title="beta movement" label="beta movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849717" start="2660" end="2679" title="stroboscopic effect" label="stroboscopic effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q266569" start="2687" end="2695" title="animator" label="animator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493902" start="2907" end="2916" title="key frame" label="key frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742408" start="3001" end="3007" title="Analog device" label="Analog"/>
<link wikidata="Q490049" start="3099" end="3114" title="phenakistiscope" label="phenakistiscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q218273" start="3116" end="3124" title="zoetrope" label="zoetrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172965" start="3126" end="3135" title="flip book" label="flip book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501341" start="3137" end="3149" title="praxinoscope" label="praxinoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="3161" end="3171" title="Television" label="Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q34508" start="3176" end="3181" title="video" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076968" start="3265" end="3274" title="digital media" label="digitally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192" start="3325" end="3337" title="animated GIF" label="animated GIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369644" start="3342" end="3357" title="Flash animation" label="Flash animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="3390" end="3400" title="short film" label="short film"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="3403" end="3415" title="feature film" label="feature film"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="3418" end="3435" title="Television show" label="television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="3542" end="3552" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039318" start="3555" end="3570" title="motion graphics" label="motion graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="3572" end="3586" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q8317" start="3593" end="3607" title="visual effects" label="visual effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q654393" start="3703" end="3716" title="magic lantern" label="magic lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q787116" start="3878" end="3886" title="automaton" label="automata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="3928" end="3934" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q494002" start="3938" end="3950" title="animatronics" label="animatronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q787116" start="4457" end="4466" title="automaton" label="automaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q854836" start="4469" end="4483" title="shadow puppets" label="shadow puppets"/>
<link wikidata="Q862454" start="4501" end="4508" title="lantern" label="lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q178873" start="4599" end="4611" title="stroboscope" label="stroboscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q490049" start="4638" end="4653" title="phenakistiscope" label="phenakistiscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q218273" start="4736" end="4744" title="zoetrope" label="zoetrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172965" start="4771" end="4780" title="flip book" label="flip book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501341" start="4793" end="4805" title="praxinoscope" label="praxinoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="4817" end="4821" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q590870" start="4846" end="4860" title="cinematography" label="cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q724276" start="5116" end="5134" title="J. Stuart Blackton" label="J. Stuart Blackton"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="5147" end="5158" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q275011" start="5183" end="5193" title="Émile Cohl" label="Émile Cohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q94748" start="5210" end="5223" title="Fantasmagorie (film)" label="Fantasmagorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q184781" start="5289" end="5323" title="traditional animation" label="traditional (hand-drawn) animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q710013" start="5428" end="5446" title="Ladislas Starevich" label="Ladislas Starevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q207960" start="5492" end="5504" title="Winsor McCay" label="Winsor McCay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020439" start="5563" end="5574" title="Little Nemo (1911 film)" label="Little Nemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q556464" start="5598" end="5617" title="Gertie the Dinosaur" label="Gertie the Dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q627603" start="5684" end="5692" title="cartoons" label="cartoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q350780" start="5749" end="5767" title="John Randolph Bray" label="John Randolph Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046385" start="5781" end="5790" title="Earl Hurd" label="Earl Hurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q184781" start="5805" end="5818" title="cel animation" label="cel animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q692603" start="5894" end="5907" title="Felix the Cat" label="Felix the Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q816038" start="6075" end="6091" title="Steamboat Willie" label="Steamboat Willie"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="6109" end="6121" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11936" start="6126" end="6138" title="Minnie Mouse" label="Minnie Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="6189" end="6200" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047410" start="6268" end="6291" title="Walt Disney Animation Studios" label="Disney Animation&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q784817" start="6539" end="6571" title="golden age of American animation" label="golden age of American animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="6835" end="6858" title="Walt Disney Productions" label="Walt Disney Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q111135" start="6865" end="6870" title="Goofy" label="Goofy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6550" start="6882" end="6893" title="Donald Duck" label="Donald Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427842" start="6902" end="6919" title="Fleischer Studios" label="Fleischer Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066286" start="6920" end="6945" title="Paramount Cartoon Studios" label="Paramount Cartoon Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q612863" start="6952" end="6970" title="Out of the Inkwell" label="Out of the Inkwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778963" start="6977" end="6991" title="Koko the Clown" label="Koko the Clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640084" start="7000" end="7005" title="Bimbo (Fleischer Studios)" label="Bimbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q583810" start="7010" end="7020" title="Betty Boop" label="Betty Boop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7029" end="7035" title="Popeye#Theatrical animated cartoons" label="Popeye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442531" start="7047" end="7072" title="Casper the Friendly Ghost" label="Casper the Friendly Ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q384930" start="7081" end="7109" title="Warner Bros. Cartoons" label="Warner Bros. Cartoon Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q622435" start="7116" end="7128" title="Looney Tunes" label="Looney Tunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q937186" start="7135" end="7144" title="Porky Pig" label="Porky Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q319918" start="7153" end="7163" title="Daffy Duck" label="Daffy Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q844904" start="7172" end="7182" title="Elmer Fudd" label="Elmer Fudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q183102" start="7196" end="7206" title="Bugs Bunny" label="Bugs Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q623553" start="7220" end="7226" title="Tweety" label="Tweety"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990037" start="7235" end="7252" title="Sylvester the Cat" label="Sylvester the Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q822524" start="7261" end="7295" title="Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner" label="Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567087" start="7304" end="7322" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer cartoon studio" label="MGM cartoon studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q131144" start="7330" end="7343" title="Tom and Jerry" label="Tom and Jerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260264" start="7355" end="7361" title="Droopy" label="Droopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565810" start="7363" end="7388" title="Walter Lantz Productions" label="Universal Cartoon Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q741321" start="7395" end="7411" title="Woody Woodpecker" label="Woody Woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428093" start="7420" end="7430" title="Terrytoons" label="Terrytoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="7431" end="7447" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q49677" start="7455" end="7467" title="Mighty Mouse" label="Mighty Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="7480" end="7494" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q15012089" start="7501" end="7513" title="Pink Panther (character)" label="Pink Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517168" start="7586" end="7603" title="Quirino Cristiani" label="Quirino Cristiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323904" start="7645" end="7655" title="El Apóstol" label="El Apóstol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268687" start="7667" end="7671" title="lost film" label="lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702785" start="7764" end="7781" title="Sin dejar rastros" label="Sin dejar rastros"/>
<link wikidata="Q444011" start="7911" end="7925" title="Lotte Reiniger" label="Lotte Reiniger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850055" start="7961" end="7981" title="silhouette animation" label="silhouette animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q567591" start="7988" end="8020" title="Die Abenteuer des Prinzen Achmed" label="Die Abenteuer des Prinzen Achmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047410" start="8082" end="8101" title="Walt Disney Animation Studios" label="Walt Disney Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q134430" start="8147" end="8178" title="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937 film)" label="Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q246418" start="8316" end="8339" title="Gulliver&amp;#x27;s Travels (1939 film)" label="Gulliver&amp;#x27;s Travels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341553" start="8468" end="8477" title="Pinocchio (1940 film)" label="Pinocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q943192" start="8491" end="8499" title="Fantasia (1940 film)" label="Fantasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061614" start="8573" end="8593" title="Mr. Bug Goes to Town" label="Mr. Bug Goes to Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q191753" start="8650" end="8660" title="Cinderella (1950 film)" label="Cinderella"/>
<link wikidata="Q189875" start="8681" end="8700" title="Alice in Wonderland (1951 film)" label="Alice in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172284" start="8724" end="8742" title="Lady and the Tramp" label="Lady and the Tramp"/>
<link wikidata="Q315441" start="8885" end="8897" title="Ralph Bakshi" label="Ralph Bakshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636396" start="8959" end="8981" title="Sullivan-Bluth Studios" label="Sullivan-Bluth Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134678" start="9047" end="9063" title="An American Tail" label="An American Tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="9331" end="9342" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291325" start="9347" end="9363" title="cutout animation" label="cutout animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q679912" start="9383" end="9396" title="Soyuzmultfilm" label="Soyuzmultfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="9767" end="9772" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130164" start="9792" end="9809" title="limited animation" label="limited animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543107" start="10087" end="10111" title="Saturday-morning cartoon" label="Saturday-morning cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="10298" end="10323" title="Hanna-Barbera Productions" label="Hanna-Barbera Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q201358" start="10387" end="10402" title="The Flintstones" label="The Flintstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q745818" start="10432" end="10442" title="prime time" label="prime time"/>
<link wikidata="Q205683" start="10467" end="10477" title="Scooby-Doo" label="Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216045" start="10529" end="10539" title="The Smurfs (1981 TV series)" label="The Smurfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130164" start="10682" end="10699" title="limited animation" label="limited animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q605111" start="10874" end="10886" title="The Simpsons shorts" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="10922" end="10934" title="The Simpsons" label="its own show"/>
<link wikidata="Q83279" start="10955" end="10976" title="SpongeBob SquarePants" label="SpongeBob SquarePants"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="11218" end="11229" title="stop motion" label="stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q588750" start="11234" end="11242" title="puppetry" label="puppetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="11272" end="11277" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q755021" start="11505" end="11514" title="Barbapapa" label="Barbapapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q713578" start="11569" end="11630" title="Vicky the Viking" label="Wickie und die starken Männer/小さなバイキング ビッケ (Vicky the Viking)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564651" start="11673" end="11691" title="Maya the Honey Bee" label="Maya the Honey Bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296189" start="11729" end="11744" title="The Jungle Book (1989 TV series)" label="The Jungle Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="11809" end="11827" title="Computer animation" label="Computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475648" start="12005" end="12016" title="Futureworld" label="Futureworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q202371" start="12038" end="12061" title="The Rescuers Down Under" label="The Rescuers Down Under"/>
<link wikidata="Q635983" start="12174" end="12210" title="Computer Animation Production System" label="Computer Animation Production System"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="12232" end="12237" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="12260" end="12283" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q171048" start="12498" end="12507" title="Toy Story" label="Toy Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q11157999" start="13251" end="13263" title="gross margin" label="gross margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="13285" end="13295" title="film genre" label="film genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036441" start="13777" end="13798" title="World War II and American animation" label="Many American studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002575" start="14257" end="14278" title="Snap, Crackle and Pop" label="Snap, Crackle and Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q319723" start="14325" end="14334" title="Tex Avery" label="Tex Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473883" start="14365" end="14369" title="Raid (insecticide)" label="Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473883" start="14376" end="14391" title="Kills Bugs Dead" label="Kills Bugs Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="14748" end="14758" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="14870" end="14875" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="14893" end="14898" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="15026" end="15036" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="15500" end="15523" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="The Walt Disney Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="15647" end="15659" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15676" end="15718" title="Mickey Mouse#Merchandising" label="depicted on an enormous amount of products"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15788" end="15824" title="Mickey Mouse#Pejorative use of Mickey&amp;#x27;s name" label="pejorative use of Mickey&amp;#x27;s name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030410" start="15830" end="15854" title="Disney Consumer Products" label="licensed Disney products"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282486" start="15884" end="15893" title="Disneyana" label="Disneyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q21188193" start="15941" end="15959" title="Disneyana Fan Club" label="Disneyana Fan Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q181185" start="15975" end="15985" title="Disneyland" label="Disneyland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16127" end="16157" title="Disney Experiences#Disney resorts" label="Disney theme parks and resorts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16159" end="16181" title="The Walt Disney Company#Financial data" label="Disney&amp;#x27;s earnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011572" start="16454" end="16474" title="Golden Rooster Awards" label="Golden Rooster Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579755" start="16479" end="16493" title="Golden Rooster Award for Best Animation" label="Best Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654243" start="16578" end="16593" title="ASIFA-Hollywood" label="ASIFA-Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q566905" start="16601" end="16613" title="Annie Awards" label="Annie Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q33540215" start="16619" end="16631" title="Emile Awards" label="Emile Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764722" start="16650" end="16661" title="Anima Mundi (event)" label="Anima Mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="16714" end="16728" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q917808" start="16733" end="16757" title="Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film" label="Best Animated Short Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q106800" start="16775" end="16796" title="Academy Award for Best Animated Feature" label="Best Animated Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q112243" start="16902" end="16920" title="Academy Award for Best Original Song" label="Best Original Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q488651" start="16925" end="16944" title="Academy Award for Best Original Score" label="Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q179673" start="16953" end="16973" title="Beauty and the Beast (1991 film)" label="Beauty and the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="17022" end="17034" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q174811" start="17051" end="17053" title="Up (2009 film)" label="Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q187278" start="17077" end="17088" title="Toy Story 3" label="Toy Story 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="17332" end="17342" title="filmmaking" label="filmmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q24869" start="17420" end="17432" title="feature film" label="feature film"/>
<link wikidata="Q382444" start="17564" end="17577" title="marginal cost" label="marginal cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124733" start="17705" end="17709" title="take" label="take"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256415" start="17717" end="17738" title="principal photography" label="principal photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762300" start="18266" end="18283" title="storyboard artist" label="storyboard artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q334667" start="18320" end="18330" title="storyboard" label="storyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q28106657" start="19753" end="19764" title="model sheet" label="model sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126762" start="19945" end="19953" title="maquette" label="maquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="20497" end="20507" title="short film" label="short film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191969" start="20614" end="20624" title="visual gag" label="visual gag"/>
<link wikidata="Q736464" start="20688" end="20701" title="Hanna-Barbera" label="Hanna-Barbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765080" start="20723" end="20738" title="animated sitcom" label="animated sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q201358" start="20772" end="20787" title="The Flintstones" label="The Flintstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q28389" start="21109" end="21121" title="screenwriter" label="screenwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q103076" start="21150" end="21160" title="screenplay" label="screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052736" start="22109" end="22112" title="cel" label="cel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881921" start="22306" end="22320" title="rostrum camera" label="rostrum camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q226528" start="22781" end="22791" title="35 mm movie film" label="35 mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q173131" start="22813" end="22826" title="digital video" label="digital video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062896" start="22906" end="22924" title="Character animation" label="character animator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341553" start="23265" end="23274" title="Pinocchio (1940 film)" label="Pinocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299779" start="23310" end="23321" title="Animal Farm (1954 film)" label="Animal Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210900" start="23358" end="23373" title="Lucky and Zorba" label="Lucky and Zorba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164767" start="23405" end="23420" title="The Illusionist (2010 film)" label="The Illusionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36479" start="23539" end="23552" title="The Lion King" label="The Lion King"/>
<link wikidata="Q486609" start="23577" end="23586" title="Anastasia (1997 film)" label="Anastasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q245227" start="23611" end="23630" title="The Prince of Egypt" label="The Prince of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905968" start="23655" end="23660" title="Akira (1988 film)" label="Akira"/>
<link wikidata="Q155653" start="23688" end="23701" title="Spirited Away" label="Spirited Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q779517" start="23729" end="23755" title="The Triplets of Belleville" label="The Triplets of Belleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q908816" start="23788" end="23807" title="The Secret of Kells" label="The Secret of Kells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047410" start="24154" end="24172" title="Walt Disney Animation Studios" label="Walt Disney studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q190135" start="24180" end="24198" title="The Little Mermaid (1989 film)" label="The Little Mermaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q179673" start="24212" end="24232" title="Beauty and the Beast (1991 film)" label="Beauty and the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q215518" start="24246" end="24253" title="Aladdin (1992 Disney film)" label="Aladdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36479" start="24267" end="24280" title="The Lion King" label="The Lion King"/>
<link wikidata="Q384930" start="24334" end="24363" title="Warner Bros. Cartoons" label="Warner Bros. animation studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q211738" start="24377" end="24401" title="Disney animated features" label="Disney animated features"/>
<link wikidata="Q174374" start="24465" end="24483" title="The Secret of NIMH" label="The Secret of NIMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q867283" start="24508" end="24522" title="The Iron Giant" label="The Iron Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342613" start="24551" end="24559" title="Nocturna (film)" label="Nocturna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130164" start="24768" end="24785" title="Limited animation" label="Limited animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q642996" start="25110" end="25139" title="United Productions of America" label="United Productions of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509967" start="25228" end="25248" title="Gerald McBoing-Boing" label="Gerald McBoing-Boing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131791" start="25273" end="25289" title="Yellow Submarine (film)" label="Yellow Submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="25320" end="25325" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414376" start="25478" end="25487" title="Filmation" label="Filmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="25535" end="25543" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369644" start="25545" end="25556" title="web cartoon" label="web cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q93788" start="25621" end="25634" title="Max Fleischer" label="Max Fleischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q378913" start="25805" end="25826" title="The Lord of the Rings (1978 film)" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q300042" start="25902" end="25913" title="Waking Life" label="Waking Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q300547" start="25941" end="25957" title="A Scanner Darkly (film)" label="A Scanner Darkly"/>
<link wikidata="Q240478" start="26006" end="26018" title="Fire and Ice (1983 film)" label="Fire and Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471965" start="26043" end="26054" title="Heavy Metal (film)" label="Heavy Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182662" start="26079" end="26090" title="The Flowers of Evil (manga)" label="Aku no Hana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091779" start="26143" end="26164" title="List of films with live action and animation" label="Live-action/animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778963" start="26309" end="26323" title="Koko the Clown" label="Koko the Clown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364709" start="26422" end="26436" title="Alice Comedies" label="Alice Comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000923" start="26539" end="26557" title="Allegro Non Troppo" label="Allegro Non Troppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q379873" start="26585" end="26608" title="Who Framed Roger Rabbit" label="Who Framed Roger Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016112" start="26633" end="26646" title="Volere volare" label="Volere volare"/>
<link wikidata="Q207659" start="26673" end="26682" title="Space Jam" label="Space Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q966690" start="26710" end="26723" title="Osmosis Jones" label="Osmosis Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="26762" end="26773" title="Stop motion" label="Stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="27268" end="27279" title="Stop motion" label="Stop motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q679529" start="27458" end="27466" title="armature (sculpture)" label="armature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151164" start="27583" end="27602" title="The Tale of the Fox" label="The Tale of the Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q322328" start="27631" end="27661" title="The Nightmare Before Christmas" label="The Nightmare Before Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q164417" start="27686" end="27698" title="Corpse Bride" label="Corpse Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q632668" start="27723" end="27731" title="Coraline (film)" label="Coraline"/>
<link wikidata="Q362319" start="27763" end="27773" title="Jiří Trnka" label="Jiří Trnka"/>
<link wikidata="Q8822" start="27835" end="27848" title="Robot Chicken" label="Robot Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260728" start="27878" end="27888" title="Puppetoons" label="Puppetoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q731331" start="27929" end="27939" title="George Pal" label="George Pal"/>
<link wikidata="Q870889" start="28089" end="28103" title="Clay animation" label="Clay animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q840688" start="28107" end="28117" title="Plasticine" label="Plasticine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314323" start="28189" end="28200" title="Laika, LLC" label="trademarked"/>
<link wikidata="Q679529" start="28326" end="28334" title="armature (sculpture)" label="armature"/>
<link wikidata="Q923961" start="28524" end="28538" title="Bruce Bickford (animator)" label="Bruce Bickford"/>
<link wikidata="Q43998029" start="28653" end="28658" title="Gumby" label="Gumby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294504" start="28693" end="28700" title="Mio Mao" label="Mio Mao"/>
<link wikidata="Q113115033" start="28733" end="28738" title="Morph (TV series)" label="Morph"/>
<link wikidata="Q691528" start="28775" end="28795" title="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit" label="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit"/>
<link wikidata="Q316165" start="28827" end="28841" title="Jan Švankmajer" label="Jan Švankmajer"/>
<link wikidata="Q939929" start="28855" end="28877" title="Dimensions of Dialogue" label="Dimensions of Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="28885" end="28899" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q478667" start="28914" end="28927" title="The Trap Door" label="The Trap Door"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28966" end="29016" title="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit" label="Wallace &amp;amp; Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q156401" start="29030" end="29041" title="Chicken Run" label="Chicken Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712587" start="29058" end="29086" title="The Adventures of Mark Twain (1985 film)" label="The Adventures of Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621738" start="29097" end="29117" title="Strata-cut animation" label="Strata-cut animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291325" start="29442" end="29458" title="Cutout animation" label="Cutout animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25078" start="29580" end="29593" title="Terry Gilliam" label="Terry Gilliam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16401" start="29631" end="29664" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus" label="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q477687" start="29694" end="29710" title="Fantastic Planet" label="Fantastic Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q259685" start="29754" end="29767" title="Tale of Tales (1979 film)" label="Tale of Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q44410" start="29790" end="29800" title="Matt Stone" label="Matt Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q44414" start="29805" end="29816" title="Trey Parker" label="Trey Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q54622175" start="29844" end="29854" title="South Park (franchise)" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="29956" end="29966" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850055" start="30109" end="30129" title="Silhouette animation" label="Silhouette animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q567591" start="30254" end="30285" title="The Adventures of Prince Achmed" label="The Adventures of Prince Achmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="30293" end="30308" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16028827" start="30326" end="30347" title="Princes et Princesses" label="Princes et Princesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888309" start="30372" end="30387" title="Model animation" label="Model animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662817" start="30495" end="30500" title="matte (filmmaking)" label="matte"/>
<link wikidata="Q313341" start="30649" end="30664" title="Ray Harryhausen" label="Ray Harryhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q785555" start="30690" end="30713" title="Jason and the Argonauts (1963 film)" label="Jason and the Argonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386416" start="30744" end="30766" title="Willis H. O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Willis H. O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q309048" start="30783" end="30792" title="King Kong (1933 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533348" start="30809" end="30818" title="Go motion" label="Go motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q852589" start="30889" end="30900" title="motion blur" label="motion blur"/>
<link wikidata="Q746676" start="31004" end="31032" title="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic" label="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935109" start="31037" end="31049" title="Phil Tippett" label="Phil Tippett"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="31060" end="31074" title="special effect" label="special effect"/>
<link wikidata="" start="31101" end="31147" title="Star Wars: Episode V – The Empire Strikes Back" label="Star Wars: Episode V – The Empire Strikes Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193005" start="31246" end="31258" title="Dragonslayer (1981 film)" label="Dragonslayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119677" start="31268" end="31284" title="Object animation" label="Object animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="31392" end="31409" title="Graphic animation" label="Graphic animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q849666" start="31693" end="31702" title="Brickfilm" label="Brickfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q170484" start="31752" end="31756" title="Lego" label="Lego"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="31891" end="31898" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="31941" end="31959" title="animation software" label="animation software"/>
<link wikidata="Q200751" start="31963" end="31973" title="Pixilation" label="Pixilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450020" start="32234" end="32268" title="The Secret Adventures of Tom Thumb" label="The Secret Adventures of Tom Thumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q941012" start="32285" end="32294" title="Angry Kid" label="Angry Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="32317" end="32330" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562390" start="32345" end="32355" title="Neighbours (1952 film)" label="Neighbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q716552" start="32365" end="32379" title="Norman McLaren" label="Norman McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194763" start="32769" end="32781" title="2D computer graphics" label="2D animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="32837" end="32852" title="Raster graphics" label="bitmap graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170130" start="32860" end="32875" title="vector graphics" label="vector graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q187631" start="32960" end="32972" title="Interpolation" label="interpolated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136781" start="32973" end="32981" title="morphing" label="morphing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595373" start="32983" end="32997" title="onion skinning" label="onion skinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386296" start="33099" end="33124" title="Scanimate" label="analog computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369644" start="33126" end="33141" title="Flash animation" label="Flash animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7236226" start="33147" end="33167" title="PowerPoint animation" label="PowerPoint animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092472" start="33169" end="33180" title="Cinemagraph" label="Cinemagraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330570" start="33186" end="33203" title="Still life photography" label="still photographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192" start="33222" end="33234" title="animated GIF" label="animated GIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q379788" start="33279" end="33288" title="advection" label="advection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252695" start="33510" end="33518" title="Paperman" label="Paperman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813564" start="33715" end="33723" title="Skeletal animation" label="skeletal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154597" start="34287" end="34299" title="polygon mesh" label="polygon mesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792910" start="34564" end="34572" title="Armature (computer animation)" label="armature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493902" start="34704" end="34713" title="key frame" label="key frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434937" start="34876" end="34893" title="fluid animation" label="water simulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049253" start="34971" end="34982" title="Cel shading" label="Cel shading"/>
<link wikidata="Q586467" start="35125" end="35132" title="Skyland" label="Skyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q867283" start="35161" end="35175" title="The Iron Giant" label="The Iron Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q73622" start="35202" end="35210" title="Futurama" label="Futurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704502" start="35236" end="35256" title="Appleseed Ex Machina" label="Appleseed Ex Machina"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35284" end="35319" title="The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker" label="The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35347" end="35386" title="The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild" label="The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="35409" end="35418" title="Machinima" label="Machinima"/>
<link wikidata="Q824340" start="35554" end="35563" title="demoscene" label="demoscene"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="35604" end="35624" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q217423" start="35642" end="35647" title="Quake (video game)" label="Quake"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="35657" end="35671" title="Motion capture" label="Motion capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q862197" start="35811" end="35824" title="The Polar Express (film)" label="Polar Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q644933" start="35849" end="35856" title="Beowulf (2007 film)" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q86791" start="35881" end="35898" title="A Christmas Carol (2009 film)" label="A Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q980041" start="35923" end="35947" title="The Adventures of Tintin (film)" label="The Adventures of Tintin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424778" start="35971" end="35982" title="Kochadaiiyaan" label="kochadiiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="36005" end="36023" title="Computer animation" label="Computer animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174811" start="36249" end="36251" title="Up (2009 film)" label="Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q373096" start="36276" end="36300" title="How to Train Your Dragon (2010 film)" label="How to Train Your Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189637" start="36320" end="36346" title="Physically based animation" label="Physically based animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="36366" end="36385" title="computer simulation" label="computer simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q494002" start="36408" end="36420" title="Animatronics" label="Animatronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q180165" start="36435" end="36447" title="mechatronics" label="mechatronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091162" start="36509" end="36527" title="Audio-Animatronics" label="Audio-Animatronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170978" start="36541" end="36549" title="robotics" label="robotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140930" start="36601" end="36625" title="Walt Disney Imagineering" label="Walt Disney Imagineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q181787" start="36861" end="36868" title="android (robot)" label="android"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826468" start="37066" end="37092" title="Linear alternator" label="Linear Animation Generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677117" start="37301" end="37313" title="Chuckimation" label="Chuckimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677117" start="37390" end="37408" title="Action League Now!" label="Action League Now!"/>
<link wikidata="Q654393" start="37541" end="37554" title="Magic lantern" label="Magic Lantern"/>
<link wikidata="Q39599" start="37604" end="37622" title="Christiaan Huygens" label="Christiaan Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130265" start="37706" end="37719" title="Hydraulic engineering" label="Hydrotechnics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306056" start="37837" end="37860" title="Drawn-on-film animation" label="Drawn-on-film animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745370" start="37935" end="37945" title="film stock" label="film stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q716552" start="37963" end="37977" title="Norman McLaren" label="Norman McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288566" start="37979" end="37986" title="Len Lye" label="Len Lye"/>
<link wikidata="Q698676" start="37991" end="38004" title="Stan Brakhage" label="Stan Brakhage"/>
<link wikidata="Q182370" start="38008" end="38032" title="Paint-on-glass animation" label="Paint-on-glass animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q296955" start="38100" end="38109" title="oil paint" label="oil paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386470" start="38146" end="38162" title="Aleksandr Petrov (animator)" label="Aleksandr Petrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="38166" end="38183" title="Charcoal" label="Erasure animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q666092" start="38298" end="38315" title="William Kentridge" label="William Kentridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="38334" end="38342" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196941" start="38362" end="38374" title="Piotr Dumała" label="Piotr Dumała"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381394" start="38437" end="38456" title="Pinscreen animation" label="Pinscreen animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348106" start="38776" end="38790" title="Sand animation" label="Sand animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="38833" end="38838" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q690182" start="38969" end="38977" title="Contrast (vision)" label="contrast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172965" start="38981" end="38990" title="Flip book" label="Flip book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062896" start="39661" end="39680" title="Character animation" label="Character animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17033505" start="39683" end="39695" title="Multi-sketch" label="Multi-sketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="39708" end="39722" title="Special effect" label="Special effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q222947" start="39736" end="39740" title="2.5D" label="2.5D"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40161" end="40178" title="War film#Animated" label="Animated war film"/>
<link wikidata="Q20313142" start="40181" end="40201" title="Animation department" label="Animation department"/>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="40204" end="40219" title="Animated series" label="Animated series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="40222" end="40227" title="Anime" label="Anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4787041" start="40230" end="40253" title="Architectural animation" label="Architectural animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4827727" start="40256" end="40260" title="Avar (animation variable)" label="Avar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017399" start="40263" end="40284" title="Independent animation" label="Independent animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511204" start="40287" end="40314" title="International Animation Day" label="International Animation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q743737" start="40317" end="40356" title="International Animated Film Association" label="International Animated Film Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053986" start="40359" end="40393" title="International Tournée of Animation" label="International Tournée of Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112632" start="40396" end="40423" title="List of film-related topics" label="List of film-related topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q34997" start="40426" end="40447" title="Motion graphic design" label="Motion graphic design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296864" start="40450" end="40479" title="Society for Animation Studies" label="Society for Animation Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628976" start="40482" end="40518" title="Twelve basic principles of animation" label="Twelve basic principles of animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q583169" start="40521" end="40537" title="Wire-frame model" label="Wire-frame model"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="594" wikidata="Q37340" url="?curid=594" title="Apollo">
<text>Apollo is one of the Olympian deities in ancient Greek and Roman religion and Greek and Roman mythology. Apollo has been recognized as a god of archery, music and dance, truth and prophecy, healing and diseases, the Sun and light, poetry, and more. One of the most important and complex of the Greek gods, he is the son of Zeus and Leto, and the twin brother of Artemis, goddess of the hunt. He is considered to be the most beautiful god and is represented as the ideal of the &quot;kouros&quot; (ephebe, or a beardless, athletic youth). Apollo is known in Greek-influenced Etruscan mythology as &quot;Apulu&quot;.

As the patron deity of Delphi (&quot;Apollo Pythios&quot;), Apollo is an oracular god—the prophetic deity of the Delphic Oracle and also the deity of ritual purification. His oracles were often consulted for guidance in various matters. He was in general seen as the god who affords help and wards off evil, and is referred to as , the &quot;averter of evil&quot;. Medicine and healing are associated with Apollo, whether through the god himself or mediated through his son Asclepius. Apollo delivered people from epidemics, yet he is also a god who could bring ill health and deadly plague with his arrows. The invention of archery itself is credited to Apollo and his sister Artemis. Apollo is usually described as carrying a silver or golden bow and a quiver of silver or golden arrows.

As the god of &quot;mousike&quot;, Apollo presides over all music, songs, dance, and poetry. He is the inventor of string-music and the frequent companion of the Muses, functioning as their chorus leader in celebrations. The lyre is a common attribute of Apollo. Protection of the young is one of the best attested facets of his panhellenic cult persona. As a , Apollo is concerned with the health and education of children, and he presided over their passage into adulthood. Long hair, which was the prerogative of boys, was cut at the coming of age () and dedicated to Apollo. The god himself is depicted with long, uncut hair to symbolise his eternal youth.

Apollo is an important pastoral deity, and he was the patron of herdsmen and shepherds. Protection of herds, flocks and crops from diseases, pests and predators were his primary rustic duties. On the other hand, Apollo also encouraged the founding of new towns and the establishment of civil constitutions, is associated with dominion over colonists, and was the giver of laws. His oracles were often consulted before setting laws in a city. Apollo Agyieus was the protector of the streets, public places and home entrances.

In Hellenistic times, especially during the 5th century BCE, as &quot;Apollo Helios&quot; he became identified among Greeks with Helios, the personification of the Sun. Although Latin theological works from at least 1st century BCE identified Apollo with Sol, there was no conflation between the two among the classical Latin poets until 1st century CE. 
==Etymology==

Apollo (Attic, Ionic, and Homeric Greek: , ( ); Doric: , ; Arcadocypriot: , ; Aeolic: , ; )

The name &quot;Apollo&quot;—unlike the related older name &quot;Paean&quot;—is generally not found in the Linear B (Mycenean Greek) texts, although there is a possible attestation in the lacunose form &quot;]pe-rjo-[&quot; (Linear B: ]-[) on the KN E 842 tablet, though it has also been suggested that the name might actually read &quot;Hyperion&quot; ([u]-pe-rjo-[ne]).

The etymology of the name is uncertain. The spelling ( in Classical Attic) had almost superseded all other forms by the beginning of the common era, but the Doric form, (), is more archaic, as it is derived from an earlier . It probably is a cognate to the Doric month &quot;Apellaios&quot; (), and the offerings () at the initiation of the young men during the family-festival (). According to some scholars, the words are derived from the Doric word (), which originally meant &quot;wall,&quot; &quot;fence for animals&quot; and later &quot;assembly within the limits of the square.&quot; Apella () is the name of the popular assembly in Sparta, corresponding to the (). R. S. P. Beekes rejected the connection of the theonym with the noun and suggested a Pre-Greek proto-form *&quot;Apalyun&quot;.

Several instances of popular etymology are attested by ancient authors. Thus, the Greeks most often associated Apollo&#x27;s name with the Greek verb (), &quot;to destroy&quot;. Plato in &quot;Cratylus&quot; connects the name with (), &quot;redemption&quot;, with (&quot;apolousis&quot;), &quot;purification&quot;, and with (), &quot;simple&quot;, in particular in reference to the Thessalian form of the name, , and finally with (), &quot;ever-shooting&quot;. Hesychius connects the name Apollo with the Doric (), which means &quot;assembly&quot;, so that Apollo would be the god of political life, and he also gives the explanation (), &quot;fold&quot;, in which case Apollo would be the god of flocks and herds. In the ancient Macedonian language () means &quot;stone,&quot; and some toponyms may be derived from this word: (Pella, the capital of ancient Macedonia) and (&quot;Pellēnē&quot;/&quot;Pellene&quot;).

The Hittite form &quot;Apaliunas&quot; (&quot;d&quot;) is attested in the Manapa-Tarhunta letter. The Hittite testimony reflects an early form &quot;&quot;, which may also be surmised from the comparison of Cypriot with Doric . The name of the Lydian god &quot;Qλdãns&quot; // may reflect an earlier /-/ before palatalization, syncope, and the pre-Lydian sound change * &quot;&gt;&quot; . Note the labiovelar in place of the labial // found in pre-Doric and Hittite &quot;Apaliunas&quot;. A Luwian etymology suggested for &quot;Apaliunas&quot; makes Apollo &quot;The One of Entrapment&quot;, perhaps in the sense of &quot;Hunter&quot;.

===Greco-Roman epithets===
Apollo&#x27;s chief epithet was Phoebus ( ; , &quot;Phoibos&quot; ), literally &quot;bright&quot;. It was very commonly used by both the Greeks and Romans for Apollo&#x27;s role as the god of light. Like other Greek deities, he had a number of others applied to him, reflecting the variety of roles, duties, and aspects ascribed to the god. However, while Apollo has a great number of appellations in Greek myth, only a few occur in Latin literature.

====Sun====
*Aegletes ( ; , &quot;Aiglētēs&quot;), from , &quot;light of the Sun&quot; 
*Helius ( ; , &quot;Helios&quot;), literally &quot;Sun&quot; 
*Lyceus ( ; , &quot;Lykeios&quot;, from Proto-Greek *), &quot;light&quot;. The meaning of the epithet &quot;Lyceus&quot; later became associated with Apollo&#x27;s mother Leto, who was the patron goddess of Lycia () and who was identified with the wolf ().
*Phanaeus ( ; , &quot;Phanaios&quot;), literally &quot;giving or bringing light&quot;
*Phoebus ( ; , &quot;Phoibos&quot;), literally &quot;bright&quot;, his most commonly used epithet by both the Greeks and Romans
*Sol (Roman) (), &quot;Sun&quot; in Latin

====Wolf====
*Lycegenes ( ; , &quot;Lukēgenēs&quot;), literally &quot;born of a wolf&quot; or &quot;born of Lycia&quot;
*Lycoctonus ( ; , &quot;Lykoktonos&quot;), from , &quot;wolf&quot;, and , &quot;to kill&quot;

====Origin and birth====
Apollo&#x27;s birthplace was Mount Cynthus on the island of Delos.

*Cynthius ( ; , &quot;Kunthios&quot;), literally &quot;Cynthian&quot;
*Cynthogenes ( ; , &quot;Kynthogenēs&quot;), literally &quot;born of Cynthus&quot;
*Delius ( ; , &quot;Delios&quot;), literally &quot;Delian&quot;
*Didymaeus ( ; , &quot;Didymaios&quot;) from δίδυμος, &quot;twin&quot;, as the twin of Artemis

====Place of worship====
Delphi and Actium were his primary places of worship.

*Acraephius ( ; , &quot;Akraiphios&quot;, literally &quot;Acraephian&quot;) or Acraephiaeus ( ; , &quot;Akraiphiaios&quot;), &quot;Acraephian&quot;, from the Boeotian town of Acraephia (), reputedly founded by his son Acraepheus.
*Actiacus ( ; , &quot;Aktiakos&quot;), literally &quot;Actian&quot;, after Actium ()
*Delphinius ( ; , &quot;Delphinios&quot;), literally &quot;Delphic&quot;, after Delphi (Δελφοί). An etiology in the &quot;Homeric Hymns&quot; associated this with dolphins.
*Epactaeus, meaning &quot;god worshipped on the coast&quot;, in Samos.
*Pythius ( ; , &quot;Puthios&quot;, from Πυθώ, &quot;Pythō&quot;), from the region around Delphi
*Smintheus ( ; , &quot;Smintheus&quot;), &quot;Sminthian&quot;—that is, &quot;of the town of Sminthos or Sminthe&quot; near the Troad town of Hamaxitus
*Napaian Apollo (), from the city of Nape at the island of Lesbos
*Eutresites, from the city of Eutresis.
*Ixios (Ἴξιος), derived from a district in Rhodes called Ixiae or Ixia.

====Healing and disease====
*Acesius ( ; , &quot;Akesios&quot;), from , &quot;healing&quot;. Acesius was the epithet of Apollo worshipped in Elis, where he had a temple in the agora.
*Acestor ( ; , &quot;Akestōr&quot;), literally &quot;healer&quot;
*Culicarius (Roman) ( ), from Latin &quot;culicārius&quot;, &quot;of midges&quot;
*Iatrus ( ; , &quot;Iātros&quot;), literally &quot;physician&quot;
*Medicus (Roman) ( ), &quot;physician&quot; in Latin. A temple was dedicated to &quot;Apollo Medicus&quot; in Rome, probably next to the temple of Bellona.
*Paean ( ; , &quot;Paiān&quot;), physician, healer
*Parnopius ( ; , &quot;Parnopios&quot;), from , &quot;locust&quot;

====Founder and protector====
*Agyieus ( ; , &quot;Aguīeus&quot;), from , &quot;street&quot;, for his role in protecting roads and homes
*Alexicacus ( ; , &quot;Alexikakos&quot;), literally &quot;warding off evil&quot;
*Apotropaeus ( ; , &quot;Apotropaios&quot;), from , &quot;to avert&quot;
*Archegetes ( ; , &quot;Arkhēgetēs&quot;), literally &quot;founder&quot;
*Averruncus (Roman) ( ; from Latin &quot;āverruncare&quot;), &quot;to avert&quot;
*Clarius ( ; , &quot;Klārios&quot;), from Doric , &quot;allotted lot&quot;
*Epicurius ( ; , &quot;Epikourios&quot;), from , &quot;to aid&quot;
*Genetor ( ; , &quot;Genetōr&quot;), literally &quot;ancestor&quot;
*Nomius ( ; , &quot;Nomios&quot;), literally &quot;pastoral&quot;
*Nymphegetes ( ; , &quot;Numphēgetēs&quot;), from , &quot;Nymph&quot;, and , &quot;leader&quot;, for his role as a protector of shepherds and pastoral life
*Patroos (, &quot;Patrōios&quot;) from , &quot;related to one&#x27;s father,&quot; for his role as father of Ion and founder of the Ionians, as worshipped at the Temple of Apollo Patroos in Athens
*Sauroctonus (, &quot;Sauroctonos&quot;), &quot;lizard-killer&quot;, possibly a reference to his killing of Python

====Prophecy and truth====
*Coelispex (Roman) ( ), from Latin &quot;coelum&quot;, &quot;sky&quot;, and &quot;specere&quot; &quot;to look at&quot;
*Iatromantis ( ; , &quot;Iātromantis&quot;,) from , &quot;physician&quot;, and , &quot;prophet&quot;, referring to his role as a god both of healing and of prophecy
*Leschenorius ( ; , &quot;Leskhēnorios&quot;), from , &quot;converser&quot;
*Loxias ( ; , &quot;Loxias&quot;), from , &quot;to say&quot;, historically associated with , &quot;ambiguous&quot;
*Manticus ( ; , &quot;Mantikos&quot;), literally &quot;prophetic&quot;
*Proopsios (), meaning &quot;foreseer&quot; or &quot;first seen&quot;

====Music and arts====
*Musagetes ( ; Doric , &quot;Mousāgetās&quot;), from , &quot;Muse&quot;, and &quot;leader&quot; 
*Musegetes ( ; , &quot;Mousēgetēs&quot;), as the preceding

====Archery====
*Aphetor ( ; , &quot;Aphētōr&quot;), from , &quot;to let loose&quot;
*Aphetorus ( ; , &quot;Aphētoros&quot;), as the preceding
*Arcitenens (Roman) ( ), literally &quot;bow-carrying&quot;
*Argyrotoxus ( ; , &quot;Argyrotoxos&quot;), literally &quot;with silver bow&quot;
*Clytotoxus ( ; , &quot;Klytótoxos&quot;), &quot;he who is famous for his bow&quot;, the renowned archer.
*Hecaërgus ( ; , &quot;Hekaergos&quot;), literally &quot;far-shooting&quot;
*Hecebolus ( ; , &quot;Hekēbolos&quot;), &quot;far-shooting&quot;
*Ismenius ( ; , &quot;Ismēnios&quot;), literally &quot;of Ismenus&quot;, after Ismenus, the son of Amphion and Niobe, whom he struck with an arrow

==== Appearance ====
* Acersecomes (, &quot;Akersekómēs&quot;), &quot;he who has unshorn hair&quot;, the eternal ephebe.
* Chrysocomes ( ; , &quot;Khrusokómēs&quot;), literally &quot;he who has golden hair.&quot;

====Amazons====
*Amazonius (), Pausanias at the Description of Greece writes that near Pyrrhichus there was a sanctuary of Apollo, called Amazonius () with an image of the god said to have been dedicated by the Amazons.

====Other====
*Boedromius (), was a surname of Apollo in Athens, with varying explanations for its origin. Some claim that the reason the god was given this name was because he had helped the Athenians overcome the Amazons in their battle, which took place on the seventh of Boedromion, the day the Boedromia were later commemorated. Others claim that the term originated from the fact that, in the battle between Eumolpus and Erechtheus and Ion, Apollo had counselled the Athenians to charge the enemy with a war cry (Βοή) if they were going to win.

===Celtic epithets and cult titles===
Apollo was worshipped throughout the Roman Empire. In the traditionally Celtic lands, he was most often seen as a healing and sun god. He was often equated with Celtic gods of similar character.
* Apollo Atepomarus (&quot;the great horseman&quot; or &quot;possessing a great horse&quot;). Apollo was worshipped at Mauvières (Indre). Horses were, in the Celtic world, closely linked to the Sun.
* Apollo Belenus (&quot;bright&quot; or &quot;brilliant&quot;). This epithet was given to Apollo in parts of Gaul, Northern Italy and Noricum (part of modern Austria). Apollo Belenus was a healing and sun god.
* Apollo Cunomaglus (&quot;hound lord&quot;). A title given to Apollo at a shrine at Nettleton Shrub, Wiltshire. May have been a god of healing. Cunomaglus himself may originally have been an independent healing god.
* Apollo Grannus. Grannus was a healing spring god, later equated with Apollo.
* Apollo Maponus. A god known from inscriptions in Britain. This may be a local fusion of Apollo and Maponus.
* Apollo Moritasgus (&quot;masses of sea water&quot;). An epithet for Apollo at Alesia, where he was worshipped as the god of healing and, possibly, of physicians.
* Apollo Vindonnus (&quot;clear light&quot;). Apollo Vindonnus had a temple at Essarois, near Châtillon-sur-Seine in present-day Burgundy. He was a god of healing, especially of the eyes.
* Apollo Virotutis (&quot;benefactor of mankind&quot;). Apollo Virotutis was worshipped, among other places, at Fins d&#x27;Annecy (Haute-Savoie) and at Jublains (Maine-et-Loire).

==Origins==

Apollo is considered the most Hellenic (Greek) of the Olympian gods.

The cult centers of Apollo in Greece, Delphi and Delos, date from the 8th century BCE. The Delos sanctuary was primarily dedicated to Artemis, Apollo&#x27;s twin sister. At Delphi, Apollo was venerated as the slayer of the monstrous serpent Python. For the Greeks, Apollo was the most Greek of all the gods, and through the centuries he acquired different functions. In Archaic Greece he was the prophet, the oracular god who in older times was connected with &quot;healing&quot;. In Classical Greece he was the god of light and of music, but in popular religion he had a strong function to keep away evil. Walter Burkert discerned three components in the prehistory of Apollo worship, which he termed &quot;a Dorian-northwest Greek component, a Cretan-Minoan component, and a Syro-Hittite component.&quot;

===Healer and god-protector from evil===

In classical times, his major function in popular religion was to keep away evil, and he was therefore called &quot;apotropaios&quot; (, &quot;averting evil&quot;) and &quot;alexikakos&quot; ( &quot;keeping off ill&quot;; from v. + n. ). Apollo also had many epithets relating to his function as a healer. Some commonly-used examples are &quot;paion&quot; ( literally &quot;healer&quot; or &quot;helper&quot;) &quot;epikourios&quot; (, &quot;succouring&quot;), &quot;oulios&quot; (, &quot;healer, baleful&quot;) and &quot;loimios&quot; (, &quot;of the plague&quot;). In later writers, the word, &quot;paion&quot;, usually spelled &quot;Paean&quot;, becomes a mere epithet of Apollo in his capacity as a god of healing.

Apollo in his aspect of &quot;healer&quot; has a connection to the primitive god Paean (), who did not have a cult of his own. Paean serves as the healer of the gods in the &quot;Iliad&quot;, and seems to have originated in a pre-Greek religion. It is suggested, though unconfirmed, that he is connected to the Mycenaean figure &quot;pa-ja-wo-ne&quot; (Linear B: ). Paean was the personification of holy songs sung by &quot;seer-doctors&quot; (), which were supposed to cure disease.

Homer uses the noun Paeon to designate both a god and that god&#x27;s characteristic song of apotropaic thanksgiving and triumph. Such songs were originally addressed to Apollo and afterwards to other gods: to Dionysus, to Apollo Helios, to Apollo&#x27;s son Asclepius the healer. About the 4th century BCE, the paean became merely a formula of adulation; its object was either to implore protection against disease and misfortune or to offer thanks after such protection had been rendered. It was in this way that Apollo had become recognized as the god of music. Apollo&#x27;s role as the slayer of the Python led to his association with battle and victory; hence it became the Roman custom for a paean to be sung by an army on the march and before entering into battle, when a fleet left the harbour, and also after a victory had been won.

In the &quot;Iliad&quot;, Apollo is the healer under the gods, but he is also the bringer of disease and death with his arrows, similar to the function of the Vedic god of disease Rudra. He sends a plague () to the Achaeans. Knowing that Apollo can prevent a recurrence of the plague he sent, they purify themselves in a ritual and offer him a large sacrifice of cows, called a hecatomb.

===Dorian origin===
The &quot;Homeric Hymn to Apollo&quot; depicts Apollo as an intruder from the north. The connection with the northern-dwelling Dorians and their initiation festival &quot;apellai&quot; is reinforced by the month &quot;Apellaios&quot; in northwest Greek calendars. The family-festival was dedicated to Apollo (Doric: ). &quot;Apellaios&quot; is the month of these rites, and Apellon is the &quot;megistos kouros&quot; (the great Kouros). However it can explain only the Doric type of the name, which is connected with the Ancient Macedonian word &quot;pella&quot; (Pella), &quot;stone&quot;. Stones played an important part in the cult of the god, especially in the oracular shrine of Delphi (Omphalos).

===Minoan origin===

George Huxley considered the identification of Apollo with the Minoan deity Paiawon, worshipped in Crete, to have originated at Delphi. In the &quot;Homeric Hymn&quot;, Apollo appears as a dolphin carrying Cretan priests to Delphi, to which site they evidently transfer their religious practices. &quot;Apollo Delphinios&quot; or &quot;Delphidios&quot; was a sea-god worshipped especially in Crete and in the islands. Apollo&#x27;s sister Artemis, who was the Greek goddess of hunting, is identified with the Minoan goddess Britomartis (Diktynna), and with &quot;Laphria&quot; the Pre-Greek &quot;mistress of the animals&quot; who was specially worshipped at Delphi. In her earliest depictions she was accompanied by the &quot;Master of the animals&quot;, a bow-wielding god of hunting whose name has been lost; aspects of this figure may have been absorbed into the more popular Apollo. A family of priests at Delphi was named &quot;Lab(r)yaden&quot;. The name may derive from Laphria.

===Anatolian origin===

A non-Greek origin of Apollo has long been assumed in scholarship. The name of Apollo&#x27;s mother Leto has Lydian origin, and she was worshipped on the coasts of Asia Minor. The inspiration oracular cult was probably introduced into Greece from Anatolia, which is the origin of Sibyl, and where some of the oldest oracular shrines originated. Omens, symbols, purifications, and exorcisms appear in old Assyro-Babylonian texts. These rituals were spread into the empire of the Hittites, and from there into Greece.

Homer pictures Apollo on the side of the Trojans, fighting against the Achaeans, during the Trojan War. He is pictured as a terrible god, less trusted by the Greeks than other gods. The god seems to be related to &quot;Appaliunas&quot;, a tutelary god of Wilusa (Troy) in Asia Minor, but the word is not complete. The stones found in front of the gates of Homeric Troy were the symbols of Apollo. A western Anatolian origin may also be bolstered by references to the parallel worship of &quot;Artimus&quot; (Artemis) and &quot;Qλdãns&quot;, whose name may be cognate with the Hittite and Doric forms, in surviving Lydian texts&quot;.&quot; However, recent scholars have cast doubt on the identification of &quot;Qλdãns&quot; with Apollo.

The Greeks gave to him the name &quot;agyieus&quot; as the protector god of public places and houses who wards off evil and his symbol was a tapered stone or column. However, while usually Greek festivals were celebrated at the full moon, all the feasts of Apollo were celebrated on the seventh day of the month, and the emphasis given to that day (&quot;sibutu&quot;) indicates a Babylonian origin.

=== Proto-Indo-European ===

The Vedic Rudra has some functions similar to those of Apollo. The terrible god is called &quot;the archer&quot; and the bow is also an attribute of Shiva. Rudra could bring diseases with his arrows, but he was able to free people of them and his alternative Shiva is a healer physician god. However the Indo-European component of Apollo does not explain his strong association with omens, exorcisms, and an oracular cult.

==Oracular cult==
Unusually among the Olympic deities, Apollo had two cult sites that had widespread influence: Delos and Delphi. In cult practice, Delian Apollo and Pythian Apollo (the Apollo of Delphi) were so distinct that they might both have shrines in the same locality. Lycia was sacred to the god, for this Apollo was also called Lycian. Apollo&#x27;s cult was already fully established when written sources commenced, about 650 BCE. Apollo became extremely important to the Greek world as an oracular deity in the archaic period, and the frequency of theophoric names such as &quot;Apollodorus&quot; or &quot;Apollonios&quot; and cities named &quot;Apollonia&quot; testify to his popularity. Oracular sanctuaries to Apollo were established in other sites. In the 2nd and 3rd century CE, those at Didyma and Claros pronounced the so-called &quot;theological oracles&quot;, in which Apollo confirms that all deities are aspects or servants of an all-encompassing, highest deity. &quot;In the 3rd century, Apollo fell silent. Julian the Apostate (359–361) tried to revive the Delphic oracle, but failed.&quot;

===Oracular shrines===

Apollo had a famous oracle in Delphi, and other notable ones in Claros and Didyma. His oracular shrine in Abae in Phocis, where he bore the toponymic epithet &quot;Abaeus&quot; (, &quot;Apollon Abaios&quot;), was important enough to be consulted by Croesus. His oracular shrines include:

* Abae in Phocis.
* Bassae in the Peloponnese.
* At Clarus, on the west coast of Asia Minor; as at Delphi a holy spring which gave off a &quot;pneuma&quot;, from which the priests drank.
* In Corinth, the Oracle of Corinth came from the town of Tenea, from prisoners supposedly taken in the Trojan War.
* At Khyrse, in Troad, the temple was built for Apollo Smintheus.
* In Delos, there was an oracle to the Delian Apollo, during summer. The Hieron (Sanctuary) of Apollo adjacent to the Sacred Lake, was the place where the god was said to have been born.
* In Delphi, the Pythia became filled with the &quot;pneuma&quot; of Apollo, said to come from a spring inside the Adyton.
* In Didyma, an oracle on the coast of Anatolia, south west of Lydian (Luwian) Sardis, in which priests from the lineage of the Branchidae received inspiration by drinking from a healing spring located in the temple. Was believed to have been founded by Branchus, son or lover of Apollo.
* In Hierapolis Bambyce, Syria (modern Manbij), according to the treatise &quot;De Dea Syria&quot;, the sanctuary of the Syrian Goddess contained a robed and bearded image of Apollo. Divination was based on spontaneous movements of this image.
* At Patara, in Lycia, there was a seasonal winter oracle of Apollo, said to have been the place where the god went from Delos. As at Delphi the oracle at Patara was a woman.
* In Segesta in Sicily.

Oracles were also given by sons of Apollo.
* In Oropus, north of Athens, the oracle Amphiaraus, was said to be the son of Apollo; Oropus also had a sacred spring.
* in Labadea, east of Delphi, Trophonius, another son of Apollo, killed his brother and fled to the cave where he was also afterwards consulted as an oracle.

==Temples of Apollo==


Many temples were dedicated to Apollo in Greece and the Greek colonies. They show the spread of the cult of Apollo and the evolution of Greek architecture, which was mostly based on the rightness of form and on mathematical relations. Some of the earliest temples, especially in Crete, do not belong to any Greek order. It seems that the first peripteral temples were rectangular wooden structures. The different wooden elements were considered divine, and their forms were preserved in the marble or stone elements of the temples of Doric order. The Greeks used standard types because they believed that the world of objects was a series of typical forms which could be represented in several instances. The temples should be canonic, and the architects were trying to achieve this esthetic perfection. From the earliest times there were certain rules strictly observed in rectangular peripteral and prostyle buildings. The first buildings were built narrowly in order to hold the roof, and when the dimensions changed some mathematical relations became necessary in order to keep the original forms. This probably influenced the theory of numbers of Pythagoras, who believed that behind the appearance of things there was the permanent principle of mathematics.

The Doric order dominated during the 6th and the 5th century BC but there was a mathematical problem regarding the position of the triglyphs, which could not be solved without changing the original forms. The order was almost abandoned for the Ionic order, but the Ionic capital also posed an insoluble problem at the corner of a temple. Both orders were abandoned for the Corinthian order gradually during the Hellenistic age and under Rome.

The most important temples are:

===Greek temples===
*Thebes, Greece: The oldest temple probably dedicated to &quot;Apollo Ismenius&quot; was built in the 9th century BC. It seems that it was a curvilinear building. The Doric temple was built in the early 7th century BC, but only some small parts have been found. A festival called Daphnephoria was celebrated every ninth year in honour of Apollo Ismenius (or Galaxius). The people held laurel branches (daphnai), and at the head of the procession walked a youth (chosen priest of Apollo), who was called &quot;daphnephoros&quot;.
*Eretria: According to the Homeric hymn to Apollo, the god arrived on the plain, seeking for a location to establish its oracle. The first temple of &quot;Apollo Daphnephoros&quot;, &quot;Apollo, laurel-bearer&quot;, or &quot;carrying off Daphne&quot;, is dated to 800 BC. The temple was curvilinear &quot;hecatombedon&quot; (a hundred feet). In a smaller building were kept the bases of the laurel branches which were used for the first building. Another temple probably peripteral was built in the 7th century BC, with an inner row of wooden columns over its Geometric predecessor. It was rebuilt peripteral around 510 BC, with the stylobate measuring 21.00 x 43.00 m. The number of pteron column was 6 x 14. 
*Dreros (Crete). The temple of &quot;Apollo Delphinios&quot; dates from the 7th century BC, or probably from the middle of the 8th century BC. According to the legend, Apollo appeared as a dolphin, and carried Cretan priests to the port of Delphi. The dimensions of the plan are 10.70 x 24.00 m and the building was not peripteral. It contains column-bases of the Minoan type, which may be considered as the predecessors of the Doric columns.
*Gortyn (Crete). A temple of &quot;Pythian Apollo&quot;, was built in the 7th century BC. The plan measured 19.00 x 16.70 m and it was not peripteral. The walls were solid, made from limestone, and there was a single door on the east side.
*Thermon (West Greece): The Doric temple of &quot;Apollo Thermios&quot;, was built in the middle of the 7th century BC. It was built on an older curvilinear building dating perhaps from the 10th century, on which a peristyle was added. The temple was narrow, and the number of pteron columns (probably wooden) was 5 x 15. There was a single row of inner columns. It measures 12.13 x 38.23 m at the stylobate, which was made from stones. 
*Corinth: A Doric temple was built in the 6th century BC. The temple&#x27;s stylobate measures 21.36 x 53.30 m, and the number of pteron columns was 6 x 15. There was a double row of inner columns. The style is similar to the Temple of Alcmeonidae at Delphi. The Corinthians were considered to be the inventors of the Doric order. 
*Napes (Lesbos): An Aeolic temple probably of &quot;Apollo Napaios&quot; was built in the 7th century BC. Some special capitals with floral ornament have been found, which are called Aeolic, and it seems that they were borrowed from the East. 
*Cyrene, Libya: The oldest Doric temple of Apollo was built in . The number of pteron columns was 6 x 11, and it measures 16.75 x 30.05 m at the stylobate. There was a double row of sixteen inner columns on stylobates. The capitals were made from stone. 

*Naukratis: An Ionic temple was built in the early 6th century BC. Only some fragments have been found and the earlier ones, made from limestone, are identified among the oldest of the Ionic order.

*Syracuse, Sicily: A Doric temple was built at the beginning of the 6th century BC. The temple&#x27;s stylobate measures 21.47 x 55.36 m and the number of pteron columns was 6 x 17. It was the first temple in Greek west built completely out of stone. A second row of columns were added, obtaining the effect of an inner porch. 
*Selinus (Sicily):The Doric Temple C dates from 550 BC, and it was probably dedicated to Apollo. The temple&#x27;s stylobate measures 10.48 x 41.63 m and the number of pteron columns was 6 x 17. There was a portico with a second row of columns, which is also attested for the temple at Syracuse.
*Delphi: The first temple dedicated to Apollo, was built in the 7th century BC. According to the legend, it was wooden made of laurel branches. The &quot;Temple of Alcmeonidae&quot; was built in and it is the oldest Doric temple with significant marble elements. The temple&#x27;s stylobate measures 21.65 x 58.00 m, and the number of pteron columns as 6 x 15. A fest similar with Apollo&#x27;s fest at Thebes, Greece was celebrated every nine years. A boy was sent to the temple, who walked on the sacred road and returned carrying a laurel branch (&quot;dopnephoros&quot;). The maidens participated with joyful songs. 
*Chios: An Ionic temple of &quot;Apollo Phanaios&quot; was built at the end of the 6th century BC. Only some small parts have been found and the capitals had floral ornament. 
*Abae (Phocis). The temple was destroyed by the Persians in the invasion of Xerxes in 480 BC, and later by the Boeotians. It was rebuilt by Hadrian. The oracle was in use from early Mycenaean times to the Roman period, and shows the continuity of Mycenaean and Classical Greek religion. 
*Bassae (Peloponnesus): A temple dedicated to &quot;Apollo Epikourios&quot; (&quot;Apollo the helper&quot;), was built in 430 BC, designed by Iktinos. It combined Doric and Ionic elements, and the earliest use of a column with a Corinthian capital in the middle. The temple is of a relatively modest size, with the stylobate measuring 14.5 x 38.3 metres containing a Doric peristyle of 6 x 15 columns. The roof left a central space open to admit light and air.
*Delos: A temple probably dedicated to Apollo and not peripteral, was built in the late 7th century BC, with a plan measuring 10.00 x 15.60 m. The Doric Great temple of Apollo, was built in . The temple&#x27;s stylobate measures 13.72 x 29.78 m, and the number of pteron columns as 6 x 13. Marble was extensively used.
*Ambracia: A Doric peripteral temple dedicated to &quot;Apollo Pythios Sotir&quot; was built in 500 BC, at the centre of the Greek city Arta. Only some parts have been found, and it seems that the temple was built on earlier sanctuaries dedicated to Apollo. The temple measures 20.75 x 44.00 m at the stylobate. The foundation which supported the statue of the god, still exists.

*Didyma (near Miletus): The gigantic Ionic temple of &quot;Apollo Didymaios&quot; started around 540 BC. The construction ceased and then it was restarted in 330 BC. The temple is dipteral, with an outer row of 10 x 21 columns, and it measures 28.90 x 80.75 m at the stylobate.
*Clarus (near ancient Colophon): According to the legend, the famous seer Calchas, on his return from Troy, came to Clarus. He challenged the seer Mopsus, and died when he lost. The Doric temple of &quot;Apollo Clarius&quot; was probably built in the 3rd century BC., and it was peripteral with 6 x 11 columns. It was reconstructed at the end of the Hellenistic period, and later from the emperor Hadrian but Pausanias claims that it was still incomplete in the 2nd century BC.
*Hamaxitus (Troad): In the Iliad, Chryses the priest of Apollo, addresses the god with the epithet Smintheus (Lord of Mice), related to the god&#x27;s ancient role as bringer of the disease (plague). Recent excavations indicate that the Hellenistic temple of &quot;Apollo Smintheus&quot; was constructed in 150–125 BC, but the symbol of the mouse god was used on coinage probably from the 4th century . The temple measures 40.00 x 23.00 m at the stylobate, and the number of pteron columns was 8 x 14.
*Pythion (), this was the name of a shrine of Apollo at Athens near the Ilisos river. It was created by Peisistratos, and tripods were placed there by those who had won in the cyclic chorus at the Thargelia.
*Setae (Lydia): The temple of &quot;Apollo Aksyros&quot; located in the city.
*Apollonia Pontica: There were two temples of Apollo Healer in the city. One from the Late Archaic period and the other from the Early Classical period.
*Ikaros island in the Persian Gulf (modern Failaka Island): There was a temple of Apollo on the island.
*Argos in Cyprus: there was a temple of Apollo Erithios (Ἐριθίου Ἀπόλλωνος ἱερῷ).
*The temple and oracle of Apollo at Eutresis.
*An altar of Apollo Acritas was at Lacedaemon. In addition, above a sanctuary surnamed Gasepton of Earth in Lacedaemon was set up the Maleatian Apollo.

===Etruscan and Roman temples===
*Veii (Etruria): The temple of Apollo was built in the late 6th century BC, indicating the spread of Apollo&#x27;s culture (Aplu) in Etruria. There was a prostyle porch, which is called Tuscan, and a triple cella 18.50 m wide.
*Falerii Veteres (Etruria): A temple of Apollo was built probably in the 4th–3rd century BC. Parts of a terracotta capital, and a terracotta base have been found. It seems that the Etruscan columns were derived from the archaic Doric. A cult of Apollo Soranus is attested by one inscription found near Falerii.

*Pompeii (Italy): The cult of Apollo was widespread in the region of Campania since the 6th century BC. The temple was built in 120 BC, but its beginnings lie in the 6th century BC. It was reconstructed after an earthquake in AD 63. It demonstrates a mixing of styles which formed the basis of Roman architecture. The columns in front of the cella formed a Tuscan prostyle porch, and the cella is situated unusually far back. The peripteral colonnade of 48 Ionic columns was placed in such a way that the emphasis was given to the front side.
* Rome: The temple of Apollo Sosianus and the &quot;temple of Apollo Medicus&quot;. The first temple building dates to 431 BC, and was dedicated to Apollo Medicus (the doctor), after a plague of 433 BC. It was rebuilt by Gaius Sosius, probably in 34 BC. Only three columns with Corinthian capitals exist today. It seems that the cult of Apollo had existed in this area since at least to the mid-5th century BC.
*Rome: The temple of Apollo Palatinus was located on the Palatine hill within the sacred boundary of the city. It was dedicated by Augustus in 28 BC. The façade of the original temple was Ionic and it was constructed from solid blocks of marble. Many famous statues by Greek masters were on display in and around the temple, including a marble statue of the god at the entrance and a statue of Apollo in the cella.
*Melite (modern Mdina, Malta): A Temple of Apollo was built in the city in the 2nd century AD. Its remains were discovered in the 18th century, and many of its architectural fragments were dispersed among private collections or reworked into new sculptures. Parts of the temple&#x27;s podium were rediscovered in 2002.

==Mythology==

In the myths, Apollo is the son of Zeus, the king of the gods, and Leto, his previous wife or one of his mistresses. Apollo often appears in the myths, plays and hymns either directly or indirectly through his oracles. As Zeus&#x27; favorite son, he had direct access to the mind of Zeus and was willing to reveal this knowledge to humans. A divinity beyond human comprehension, he appears both as a beneficial and a wrathful god.

===Birth===
====&quot;Homeric Hymn to Apollo&quot;====

Pregnant with the offspring of Zeus, Leto wandered through many lands wanting to give birth to Apollo. However all the lands rejected her out of fear. Upon reaching Delos, Leto requested the island to shelter her, and that in return her son would bring fame and prosperity to the island. Delos then revealed to Leto that Apollo was rumoured to be the god who will &quot;greatly lord it among gods and men all over the fruitful earth&quot;. For this reason, all the lands were fearful and Delos feared that Apollo would cast her aside once he is born. Hearing this, Leto swore on the river Styx that if she is allowed to give birth on the island, her son would honour Delos the most amongst all the other lands. Assured by this, Delos agreed to assist Leto. All goddesses except Hera also came to aid Leto.

However, Hera had tricked Eileithyia, the goddess of childbirth, to stay on Olympus, due to which Leto was unable to give birth. The goddesses then convinced Iris to go bring Eileithyia by offering her a necklace of amber 9 yards (8.2 m) long. Iris did accordingly and persuaded Eileithyia to step onto the island. Thus, clutching a palm tree, Leto finally gave birth after labouring for nine days and nine nights, with Apollo &quot;leaping forth&quot; from his mother&#x27;s womb. The goddesses washed the newborn, covered him in a white garment and fastened golden bands around him. As Leto was unable to feed him, Themis, the goddess of divine law, fed him nectar and ambrosia. Upon tasting the divine food, the child broke free of the bands fastened onto him and declared that he would be the master of lyre and archery, and interpret the will of Zeus to humankind. He then started to walk, which caused the island to be filled with gold.

====Callimachus&#x27; &quot;Hymn to Delos&quot;====
The island Delos used to be Asteria, a goddess who jumped into the waters to escape the advances of Zeus and became a free-floating island of the same name. When Leto got pregnant, Hera was told that Leto&#x27;s son would become more dear to Zeus than Ares. Enraged by this, Hera watched over the heavens and sent out Ares and Iris to prevent Leto from giving birth on the earth. Ares, stationed over the mainland, and Iris, over the islands, threatened all the lands and prevented them from helping Leto.

When Leto arrived at Thebes, fetal Apollo prophesied from his mother&#x27;s womb that in the future he would punish a slanderous woman in Thebes (Niobe), so he did not want to be born there. Leto then went to Thessaly and sought the help of the river nymphs who were the daughters of the river Peneus. Though he was initially fearful and reluctant, Peneus later decided to let Leto give birth in his waters. He did not change his mind even when Ares produced a terrifying sound and threatened to hurl mountain peaks into the river. But Leto herself declined his help and departed, as she did not want him to suffer for her sake.

After being turned away from various lands, Apollo spoke again from the womb, asking his mother to take look at the floating island in front of her and expressing his wish to be born there. When Leto approached Asteria, all the other islands fled. But Asteria welcomed Leto without any fear of Hera. Walking on the island, she sat down against a palm tree and asked Apollo to be born. During the childbirth, swans circled the island seven times, a sign that later on Apollo would play the seven-stringed lyre. When Apollo finally &quot;leapt forth&quot; from his mother&#x27;s womb, the nymphs of the island sang a hymn to Eileithyia that was heard to the heavens. The moment Apollo was born, the entire island, including the trees and the waters, became gold. Asteria bathed the newborn, swaddled him and fed him with her breast milk. The island had become rooted and was later called Delos.

Hera was no longer angry, as Zeus had managed to calm her down; and she held no grudge against Asteria, since Asteria had rejected Zeus in the past.

====Pindar====

Pindar is the earliest source who explicitly calls Apollo and Artemis as twins. Here, Asteria is also stated to be Leto&#x27;s sister. Wanting to escape Zeus&#x27; advances, she flung herself into the sea and became a floating rock called Ortygia until the twins were born. When Leto stepped on the rock, four pillars with adamantine bases rose from the earth and held up the rock. When Apollo and Artemis were born, their bodies shone radiantly and a chant was sung by Eileithyia and Lachesis, one of the three Moirai.

====Hyginus====

Scorning the advances of Zeus, Asteria transformed herself into a bird and jumped into a sea. From her, an island rose which was called Ortygia. When Hera discovered that Leto was pregnant with Zeus&#x27; child, she decreed that Leto can give birth only in a place where sun does not shine. During this time, the monster Python also started hounding Leto with an intent of killing her, because he had foreseen his death coming at the hands of Leto&#x27;s offspring. However, on Zeus&#x27; orders, Boreas carried away Leto and entrusted her to Poseidon. To protect her, Poseidon took her to the island Ortygia and covered it with waves so that the sun would not shine on it. Leto gave birth clinging to an olive tree and henceforth the island was called Delos.

==== Other variations ====
Aside from those mentioned above, more variations on the story of Apollo&#x27;s birth include:

Aelian states that it took Leto twelve days and twelve nights to travel from Hyperborea to Delos. Leto changed herself into a she-wolf before giving birth. This is given as the reason why Homer describes Apollo as the &quot;wolf-born god&quot;.

Libanius wrote that neither land nor visible islands would receive Leto, but by the will of Zeus Delos then became visible, and thus received Leto and the children.

According to Strabo, the Curetes helped Leto by creating loud noises with their weapons and thus frightening Hera, they concealed Leto&#x27;s childbirth.

Theognis wrote that the island was filled with ambrosial fragrance when Apollo was born, and the Earth laughed with joy.

In some versions, Artemis was born first and subsequently assisted with the birth of Apollo.

While in some accounts Apollo&#x27;s birth itself fixed the floating Delos to the earth, there are accounts of Apollo securing Delos to the bottom of the ocean a little while later. 
This island became sacred to Apollo and was one of the major cult centres of the god.
Apollo was born on the seventh day (, &quot;hebdomagenes&quot;) of the month Thargelion—according to Delian tradition—or of the month Bysios—according to Delphian tradition. The seventh and twentieth, the days of the new and full moon, were ever afterwards held sacred to him.

===Hyperborea===
Hyperborea, the mystical land of eternal spring, venerated Apollo above all the gods. The Hyperboreans always sang and danced in his honor and hosted Pythian games. There, a vast forest of beautiful trees was called &quot;the garden of Apollo&quot;. Apollo spent the winter months among the Hyperboreans, leaving his shrine in Delphi under the care of Dionysus. His absence from the world caused coldness and this was marked as his annual death. No prophecies were issued during this time. He returned to the world during the beginning of the spring. The &quot;Theophania&quot; festival was held in Delphi to celebrate his return.

However, Diodorus Silculus states that Apollo visited Hyperborea every nineteen years. This nineteen-year period was called by the Greeks as the &#x27;year of Meton&#x27;, the time period in which the stars returned to their initial positions. And that visiting Hyperborea at that time, Apollo played on the cithara and danced continuously from the vernal equinox until the rising of the Pleiades (constellations).

Hyperborea was also Leto&#x27;s birthplace. It is said that Leto came to Delos from Hyperborea accompanied by a pack of wolves. Henceforth, Hyperborea became Apollo&#x27;s winter home and wolves became sacred to him. His intimate connection to wolves is evident from his epithet &quot;Lyceus&quot;, meaning &quot;wolf-like&quot;. But Apollo was also the wolf-slayer in his role as the god who protected flocks from predators. The Hyperborean worship of Apollo bears the strongest marks of Apollo being worshipped as the sun god. Shamanistic elements in Apollo&#x27;s cult are often liked to his Hyperborean origin, and he is likewise speculated to have originated as a solar shaman. Shamans like Abaris and Aristeas were also the followers of Apollo, who hailed from Hyperborea.

In myths, the tears of amber Apollo shed when his son Asclepius died mixed with the waters of the river Eridanos, which surrounded Hyperborea. Apollo also buried in Hyperborea the arrow which he had used to kill the Cyclopes. He later gave this arrow to Abaris.

===Childhood and youth===

Growing up, Apollo was nursed by the nymphs Korythalia and Aletheia, the personification of truth. Phoebe, his grandmother, gave the oracular shrine of Delphi to Apollo as a birthday gift.

As a four-year-old child, Apollo built a foundation and an altar on Delos using the horns of the goats that his sister Artemis hunted. Since he learnt the art of building when young, he came to be known as Archegetes, (&quot;the founder of towns&quot;) and guided men to build new cities. To keep the child amused, the Delian nymphs ran around the altar beating it, and then with their hands tied behind their backs, bit an olive branch. It later became a custom for all the sailors who passed by the island to do the same.

From his father Zeus, Apollo received a golden headband and a chariot driven by swans.

In his early years when Apollo spent his time herding cows, he was reared by the Thriae, who trained him and enhanced his prophetic skills. The god Pan was also said to have mentored him in the prophetic art. Apollo is also said to have invented the lyre, and along with Artemis, the art of archery. He then taught the humans the art of healing and archery.

====Lycian peasants====

Soon after giving birth to her twins, Leto fled from Delos fearing Hera. Upon reaching Lycia, her infants had drained all of their mother&#x27;s milk and cried for more to satisfy their hunger. The exhausted mother then tried drinking from a nearby lake but was stopped by some Lycian peasants. When she begged them to let her quench her thirst, the haughty peasants not only threatened her but also stirred the mud in the lake to dirty the waters. Angered by this, Leto turned them into frogs.

In a slightly varied version, Leto took her infants and crossed over to Lycia where she attempted to bathe her children in a spring she found there. But the local herdsmen drove her away. After that, some wolves found Leto and guided her to the river Xanthos, where Leto was able to bathe her children and quench her thirst. She then returned to the spring and turned the herdsmen into frogs.

====Slaying of Python====

Python, a chthonic serpent-dragon, was a child of Gaia and the guardian of the Delphic Oracle.
In the Callimachus&#x27; hymn to Delos, fetal Apollo foresees the death of Python at his hands.

In the Homeric hymn to Apollo, Python was a female drakon and the nurse of the giant Typhon whom Hera had created to overthrow Zeus. She was described as a terrifying monster and a &quot;bloody plague&quot;. Apollo, in his pursuit to establish his worship, came across Python and killed her with a single arrow shot from his bow. He let the corpse rot under the sun and declared himself the oracular deity of Delphi. Other authors have Apollo kill the monster using a hundred arrows or a thousand arrows.

According to Euripides, Leto had brought her twins to the cliffs of Parnassus shortly after giving birth to them. Upon seeing the monster there, Apollo, still a child being carried in his mother&#x27;s arms, leapt forth and killed Python. Some authors also mention that Python was killed for displaying lustful affections towards Leto.

In another account, Python chased pregnant Leto with an intent of killing her because his death was fated to come at the hands of Leto&#x27;s child. However, he had to stop the chase when Leto came under the protection of Poseidon. After his birth, four days old Apollo killed the serpent with the bow and arrows gifted to him by Hephaestus and avenged the trouble given to his mother. The god then put the bones of the slain monster in a cauldron and deposited it in his temple.

This legend is also narrated as the origin of the cry &quot;Hië paian&quot;. According to Athenaeus, Python attacked Leto and her twins during their visit to Delphi. Taking Artemis into her arms, Leto climbed upon a rock and cried at Apollo to shoot the monster. The cry let out by her, &quot;ιε, παῖ&quot; (&quot;Shoot, boy&quot;) later got slightly altered as &quot;ἰὴ παιών&quot; (&quot;Hië paian&quot;), an exclamation to avert evils. Callimachus attributes the origin of this phrase to the Delphians, who let out the cry to encourage Apollo when the young god battled with Python.

Strabo has recorded a slightly different version where Python was actually a cruel and lawless man who was also known by the name &quot;Drakon&quot;. When Apollo was teaching the humans to cultivate fruits and civilise themselves, the residents of Parnassus complained to the god about Python. In response to their pleas, Apollo killed the man with his arrows. During the fight, the Parnassians shouted &quot;Hië paian&quot; to encourage the god.

====Establishment of worship in Delphi====

Continuing from his victory over Python, the Homeric hymn describes how the young god established his worship among the humans. As Apollo was pondering about what kind of men he should recruit to serve him, he spotted a ship full of Cretan merchants or pirates. He took the form of a dolphin and sprang aboard the ship. Whenever the oblivious crew members tried throwing the dolphin overboard, the god shook the ship until the crew was awed into submission. Apollo then created a breeze that directed the ship to Delphi. Upon reaching the land, he revealed himself as a god and initiated them as his priests. He instructed them to guard his temple and always keep righteousness in their hearts.

Alcaeus narrates the following account: Zeus, who had adorned his newborn son with a golden headband, also provided him with a chariot driven by swans and instructed Apollo to visit Delphi to establish his laws among the people. But Apollo disobeyed his father and went to the land of Hyperborea. The Delphians continuously sung paeans in his honour and pleaded him to come back to them. The god returned only after a year and then carried out Zeus&#x27; orders.

In other variations, the shrine at Delphi was simply handed over to Apollo by his grandmother Phoebe as a gift, or Themis herself inspired him to be the oracular voice of Delphi.

However, in many other accounts, Apollo had to overcome certain obstacles before he was able to establish himself at Delphi. Gaea came in conflict with Apollo for killing Python and claiming the Delphic oracle for himself. According to Pindar, she sought to banish Apollo to Tartarus as a punishment. According to Euripides, soon after Apollo took the ownership of the oracle, Gaea started sending prophetic dreams to the humans. As a result, people stopped visiting Delphi to obtain prophecies. Troubled by this, Apollo went to Olympus and supplicated to Zeus. Zeus, admiring the ambitions of his young son, granted his request by putting an end to the dream visions. This sealed the role of Apollo as the oracular deity of Delphi.

Since Apollo had committed a blood crime, he also had to be purified. Pausanias has recorded two of the many variations of this purification. In one of them, both Apollo and Artemis fled to Sicyon and were purified there. In the other tradition that had been prevalent among the Cretans, Apollo alone travelled to Crete and was purified by Carmanor. In another account, the Argive king Crotopus was the one who performed the purification rites on Apollo alone.

According the Aristonous and Aelian, Apollo was purified by the will of Zeus in the Vale of Tempe. Aristonous has continued the tale, saying that Apollo was escorted back to Delphi by Athena. As a token of gratitude, he later built a temple for Athena at Delphi, which served as a threshold for his own temple. Upon reaching Delphi, Apollo convinced Gaea and Themis into handing over the seat of oracle to him. To celebrate this event, other immortals also graced Apollo with gifts – Poseidon gave him the land of Delphi, the Delphian nymphs gifted him the Corycian cave, and Artemis set her dogs to patrol and safeguard the land.

Some others have also said that Apollo was exiled and subjected to servitude under king Admetus as a means of punishment for the murder he had committed. It was when he was serving as a cowherd under Admetus that the theft of the cattle by Hermes happened. The servitude was said to have lasted for either one year, or one great year (a cycle of eight years), or nine years.

Plutarch, however, has mentioned a variation where Apollo was neither purified in Tempe nor banished to Earth as a servant for nine years, but was driven out to another world for nine great years. The god who returned was cleansed and purified, thus becoming a &quot;true Phoebus – that is to say, clear and bright&quot;. He then took over the Delphic oracle, which had been under the care of Themis in his absence. Henceforth, Apollo became the god who cleansed himself from the sin of murder, made men aware of their guilt and purified them.

The Pythian games were also established by Apollo, either as funeral games to honor Python or to celebrate his own victory. The Pythia was Apollo&#x27;s high priestess and his mouthpiece through whom he gave prophecies.

====Tityus====

Tityus was another giant who tried to rape Leto, either on his own accord when she was on her way to Delphi or at the order of Hera. Leto called upon on her children who instantly slew the giant. Apollo, still a young boy, shot him with his arrows. In some accounts, Artemis also joined him in protecting their mother by attacking Tityos with her arrows. For this act, he was banished to Tartarus and there he was pegged to the rock floor and stretched on an area of , while a pair of vultures feasted daily on his liver or his heart.

Another account recorded by Strabo says that Tityus was not a giant but a lawless man whom Apollo killed at the request of the residents.

===Admetus===
Admetus was the king of Pherae, who was known for his hospitality. When Apollo was exiled from Olympus for killing Python, he served as a herdsman under Admetus, who was then young and unmarried. Apollo is said to have shared a romantic relationship with Admetus during his stay. After completing his years of servitude, Apollo went back to Olympus as a god.

Because Admetus had treated Apollo well, the god conferred great benefits on him in return. Apollo&#x27;s mere presence is said to have made the cattle give birth to twins. Apollo helped Admetus win the hand of Alcestis, the daughter of King Pelias, by taming a lion and a boar to draw Admetus&#x27; chariot. He was present during their wedding to give his blessings. When Admetus angered the goddess Artemis by forgetting to give her the due offerings, Apollo came to the rescue and calmed his sister. When Apollo learnt of Admetus&#x27; untimely death, he convinced or tricked the Fates into letting Admetus live past his time.

According to another version, or perhaps some years later, when Zeus struck down Apollo&#x27;s son Asclepius with a lightning bolt for resurrecting the dead, Apollo in revenge killed the Cyclopes, who had fashioned the bolt for Zeus. Apollo would have been banished to Tartarus for this, but his mother Leto intervened, and reminding Zeus of their old love, pleaded with him not to kill their son. Zeus obliged and sentenced Apollo to one year of hard labor once again under Admetus.

The love between Apollo and Admetus was a favored topic of Roman poets like Ovid and Servius.

===Niobe===
The fate of Niobe was prophesied by Apollo while he was still in Leto&#x27;s womb. Niobe was the queen of Thebes and wife of Amphion. She displayed hubris when she boasted that she was superior to Leto because she had fourteen children (Niobids), seven male and seven female, while Leto had only two. She further mocked Apollo&#x27;s effeminate appearance and Artemis&#x27; manly appearance. Leto, insulted by this, told her children to punish Niobe. Accordingly, Apollo killed Niobe&#x27;s sons, and Artemis her daughters. According to some versions of the myth, among the Niobids, Chloris and her brother Amyclas were not killed because they prayed to Leto. Amphion, at the sight of his dead sons, either killed himself or was killed by Apollo after swearing revenge.

A devastated Niobe fled to Mount Sipylos in Asia Minor and turned into stone as she wept. Her tears formed the river Achelous. Zeus had turned all the people of Thebes to stone and so no one buried the Niobids until the ninth day after their death, when the gods themselves entombed them.

When Chloris married and had children, Apollo granted her son Nestor the years he had taken away from the Niobids. Hence, Nestor was able to live for 3 generations.

===Building the walls of Troy ===

Once Apollo and Poseidon served under the Trojan king Laomedon in accordance with Zeus&#x27; words. Apollodorus states that the gods willingly went to the king disguised as humans in order to check his hubris. Apollo guarded the cattle of Laomedon in the valleys of Mount Ida, while Poseidon built the walls of Troy. Other versions make both Apollo and Poseidon the builders of the wall. In Ovid&#x27;s account, Apollo completes his task by playing his tunes on his lyre.

In Pindar&#x27;s odes, the gods took a mortal named Aeacus as their assistant. When the work was completed, three snakes rushed against the wall, and though the two that attacked the sections of the wall built by the gods fell down dead, the third forced its way into the city through the portion of the wall built by Aeacus. Apollo immediately prophesied that Troy would fall at the hands of Aeacus&#x27;s descendants, the Aeacidae (i.e. his son Telamon joined Heracles when he sieged the city during Laomedon&#x27;s rule. Later, his great-grandson Neoptolemus was present in the wooden horse that leads to the downfall of Troy).

However, the king not only refused to give the gods the wages he had promised, but also threatened to bind their feet and hands, and sell them as slaves. Angered by the unpaid labour and the insults, Apollo infected the city with a pestilence and Poseidon sent the sea monster Cetus. To deliver the city from it, Laomedon had to sacrifice his daughter Hesione (who would later be saved by Heracles).

During his stay in Troy, Apollo had a lover named Ourea, who was a nymph and daughter of Poseidon. Together they had a son named Ileus, whom Apollo loved dearly.

===Trojan War===

Apollo sided with the Trojans during the Trojan War waged by the Greeks against the Trojans.

During the war, the Greek king Agamemnon captured Chryseis, the daughter of Apollo&#x27;s priest Chryses, and refused to return her. Angered by this, Apollo shot arrows infected with the plague into the Greek encampment. He demanded that they return the girl, and the Achaeans (Greeks) complied, indirectly causing the &quot;anger of Achilles&quot;, which is the theme of the &quot;Iliad&quot;.

Receiving the aegis from Zeus, Apollo entered the battlefield as per his father&#x27;s command, causing great terror to the enemy with his war cry. He pushed the Greeks back and destroyed many of the soldiers. He is described as &quot;the rouser of armies&quot; because he rallied the Trojan army when they were falling apart.

When Zeus allowed the other gods to get involved in the war, Apollo was provoked by Poseidon to a duel. However, Apollo declined to fight him, saying that he would not fight his uncle for the sake of mortals.

When the Greek hero Diomedes injured the Trojan hero Aeneas, Aphrodite tried to rescue him, but Diomedes injured her as well. Apollo then enveloped Aeneas in a cloud to protect him. He repelled the attacks Diomedes made on him and gave the hero a stern warning to abstain from attacking a god. Aeneas was then taken to Pergamos, a sacred spot in Troy, where he was healed.

After the death of Sarpedon, a son of Zeus, Apollo rescued the corpse from the battlefield as per his father&#x27;s wish and cleaned it. He then gave it to Sleep (Hypnos) and Death (Thanatos). Apollo had also once convinced Athena to stop the war for that day, so that the warriors can relieve themselves for a while.

The Trojan hero Hector (who, according to some, was the god&#x27;s own son by Hecuba) was favored by Apollo. When he got severely injured, Apollo healed him and encouraged him to take up his arms. During a duel with Achilles, when Hector was about to lose, Apollo hid Hector in a cloud of mist to save him. When the Greek warrior Patroclus tried to get into the fort of Troy, he was stopped by Apollo. Encouraging Hector to attack Patroclus, Apollo stripped the armour of the Greek warrior and broke his weapons. Patroclus was eventually killed by Hector. At last, after Hector&#x27;s fated death, Apollo protected his corpse from Achilles&#x27; attempt to mutilate it by creating a magical cloud over the corpse, shielding it from the rays of the sun.

Apollo held a grudge against Achilles throughout the war because Achilles had murdered his son Tenes before the war began and brutally assassinated his son Troilus in his own temple. Not only did Apollo save Hector from Achilles, he also tricked Achilles by disguising himself as a Trojan warrior and driving him away from the gates. He foiled Achilles&#x27; attempt to mutilate Hector&#x27;s dead body.

Finally, Apollo caused Achilles&#x27; death by guiding an arrow shot by Paris into Achilles&#x27; heel. In some versions, Apollo himself killed Achilles by taking the disguise of Paris.

Apollo helped many Trojan warriors—including Agenor, Polydamas, and Glaucus—in the battlefield. Though he greatly favored the Trojans, Apollo was bound to follow the orders of Zeus and served his father loyally during the war.

===Nurturer of the young===

Apollo &quot;Kourotrophos&quot; is the god who nurtures and protects children and the young, especially boys. He oversees their education and their passage into adulthood. Education is said to have originated from Apollo and the Muses. Many myths have him train his children. It was a custom for boys to cut and dedicate their long hair to Apollo after reaching adulthood.

Chiron, the abandoned centaur, was fostered by Apollo, who instructed him in medicine, prophecy, archery and more. Chiron would later become a great teacher himself.

Asclepius in his childhood gained much knowledge pertaining to medicinal arts from his father. However, he was later entrusted to Chiron for further education.

Anius, Apollo&#x27;s son by Rhoeo, was abandoned by his mother soon after his birth. Apollo brought him up and educated him in mantic arts. Anius later became the priest of Apollo and the king of Delos.

Iamus was the son of Apollo and Evadne. When Evadne went into labour, Apollo sent the Moirai to assist his lover. After the child was born, Apollo sent snakes to feed the child some honey. When Iamus reached the age of education, Apollo took him to Olympia and taught him many arts, including the ability to understand and explain the languages of birds.

Idmon was educated by Apollo to be a seer. Even though he foresaw his death that would happen in his journey with the Argonauts, he embraced his destiny and died a brave death. To commemorate his son&#x27;s bravery, Apollo commanded Boeotians to build a town around the tomb of the hero, and to honor him.

Apollo adopted Carnus, the abandoned son of Zeus and Europa. He reared the child with the help of his mother Leto and educated him to be a seer.

When his son Melaneus reached the age of marriage, Apollo asked the princess Stratonice to be his son&#x27;s bride and carried her away from her home when she agreed.

Apollo saved a shepherd boy (name unknown) from death in a large deep cave, by means of vultures. To thank him, the shepherd built Apollo a temple under the name Vulturius.

===God of music===

Immediately after his birth, Apollo demanded a lyre and invented the paean, thus becoming the god of music. As the divine singer, he is the patron of poets, singers and musicians. The invention of string music is attributed to him. Plato said that the innate ability of humans to take delight in music, rhythm and harmony is the gift of Apollo and the Muses. According to Socrates, ancient Greeks believed that Apollo is the god who directs the harmony and makes all things move together, both for the gods and the humans. For this reason, he was called &quot;Homopolon&quot; before the &quot;Homo&quot; was replaced by &quot;A&quot;. Apollo&#x27;s harmonious music delivered people from their pain, and hence, like Dionysus, he is also called the liberator. The swans, which were considered to be the most musical among the birds, were believed to be the &quot;singers of Apollo&quot;. They are Apollo&#x27;s sacred birds and acted as his vehicle during his travel to Hyperborea. Aelian says that when the singers would sing hymns to Apollo, the swans would join the chant in unison.

Among the Pythagoreans, the study of mathematics and music were connected to the worship of Apollo, their principal deity. Their belief was that music purifies the soul, just as medicine purifies the body. They also believed that music was delegated to the same mathematical laws of harmony as the mechanics of the cosmos, evolving into an idea known as the music of the spheres.

Apollo appears as the companion of the Muses, and as Musagetes (&quot;leader of Muses&quot;) he leads them in dance. They spend their time on Parnassus, which is one of their sacred places. Apollo is also the lover of the Muses and by them he became the father of famous musicians like Orpheus and Linus.

Apollo is often found delighting the immortal gods with his songs and music on the lyre. In his role as the god of banquets, he was always present to play music at weddings of the gods, like the marriage of Eros and Psyche, Peleus and Thetis. He is a frequent guest of the Bacchanalia, and many ancient ceramics depict him being at ease amidst the maenads and satyrs. Apollo also participated in musical contests when challenged by others. He was the victor in all those contests, but he tended to punish his opponents severely for their hubris.

====Apollo&#x27;s lyre====

The invention of the lyre is attributed either to Hermes or to Apollo himself. Distinctions have been made that Hermes invented lyre made of tortoise shell, whereas the lyre Apollo invented was a regular lyre.

Myths tell that the infant Hermes stole a number of Apollo&#x27;s cows and took them to a cave in the woods near Pylos, covering their tracks. In the cave, he found a tortoise and killed it, then removed the insides. He used one of the cow&#x27;s intestines and the tortoise shell and made his lyre.

Upon discovering the theft, Apollo confronted Hermes and asked him to return his cattle. When Hermes acted innocent, Apollo took the matter to Zeus. Zeus, having seen the events, sided with Apollo, and ordered Hermes to return the cattle. Hermes then began to play music on the lyre he had invented. Apollo fell in love with the instrument and offered to exchange the cattle for the lyre. Hence, Apollo then became the master of the lyre.

According to other versions, Apollo had invented the lyre himself, whose strings he tore in repenting of the excess punishment he had given to Marsyas. Hermes&#x27; lyre, therefore, would be a reinvention.

====Contest with Pan====

Once Pan had the audacity to compare his music with that of Apollo and to challenge the god of music to a contest. The mountain-god Tmolus was chosen to umpire. Pan blew on his pipes, and with his rustic melody gave great satisfaction to himself and his faithful follower, Midas, who happened to be present. Then, Apollo struck the strings of his lyre. It was so beautiful that Tmolus at once awarded the victory to Apollo, and everyone was pleased with the judgement. Only Midas dissented and questioned the justice of the award. Apollo did not want to suffer such a depraved pair of ears any longer, and caused them to become the ears of a donkey.

====Contest with Marsyas====

Marsyas was a satyr who was punished by Apollo for his hubris. He had found an aulos on the ground, tossed away after being invented by Athena because it made her cheeks puffy. Athena had also placed a curse upon the instrument, that whoever would pick it up would be severely punished. When Marsyas played the flute, everyone became frenzied with joy. This led Marsyas to think that he was better than Apollo, and he challenged the god to a musical contest. The contest was judged by the Muses, or the nymphs of Nysa. Athena was also present to witness the contest.

Marsyas taunted Apollo for &quot;wearing his hair long, for having a fair face and smooth body, for his skill in so many arts&quot;. He also further said,

The Muses and Athena sniggered at this comment. The contestants agreed to take turns displaying their skills and the rule was that the victor could &quot;do whatever he wanted&quot; to the loser.

According to one account, after the first round, they both were deemed equal by the Nysiads. But in the next round, Apollo decided to play on his lyre and add his melodious voice to his performance. Marsyas argued against this, saying that Apollo would have an advantage and accused Apollo of cheating. But Apollo replied that since Marsyas played the flute, which needed air blown from the throat, it was similar to singing, and that either they both should get an equal chance to combine their skills or none of them should use their mouths at all. The nymphs decided that Apollo&#x27;s argument was just. Apollo then played his lyre and sang at the same time, mesmerising the audience. Marsyas could not do this. Apollo was declared the winner and, angered with Marsyas&#x27; haughtiness and his accusations, decided to flay the satyr.

According to another account, Marsyas played his flute out of tune at one point and accepted his defeat. Out of shame, he assigned to himself the punishment of being skinned for a wine sack. Another variation is that Apollo played his instrument upside down. Marsyas could not do this with his instrument. So the Muses who were the judges declared Apollo the winner. Apollo hung Marsyas from a tree to flay him.

Apollo flayed the limbs of Marsyas alive in a cave near Celaenae in Phrygia for his hubris to challenge a god. He then gave the rest of his body for proper burial and nailed Marsyas&#x27; flayed skin to a nearby pine-tree as a lesson to the others. Marsyas&#x27; blood turned into the river Marsyas. But Apollo soon repented and being distressed at what he had done, he tore the strings of his lyre and threw it away. The lyre was later discovered by the Muses and Apollo&#x27;s sons Linus and Orpheus. The Muses fixed the middle string, Linus the string struck with the forefinger, and Orpheus the lowest string and the one next to it. They took it back to Apollo, but the god, who had decided to stay away from music for a while, laid away both the lyre and the pipes at Delphi and joined Cybele in her wanderings to as far as Hyperborea.

====Contest with Cinyras====

Cinyras was a ruler of Cyprus, who was a friend of Agamemnon. Cinyras promised to assist Agamemnon in the Trojan war, but did not keep his promise. Agamemnon cursed Cinyras. He invoked Apollo and asked the god to avenge the broken promise. Apollo then had a lyre-playing contest with Cinyras, and defeated him. Either Cinyras committed suicide when he lost, or was killed by Apollo.

===Patron of sailors===
Apollo functions as the patron and protector of sailors, one of the duties he shares with Poseidon. In the myths, he is seen helping heroes who pray to him for a safe journey.

When Apollo spotted a ship of Cretan sailors that were caught in a storm, he quickly assumed the shape of a dolphin and guided their ship safely to Delphi.

When the Argonauts faced a terrible storm, Jason prayed to his patron, Apollo, to help them. Apollo used his bow and golden arrow to shed light upon an island, where the Argonauts soon took shelter. This island was renamed &quot;Anaphe&quot;, which means &quot;He revealed it&quot;.

Apollo helped the Greek hero Diomedes, to escape from a great tempest during his journey homeward. As a token of gratitude, Diomedes built a temple in honor of Apollo under the epithet Epibaterius (&quot;the embarker&quot;).

During the Trojan War, Odysseus came to the Trojan camp to return Chriseis, the daughter of Apollo&#x27;s priest Chryses, and brought many offerings to Apollo. Pleased with this, Apollo sent gentle breezes that helped Odysseus return safely to the Greek camp.

Arion was a poet who was kidnapped by some sailors for the rich prizes he possessed. Arion requested them to let him sing for the last time, to which the sailors consented. Arion began singing a song in praise of Apollo, seeking the god&#x27;s help. Consequently, numerous dolphins surrounded the ship and when Arion jumped into the water, the dolphins carried him away safely.

===Wars===

====Trojan War====
Apollo played a pivotal role in the entire Trojan War. He sided with the Trojans, and sent a terrible plague to the Greek camp, which indirectly led to the conflict between Achilles and Agamemnon. He killed the Greek heroes Patroclus, Achilles, and numerous Greek soldiers. He also helped many Trojan heroes, the most important one being Hector. After the end of the war, Apollo and Poseidon together cleaned the remains of the city and the camps.

====Telegony war====
A war broke out between the Brygoi and the Thesprotians, who had the support of Odysseus. The gods Athena and Ares came to the battlefield and took sides. Athena helped the hero Odysseus while Ares fought alongside of the Brygoi. When Odysseus lost, Athena and Ares came into a direct duel. To stop the battling gods and the terror created by their battle, Apollo intervened and stopped the duel between them.

====Indian war====
When Zeus suggested that Dionysus defeat the Indians in order to earn a place among the gods, Dionysus declared war against the Indians and travelled to India along with his army of Bacchantes and satyrs. Among the warriors was Aristaeus, Apollo&#x27;s son. Apollo armed his son with his own hands and gave him a bow and arrows and fitted a strong shield to his arm. After Zeus urged Apollo to join the war, he went to the battlefield. Seeing several of his nymphs and Aristaeus drowning in a river, he took them to safety and healed them. He taught Aristaeus more useful healing arts and sent him back to help the army of Dionysus.

====Theban war====
During the war between the sons of Oedipus, Apollo favored Amphiaraus, a seer and one of the leaders in the war. Though saddened that the seer was fated to be doomed in the war, Apollo made Amphiaraus&#x27; last hours glorious by &quot;lighting his shield and his helm with starry gleam&quot;. When Hypseus tried to kill the hero with a spear, Apollo directed the spear towards the charioteer of Amphiaraus instead. Then Apollo himself replaced the charioteer and took the reins in his hands. He deflected many spears and arrows away from them. He also killed many of the enemy warriors like Melaneus, Antiphus, Aetion, Polites and Lampus. At last, when the moment of departure came, Apollo expressed his grief with tears in his eyes and bid farewell to Amphiaraus, who was soon engulfed by the Earth.

===Slaying of giants===

Apollo killed the giants Python and Tityos, who had assaulted his mother Leto.

====Gigantomachy====
During the gigantomachy, Apollo and Heracles blinded the giant Ephialtes by shooting him in his eyes, Apollo shooting his left and Heracles his right. He also killed Porphyrion, the king of giants, using his bow and arrows.

====Aloadae====
The Aloadae, namely Otis and Ephialtes, were twin giants who decided to wage war upon the gods. They attempted to storm Mt. Olympus by piling up mountains, and threatened to fill the sea with mountains and inundate dry land. They even dared to seek the hand of Hera and Artemis in marriage. Angered by this, Apollo killed them by shooting them with arrows. According to another tale, Apollo killed them by sending a deer between them; as they tried to kill it with their javelins, they accidentally stabbed each other and died.

====Phorbas====
Phorbas was a savage giant king of Phlegyas who was described as having swine-like features. He wished to plunder Delphi for its wealth. He seized the roads to Delphi and started harassing the pilgrims. He captured the old people and children and sent them to his army to hold them for ransom. And he challenged the young and sturdy men to a match of boxing, only to cut their heads off when they would get defeated by him. He hung the chopped-off heads to an oak tree. Finally, Apollo came to put an end to this cruelty. He entered a boxing contest with Phorbas and killed him with a single blow.

===Other stories===

In the first Olympic games, Apollo defeated Ares and became the victor in wrestling. He outran Hermes in the race and won first place.

Apollo divides months into summer and winter. He rides on the back of a swan to the land of the Hyperboreans during the winter months, and the absence of warmth in winter is due to his departure. During his absence, Delphi was under the care of Dionysus, and no prophecies were given during winters.

==== Periphas ====

Periphas was an Attican king and a priest of Apollo. He was noble, just and rich. He did all his duties justly. Because of this people were very fond of him and started honouring him to the same extent as Zeus. At one point, they worshipped Periphas in place of Zeus and set up shrines and temples for him. This annoyed Zeus, who decided to annihilate the entire family of Periphas. But because he was a just king and a good devotee, Apollo intervened and requested his father to spare Periphas. Zeus considered Apollo&#x27;s words and agreed to let him live. But he metamorphosed Periphas into an eagle and made the eagle the king of birds. When Periphas&#x27; wife requested Zeus to let her stay with her husband, Zeus turned her into a vulture and fulfilled her wish.

==== Molpadia and Parthenos ====

Molpadia and Parthenos were the sisters of Rhoeo, a former lover of Apollo. One day, they were put in charge of watching their father&#x27;s ancestral wine jar but they fell asleep while performing this duty. While they were asleep, the wine jar was broken by the swine their family kept. When the sisters woke up and saw what had happened, they threw themselves off a cliff in fear of their father&#x27;s wrath. Apollo, who was passing by, caught them and carried them to two different cities in Chersonesus, Molpadia to Castabus and Parthenos to Bubastus. He turned them into goddesses and they both received divine honors. Molpadia&#x27;s name was changed to Hemithea upon her deification.

==== Prometheus ====

Prometheus was the titan who was punished by Zeus for stealing fire. He was bound to a rock, where each day an eagle was sent to eat Prometheus&#x27; liver, which would then grow back overnight to be eaten again the next day. Seeing his plight, Apollo pleaded with Zeus to release the kind Titan, while Artemis and Leto stood behind him with tears in their eyes. Zeus, moved by Apollo&#x27;s words and the tears of the goddesses, finally sent Heracles to free Prometheus.

==== Heracles ====

After Heracles (then named Alcides) was struck with madness and killed his family, he sought to purify himself and consulted the oracle of Apollo. Apollo, through the Pythia, commanded him to serve king Eurystheus for twelve years and complete the ten tasks the king would give him. Only then would Alcides be absolved of his sin. Apollo also renamed him Heracles.

To complete his third task, Heracles had to capture the Ceryneian Hind, a hind sacred to Artemis, and bring back it alive. After chasing the hind for one year, the animal eventually got tired, and when it tried crossing the river Ladon, Heracles captured it. While he was taking it back, he was confronted by Apollo and Artemis, who were angered at Heracles for this act. However, Heracles soothed the goddess and explained his situation to her. After much pleading, Artemis permitted him to take the hind and told him to return it later.

After he was freed from his servitude to Eurystheus, Heracles fell in conflict with Iphytus, a prince of Oechalia, and murdered him. Soon after, he contracted a terrible disease. He consulted the oracle of Apollo once again, in the hope of ridding himself of the disease. The Pythia, however, denied to give any prophesy. In anger, Heracles snatched the sacred tripod and started walking away, intending to start his own oracle. However, Apollo did not tolerate this and stopped Heracles; a duel ensued between them. Artemis rushed to support Apollo, while Athena supported Heracles. Soon, Zeus threw his thunderbolt between the fighting brothers and separated them. He reprimanded Heracles for this act of violation and asked Apollo to give a solution to Heracles. Apollo then ordered the hero to serve under Omphale, queen of Lydia for one year in order to purify himself.

After their reconciliation, Apollo and Heracles together founded the city of Gythion.

==== Plato&#x27;s concept of soulmates ====

A long time ago, there were three kinds of human beings: male, descended from the sun; female, descended from the earth; and androgynous, descended from the moon. Each human being was completely round, with four arms and four legs, two identical faces on opposite sides of a head with four ears, and all else to match. They were powerful and unruly. Otis and Ephialtes even dared to scale Mount Olympus.

To check their insolence, Zeus devised a plan to humble them and improve their manners instead of completely destroying them. He cut them all in two and asked Apollo to make necessary repairs, giving humans the individual shape they still have now. Apollo turned their heads and necks around towards their wounds, he pulled together their skin at the abdomen, and sewed the skin together at the middle of it. This is what we call navel today. He smoothened the wrinkles and shaped the chest. But he made sure to leave a few wrinkles on the abdomen and around the navel so that they might be reminded of their punishment.

==== The rock of Leukas ====

Leukatas was believed to be a white-colored rock jutting out from the island of Leukas into the sea. It was present in the sanctuary of Apollo Leukates. A leap from this rock was believed to have put an end to the longings of love.

Once, Aphrodite fell deeply in love with Adonis, a young man of great beauty who was later accidentally killed by a boar. Heartbroken, Aphrodite wandered looking for the rock of Leukas. When she reached the sanctuary of Apollo in Argos, she confided in him her love and sorrow. Apollo then brought her to the rock of Leukas and asked her to throw herself from the top of the rock. She did so and was freed from her love. When she sought the reason behind this, Apollo told her that Zeus, before taking another lover, would sit on this rock to free himself from his love for Hera.

Another tale relates that a man named Nireus, who fell in love with the cult statue of Athena, came to the rock and jumped in order to relieve himself. After jumping, he fell into the net of a fisherman in which, when he was pulled out, he found a box filled with gold. He fought with the fisherman and took the gold, but Apollo appeared to him in the night in a dream and warned him not to appropriate gold which belonged to others.

It was an ancestral custom among the Leukadians to fling a criminal from this rock every year at the sacrifice performed in honor of Apollo for the sake of averting evil. However, a number of men would be stationed all around below rock to catch the criminal and take him out of the borders in order to exile him from the island. This was the same rock from which, according to a legend, Sappho took her suicidal leap.

==== Slaying of Titans ====
Once Hera, out of spite, aroused the Titans to war against Zeus and take away his throne. Accordingly, when the Titans tried to climb Mount Olympus, Zeus with the help of Apollo, Artemis and Athena, defeated them and cast them into Tartarus.

===Female lovers===
Apollo is said to have been the lover of all nine Muses, and not being able to choose one of them, he decided to remain unwed. He fathered the Corybantes by the Muse Thalia. By Calliope, he had Hymenaios, Ialemus, Orpheus and Linus. Alternatively, Linus was said to be the son of Apollo and either Urania or Terpsichore.

In the Great Eoiae that is attributed to Hesiod, Scylla is the daughter of Apollo and Hecate.

Cyrene was a Thessalian princess whom Apollo loved. In her honor, he built the city Cyrene and made her its ruler. She was later granted longevity by Apollo who turned her into a nymph. The couple had two sons, Aristaeus, and Idmon.

Evadne was a nymph daughter of Poseidon and a lover of Apollo. They had a son, Iamos. During the time of the childbirth, Apollo sent Eileithyia, the goddess of childbirth to assist her.

Rhoeo, a princess of the island of Naxos was loved by Apollo. Out of affection for her, Apollo turned her sisters into goddesses. On the island Delos she bore Apollo a son named Anius. Not wanting to have the child, she entrusted the infant to Apollo and left. Apollo raised and educated the child on his own.

Ourea, a daughter of Poseidon, fell in love with Apollo when he and Poseidon were serving the Trojan king Laomedon. They both united on the day the walls of Troy were built. She bore to Apollo a son, whom Apollo named Ileus, after the city of his birth, Ilion (Troy). Ileus was very dear to Apollo.

Thero, daughter of Phylas, a maiden as beautiful as the moonbeams, was loved by the radiant Apollo, and she loved him in return. Through their union, she became the mother of Chaeron, who was famed as &quot;the tamer of horses&quot;. He later built the city Chaeronea.

Hyrie or Thyrie was the mother of Cycnus. Apollo turned both the mother and son into swans when they jumped into a lake and tried to kill themselves.

Hecuba was the wife of King Priam of Troy, and Apollo had a son with her named Troilus. An oracle prophesied that Troy would not be defeated as long as Troilus reached the age of twenty alive. He was ambushed and killed by Achilleus, and Apollo avenged his death by killing Achilles. After the sack of Troy, Hecuba was taken to Lycia by Apollo.

Coronis was daughter of Phlegyas, King of the Lapiths. While pregnant with Asclepius, Coronis fell in love with Ischys, son of Elatus and slept with him. When Apollo found out about her infidelity through his prophetic powers or thanks to his raven who informed him, he sent his sister, Artemis, to kill Coronis. Apollo rescued the baby by cutting open Coronis&#x27; belly and gave it to the centaur Chiron to raise.

Dryope, the daughter of Dryops, was impregnated by Apollo in the form of a snake. She gave birth to a son named Amphissus.

In Euripides&#x27; play &quot;Ion&quot;, Apollo fathered Ion by Creusa, wife of Xuthus. He used his powers to conceal her pregnancy from her father. Later, when Creusa left Ion to die in the wild, Apollo asked Hermes to save the child and bring him to the oracle at Delphi, where he was raised by a priestess.

Apollo loved and kidnapped an Oceanid nymph, Melia. Her father Oceanus sent one of his sons, Caanthus, to find her, but Caanthus could not take her back from Apollo, so he burned Apollo&#x27;s sanctuary. In retaliation, Apollo shot and killed Caanthus.

===Male lovers===

Hyacinth (or Hyacinthus), a beautiful and athletic Spartan prince, was one of Apollo&#x27;s favourite lovers. The pair was practicing throwing the discus when a discus thrown by Apollo was blown off course by the jealous Zephyrus and struck Hyacinthus in the head, killing him instantly. Apollo is said to be filled with grief. Out of Hyacinthus&#x27; blood, Apollo created a flower named after him as a memorial to his death, and his tears stained the flower petals with the interjection , meaning &quot;alas&quot;. He was later resurrected and taken to heaven. The festival Hyacinthia was a national celebration of Sparta, which commemorated the death and rebirth of Hyacinthus.

Another male lover was Cyparissus, a descendant of Heracles. Apollo gave him a tame deer as a companion but Cyparissus accidentally killed it with a javelin as it lay asleep in the undergrowth. Cyparissus was so saddened by its death that he asked Apollo to let his tears fall forever. Apollo granted the request by turning him into the Cypress named after him, which was said to be a sad tree because the sap forms droplets like tears on the trunk.

Admetus, the king of Pherae, was also Apollo&#x27;s lover. During his exile, which lasted either for one year or nine years, Apollo served Admetus as a herdsman. The romantic nature of their relationship was first described by Callimachus of Alexandria, who wrote that Apollo was &quot;fired with love&quot; for Admetus. Plutarch lists Admetus as one of Apollo&#x27;s lovers and says that Apollo served Admetus because he doted upon him. Latin poet Ovid in his said that even though he was a god, Apollo forsook his pride and stayed in as a servant for the sake of Admetus. Tibullus describes Apollo&#x27;s love to the king as &quot;servitium amoris&quot; (slavery of love) and asserts that Apollo became his servant not by force but by choice. He would also make cheese and serve it to Admetus. His domestic actions caused embarrassment to his family.


When Admetus wanted to marry princess Alcestis, Apollo provided a chariot pulled by a lion and a boar he had tamed. This satisfied Alcestis&#x27; father and he let Admetus marry his daughter. Further, Apollo saved the king from Artemis&#x27; wrath and also convinced the Moirai to postpone Admetus&#x27; death once.

Branchus, a shepherd, one day came across Apollo in the woods. Captivated by the god&#x27;s beauty, he kissed Apollo. Apollo requited his affections and wanting to reward him, bestowed prophetic skills on him. His descendants, the Branchides, were an influential clan of prophets.

Other male lovers of Apollo include:

*Adonis, who is said to have been the lover of both Apollo and Aphrodite. He behaved as a man with Aphrodite and as a woman with Apollo.
*Atymnius, otherwise known as a beloved of Sarpedon
*Boreas, the god of North winds
*Cinyras, king of Cyprus and the priest of Aphrodite
*Helenus, a Trojan prince (son of Priam and Hecuba). He received from Apollo an ivory bow with which he later wounded Achilles in the hand.
*Hippolytus of Sicyon (not the same as Hippolytus, the son of Theseus)
*Hymenaios, the son of Magnes
*Iapis, to whom Apollo taught the art of healing
*Phorbas, the dragon slayer (probably the son of Triopas)

===Children===

Apollo sired many children, from mortal women and nymphs as well as the goddesses. His children grew up to be physicians, musicians, poets, seers or archers. Many of his sons founded new cities and became kings.

Asclepius is the most famous son of Apollo. His skills as a physician surpassed that of Apollo&#x27;s. Zeus killed him for bringing back the dead, but upon Apollo&#x27;s request, he was resurrected as a god. Aristaeus was placed under the care of Chiron after his birth. He became the god of beekeeping, cheese-making, animal husbandry and more. He was ultimately given immortality for the benefits he bestowed upon humanity. The Corybantes were spear-clashing, dancing demigods.

The sons of Apollo who participated in the Trojan War include the Trojan princes Hector and Troilus, as well as Tenes, the king of Tenedos, all three of whom were killed by Achilles over the course of the war.

Apollo&#x27;s children who became musicians and bards include Orpheus, Linus, Ialemus, Hymenaeus, Philammon, Eumolpus and Eleuther. Apollo fathered 3 daughters, Apollonis, Borysthenis and Cephisso, who formed a group of minor Muses, the &quot;Musa Apollonides&quot;. Plutarch recounts that the Delphians believed the three Muses to be Nete, Mese, and Hypate, after the highest, middle, and lowest strings of the lyre. Phemonoe was a seer and poet who was the inventor of Hexameter.

Apis, Idmon, Iamus, Tenerus, Mopsus, Galeus, Telmessus and others were gifted seers. Anius, Pythaeus and Ismenus lived as high priests. Most of them were trained by Apollo himself.

Arabus, Delphos, Dryops, Miletos, Tenes, Epidaurus, Ceos, Lycoras, Syrus, Pisus, Marathus, Megarus, Patarus, Acraepheus, Cicon, Chaeron and many other sons of Apollo, under the guidance of his words, founded eponymous cities.

He also had a son by Agathippe who was named Chrysorrhoas who was a mechanic artist. His other daughters include Eurynome, Chariclo wife of Chiron, Eurydice the wife of Orpheus, Eriopis, famous for her beautiful hair, Melite the heroine, Pamphile the silk weaver, Parthenos, and by some accounts, Phoebe, Hilyra and Scylla. Apollo turned Parthenos into a constellation after her early death.

Additionally, Apollo fostered and educated Chiron, the centaur who later became the greatest teacher and educated many demigods, including Apollo&#x27;s sons. Apollo also fostered Carnus, the son of Zeus and Europa.

====List of offspring and their mothers====
The following is a list of Apollo&#x27;s offspring, by various mothers. Beside each offspring, the earliest source to record the parentage is given, along with the century to which the source (in some cases approximately) dates.


===Failed love attempts===

Love affairs ascribed to Apollo are a late development in Greek mythology. Their vivid anecdotal qualities have made some of them favorites of painters since the Renaissance, the result being that they stand out more prominently in the modern imagination.
Daphne was a nymph who scorned Apollo&#x27;s advances and ran away from him. When Apollo chased her in order to persuade her, she changed herself into a laurel tree. According to other versions, she cried for help during the chase, and Gaia helped her by taking her in and placing a laurel tree in her place. According to Roman poet Ovid, the chase was brought about by Cupid, who hit Apollo with a golden arrow of love and Daphne with a leaden arrow of hatred. The myth explains the origin of the laurel and the connection of Apollo with the laurel and its leaves, which his priestess employed at Delphi. The leaves became the symbol of victory and laurel wreaths were given to the victors of the Pythian games.

Marpessa was kidnapped by Idas but was loved by Apollo as well. Zeus made her choose between them, and she chose Idas on the grounds that Apollo, being immortal, would tire of her when she grew old.

Sinope, a nymph, was approached by the amorous Apollo. She made him promise that he would grant to her whatever she would ask for, and then cleverly asked him to let her stay a virgin. Apollo kept his promise and went back.

Bolina was admired by Apollo but she refused him and jumped into the sea. To avoid her death, Apollo turned her into a nymph, saving her life.

Castalia was a nymph whom Apollo loved. She fled from him and dove into the spring at Delphi, at the base of Mt. Parnassos, which was then named after her. Water from this spring was sacred; it was used to clean the Delphian temples and inspire the priestesses.

Cassandra was a daughter of Hecuba and Priam. Apollo wished to court her. Cassandra promised to return his love on one condition – he should give her the power to see the future. Apollo fulfilled her wish, but she went back on her word and rejected him soon after. Angered that she broke her promise, Apollo cursed her that even though she would see the future, no one would ever believe her prophecies.

The Sibyl of Cumae like Cassandra promised Apollo her love if he would give her a boon. The Sibyl took a handful of sand and asked Apollo to grant her years of life as many as the grains of sand she held in her hands. Apollo granted her wish, but Sibyl went back on her word. Although Sibyl did live an extended life as Apollo had promised, he did not give her agelessness along with it, so she shrivelled and shrank and only her voice remained.

Hestia, the goddess of the hearth, rejected both Apollo&#x27;s and Poseidon&#x27;s marriage proposals and swore that she would always stay unmarried.

In one version of the prophet Tiresias&#x27;s origins, he was originally a woman who promised Apollo to sleep with him if he would give her music lessons. Apollo gave her her wish, but then she went back on her word and refused him. Apollo in anger turned her into a man.

===Female counterparts===

====Artemis====

Artemis as the sister of Apollo, is &quot;thea apollousa&quot;, that is, she as a female divinity represented the same idea that Apollo did as a male divinity. In the pre-Hellenic period, their relationship was described as the one between husband and wife, and there seems to have been a tradition which actually described Artemis as the wife of Apollo. However, this relationship was never sexual but spiritual, which is why they both are seen being unmarried in the Hellenic period.

Artemis, like her brother, is armed with a bow and arrows. She is the cause of sudden deaths of women. She also is the protector of the young, especially girls. Though she has nothing to do with oracles, music or poetry, she sometimes led the female chorus on Olympus while Apollo sang. The laurel (&quot;daphne&quot;) was sacred to both. &quot;Artemis Daphnaia&quot; had her temple among the Lacedemonians, at a place called Hypsoi. &quot;Apollo Daphnephoros&quot; had a temple in Eretria, a &quot;place where the citizens are to take the oaths&quot;. In later times when Apollo was regarded as identical with the sun or Helios, Artemis was naturally regarded as Selene or the moon.

====Hecate====

Hecate, the goddess of witchcraft and magic, is the chthonic counterpart of Apollo. They both are cousins, since their mothers – Leto and Asteria – are sisters. One of Apollo&#x27;s epithets, &quot;Hecatos&quot;, is the masculine form of Hecate, and both names mean &quot;working from afar&quot;. While Apollo presided over the prophetic powers and magic of light and heaven, Hecate presided over the prophetic powers and magic of night and chthonian darkness. If Hecate is the &quot;gate-keeper&quot;, Apollo &quot;Agyieus&quot; is the &quot;door-keeper&quot;. Hecate is the goddess of crossroads and Apollo is the god and protector of streets.

The oldest evidence found for Hecate&#x27;s worship is at Apollo&#x27;s temple in Miletos. There, Hecate was taken to be Apollo&#x27;s sister counterpart in the absence of Artemis. Hecate&#x27;s lunar nature makes her the goddess of the waning moon and contrasts and complements, at the same time, Apollo&#x27;s solar nature.

====Athena====

As a deity of knowledge and great power, Apollo was seen being the male counterpart of Athena. Being Zeus&#x27; favorite children, they were given more powers and duties. Apollo and Athena often took up the role of protectors of cities, and were patrons of some of the important cities. Athena was the principal goddess of Athens, Apollo was the principal god of Sparta.

As patrons of arts, Apollo and Athena were companions of the Muses, the former a much more frequent companion than the latter. Apollo was sometimes called the son of Athena and Hephaestus.

In the Trojan War, as Zeus&#x27; executive, Apollo is seen holding the aegis like Athena usually does. Apollo&#x27;s decisions were usually approved by his sister Athena, and they both worked to establish the law and order set forth by Zeus.

===Apollo in the &quot;Oresteia&quot;===
In Aeschylus&#x27; &quot;Oresteia&quot; trilogy, Clytemnestra kills her husband, King Agamemnon because he had sacrificed their daughter Iphigenia to proceed forward with the Trojan war. Apollo gives an order through the Oracle at Delphi that Agamemnon&#x27;s son, Orestes, is to kill Clytemnestra and Aegisthus, her lover. Orestes and Pylades carry out the revenge, and consequently Orestes is pursued by the Erinyes or Furies (female personifications of vengeance).

Apollo and the Furies argue about whether the matricide was justified; Apollo holds that the bond of marriage is sacred and Orestes was avenging his father, whereas the Erinyes say that the bond of blood between mother and son is more meaningful than the bond of marriage. They invade his temple, and he drives them away. He says that the matter should be brought before Athena. Apollo promises to protect Orestes, as Orestes has become Apollo&#x27;s supplicant. Apollo advocates Orestes at the trial, and ultimately Athena rules in favor of Apollo.

===Roman Apollo===

The Roman worship of Apollo was adopted from the Greeks. As a quintessentially Greek god, Apollo had no direct Roman equivalent, although later Roman poets often referred to him as Phoebus. There was a tradition that the Delphic oracle was consulted as early as the period of the kings of Rome during the reign of Tarquinius Superbus.

On the occasion of a pestilence in the 430s BCE, Apollo&#x27;s first temple at Rome was established in the Flaminian fields, replacing an older cult site there known as the &quot;Apollinare&quot;. During the Second Punic War in 212 BCE, the &quot;Ludi Apollinares&quot; (&quot;Apollonian Games&quot;) were instituted in his honor, on the instructions of a prophecy attributed to one Marcius. In the time of Augustus, who considered himself under the special protection of Apollo and was even said to be his son, his worship developed and he became one of the chief gods of Rome.

After the Battle of Actium, which was fought near a sanctuary of Apollo, Augustus enlarged Apollo&#x27;s temple, dedicated a portion of the spoils to him, and instituted quinquennial games in his honour. He also erected a new temple to the god on the Palatine hill. Sacrifices and prayers on the Palatine to Apollo and Diana formed the culmination of the Secular Games, held in 17 BCE to celebrate the dawn of a new era.

==Festivals==
The chief Apollonian festival was the Pythian Games held every four years at Delphi and was one of the four great Panhellenic Games. Also of major importance was the Delia held every four years on Delos. Athenian annual festivals included the Boedromia, Metageitnia, Pyanepsia, and Thargelia.
Spartan annual festivals were the Carneia and the Hyacinthia.
Thebes every nine years held the Daphnephoria.

==Attributes and symbols==

Apollo&#x27;s most common attributes were the bow and arrow. Other attributes of his included the kithara (an advanced version of the common lyre), the plectrum and the sword. Another common emblem was the sacrificial tripod, representing his prophetic powers. The Pythian Games were held in Apollo&#x27;s honor every four years at Delphi. The bay laurel plant was used in expiatory sacrifices and in making the crown of victory at these games.

The palm tree was also sacred to Apollo because he had been born under one in Delos. Animals sacred to Apollo included wolves, dolphins, roe deer, swans, cicadas (symbolizing music and song), ravens, hawks, crows (Apollo had hawks and crows as his messengers), snakes (referencing Apollo&#x27;s function as the god of prophecy), mice and griffins, mythical eagle–lion hybrids of Eastern origin.

Homer and Porphyry wrote that Apollo had a hawk as his messenger. In many myths Apollo is transformed into a hawk. In addition, Claudius Aelianus wrote that in Ancient Egypt people believed that hawks were sacred to the god and that according to the ministers of Apollo in Egypt there were certain men called &quot;hawk-keepers&quot; (ἱερακοβοσκοί) who fed and tended the hawks belonging to the god. Eusebius wrote that the second appearance of the moon is held sacred in the city of Apollo in Egypt and that the city&#x27;s symbol is a man with a hawklike face (Horus). Claudius Aelianus wrote that Egyptians called Apollo Horus in their own language.

As god of colonization, Apollo gave oracular guidance on colonies, especially during the height of colonization, 750–550 BCE. According to Greek tradition, he helped Cretan or Arcadian colonists found the city of Troy. However, this story may reflect a cultural influence which had the reverse direction: Hittite cuneiform texts mention an Asia Minor god called &quot;Appaliunas&quot; or &quot;Apalunas&quot; in connection with the city of Wilusa attested in Hittite inscriptions, which is now generally regarded as being identical with the Greek Ilion by most scholars. In this interpretation, Apollo&#x27;s title of &quot;Lykegenes&quot; can simply be read as &quot;born in Lycia&quot;, which effectively severs the god&#x27;s supposed link with wolves (possibly a folk etymology).

In literary contexts, Apollo represents harmony, order, and reason—characteristics contrasted with those of Dionysus, god of wine, who represents ecstasy and disorder. The contrast between the roles of these gods is reflected in the adjectives Apollonian and Dionysian. However, the Greeks thought of the two qualities as complementary: the two gods are brothers, and when Apollo at winter left for Hyperborea, he would leave the Delphic oracle to Dionysus. This contrast appears to be shown on the two sides of the Borghese Vase.

Apollo is often associated with the Golden Mean. This is the Greek ideal of moderation and a virtue that opposes gluttony.

In antiquity, Apollo was associated with the planet Mercury. The ancient Greeks believed that Mercury as observed during the morning was a different planet than the one during the evening, because each twilight Mercury would appear farther from the Sun as it set than it had the night before. The morning planet was called Apollo, and the one at evening Hermes/Mercury before they realised they were the same, thereupon the name &#x27;Mercury/Hermes&#x27; was kept, and &#x27;Apollo&#x27; was dropped.

== Apollo in the arts ==
Apollo is a common theme in Greek and Roman art and also in the art of the Renaissance. The earliest Greek word for a statue is &quot;delight&quot; (, &quot;agalma&quot;), and the sculptors tried to create forms which would inspire such guiding vision. Maurice Bowra notices that the Greek artist puts into a god the highest degree of power and beauty that can be imagined. The sculptors derived this from observations on human beings, but they also embodied in concrete form, issues beyond the reach of ordinary thought.

The naked bodies of the statues are associated with the cult of the body which was essentially a religious activity. The muscular frames and limbs combined with slim waists indicate the Greek desire for health, and the physical capacity which was necessary in the hard Greek environment. The statues of Apollo and the other gods present them in their full youth and strength. &quot;In the balance and relation of their limbs, such figures express their whole character, mental and physical, and reveal their central being, the radiant reality of youth in its heyday&quot;.

===Archaic sculpture===
Numerous free-standing statues of male youths from Archaic Greece exist, and were once thought to be representations of Apollo, though later discoveries indicated that many represented mortals. In 1895, V. I. Leonardos proposed the term &quot;kouros&quot; (&quot;male youth&quot;) to refer to those from Keratea; this usage was later expanded by Henri Lechat in 1904 to cover all statues of this format.

The earliest examples of life-sized statues of Apollo may be two figures from the Ionic sanctuary on the island of Delos. Such statues were found across the Greek-speaking world, the preponderance of these were found at the sanctuaries of Apollo with more than one hundred from the sanctuary of &quot;Apollo Ptoios&quot;, Boeotia alone. Significantly more rare are the life-sized bronze statues. One of the few originals which survived into the present day—so rare that its discovery in 1959 was described as &quot;a miracle&quot; by Ernst Homann-Wedeking—is the masterpiece bronze, &quot;Piraeus Apollo&quot;. It was found in Piraeus, a port city close to Athens, and is believed to have come from north-eastern Peloponnesus. It is the only surviving large-scale Peloponnesian statue.

===Classical sculpture===

The famous Apollo of Mantua and its variants are early forms of the Apollo Citharoedus statue type, in which the god holds the cithara, a sophisticated seven-stringed variant of the lyre, in his left arm. While none of the Greek originals have survived, several Roman copies from approximately the late 1st or early 2nd century exist, of which an example is the Apollo Barberini.

===Hellenistic Greece-Rome===
Apollo as a handsome beardless young man, is often depicted with a cithara (as Apollo Citharoedus) or bow in his hand, or reclining on a tree (the Apollo Lykeios and Apollo Sauroctonos types). The Apollo Belvedere is a marble sculpture that was rediscovered in the late 15th century; for centuries it epitomized the ideals of Classical Antiquity for Europeans, from the Renaissance through the 19th century. The marble is a Hellenistic or Roman copy of a bronze original by the Greek sculptor Leochares, made between 330 and 320 BCE.

The life-size so-called &quot;Adonis&quot; found in 1780 on the site of a &quot;villa suburbana&quot; near the Via Labicana in the Roman suburb of Centocelle is identified as an Apollo by modern scholars. In the late 2nd century CE floor mosaic from El Djem, Roman &quot;Thysdrus&quot;, he is identifiable as Apollo Helios by his effulgent halo, though now even a god&#x27;s divine nakedness is concealed by his cloak, a mark of increasing conventions of modesty in the later Empire.

Another haloed Apollo in mosaic, from Hadrumentum, is in the museum at Sousse. The conventions of this representation, head tilted, lips slightly parted, large-eyed, curling hair cut in locks grazing the neck, were developed in the 3rd century BCE to depict Alexander the Great. Some time after this mosaic was executed, the earliest depictions of Christ would also be beardless and haloed.

==Modern reception==
Apollo often appears in modern and popular culture due to his status as the god of music, dance and poetry.

=== Postclassical art and literature ===
==== Dance and music ====
Apollo has featured in dance and music in modern culture. Percy Bysshe Shelley composed a &quot;Hymn of Apollo&quot; (1820), and the god&#x27;s instruction of the Muses formed the subject of Igor Stravinsky&#x27;s &quot;Apollon musagète&quot; (1927–1928). In 1978, the Canadian band Rush released an album with songs &quot;Apollo: Bringer of Wisdom&quot;/&quot;Dionysus: Bringer of Love&quot;.

==== Books ====
Apollo has been portrayed in modern literature, such as when Charles Handy in &quot;Gods of Management&quot; (1978) uses Greek gods as a metaphor to portray various types of organizational culture. Apollo represents a &quot;role&quot; culture where order, reason, and bureaucracy prevail.

=== Psychology and philosophy ===
In the philosophical discussion of the arts, a distinction is sometimes made between the Apollonian and Dionysian impulses, where the former is concerned with imposing intellectual order and the latter with chaotic creativity. Friedrich Nietzsche argued that a fusion of the two was most desirable. Psychologist Carl Jung&#x27;s Apollo archetype represents what he saw as the disposition in people to over-intellectualise and maintain emotional distance.

=== Spaceflight ===

In spaceflight, the 1960s and 1970s NASA program for orbiting and landing astronauts on the Moon was named after Apollo, by NASA manager Abe Silverstein:

==Genealogy==









== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
===Primary sources===

* Aelian, &quot;On Animals&quot;, Volume II: Books 6–11. Translated by A. F. Scholfield. Loeb Classical Library 447. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1958.
* Aeschylus, &quot;The Eumenides&quot; in &quot;Aeschylus, with an English translation by Herbert Weir Smyth, Ph. D. in two volumes&quot;, Vol 2, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 1926, Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Antoninus Liberalis, &quot;The Metamorphoses of Antoninus Liberalis&quot; translated by Francis Celoria (Routledge 1992). Online version at the Topos Text Project.
* Apollodorus, &quot;Apollodorus, The Library, with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes.&quot; Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Apollonius of Rhodes, &quot;Apollonius Rhodius: the Argonautica&quot;, translated by Robert Cooper Seaton, W. Heinemann, 1912. Internet Archive.
* Callimachus, &quot;Callimachus and Lycophron with an English Translation by A. W. Mair; Aratus, with an English Translation by G. R. Mair&quot;, London: W. Heinemann, New York: G. P. Putnam 1921. Online version at Harvard University Press. Internet Archive.
* Campbell, David A., &quot;Greek Lyric, Volume III: Stesichorus, Ibycus, Simonides, and Others&quot;, Loeb Classical Library No. 476, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 1991. . Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Cicero, Marcus Tullius, &quot;De Natura Deorum&quot; in &quot;Cicero in Twenty-eight Volumes, XIX De Natura Deorum; Academica&quot;, with an English translation by H. Rackham, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd, 1967. Internet Archive.
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Library of History, Volume III: Books 4.59-8&quot;, translated by C. H. Oldfather, Loeb Classical Library No. 340. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 1939. . Online version at Harvard University Press. Online version by Bill Thayer.
* &quot;Etymologicum Magnum&quot;, edited by Thomas Gaisford, Oxford, E. Typographeo Academico, 1848. Online version at the Munich Digitization Center.
* Herodotus, &quot;Herodotus, with an English translation by A. D. Godley.&quot; Cambridge. Harvard University Press. 1920. Online version available at The Perseus Digital Library.
* Hesiod, &quot;Catalogue of Women&quot;, in &quot;Hesiod: The Shield, Catalogue of Women, Other Fragments&quot;, edited and translated by Glenn W. Most, Loeb Classical Library No. 503, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 2007, 2018. . Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Hesiod, &quot;Theogony&quot;, in &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White&quot;, Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* &quot;Homeric Hymn 3 to Apollo&quot; in &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White&quot;, Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* &quot;Homeric Hymn&quot; 4 &quot;to Hermes&quot;, in &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White&quot;, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer, &quot;The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PhD in two volumes&quot;. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer; &quot;The Odyssey with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PH.D. in two volumes&quot;. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Hyginus, Gaius Julius, &quot;De astronomia&quot;, in &quot;The Myths of Hyginus&quot;, edited and translated by Mary A. Grant, Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1960. Online version at ToposText.
* Hyginus, Gaius Julius, &quot;Fabulae&quot;, in &quot;The Myths of Hyginus&quot;, edited and translated by Mary A. Grant, Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1960. Online version at ToposText.
* Livy, &quot;The History of Rome, Books I and II With An English Translation&quot;. Cambridge. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919.
* Nonnus, &quot;Dionysiaca&quot;; translated by Rouse, W H D, I Books I-XV. Loeb Classical Library No. 344, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1940. Internet Archive
* Nonnus, &quot;Dionysiaca&quot;; translated by Rouse, W H D, II Books XVI-XXXV. Loeb Classical Library No. 345, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1940. Internet Archive
* Page, Denys Lionel, Sir, &quot;Poetae Melici Graeci&quot;, Oxford University Press, 1962. .
* Statius, &quot;&quot;Thebaid&quot;&quot;. Translated by Mozley, J H. Loeb Classical Library Volumes. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1928.
* Strabo, &quot;The Geography of Strabo.&quot; Edition by H.L. Jones. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Sophocles, &quot;Oedipus Rex&quot;
* Palaephatus, &quot;On Unbelievable Tales&quot; 46. Hyacinthus (330 BCE)
* Ovid, &quot;Metamorphoses&quot;, Brookes More, Boston, Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. 10. 162–219 (1–8 CE)
* Pausanias, &quot;Pausanias Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes.&quot; Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Philostratus the Elder, &quot;Imagines&quot;, in &quot;Philostratus the Elder, Imagines. Philostratus the Younger, Imagines. Callistratus, Descriptions.&quot; Translated by Arthur Fairbanks. Loeb Classical Library No. 256. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1931. . Online version at Harvard University Press. Internet Archive 1926 edition. i.24 Hyacinthus (170–245 CE)
* Philostratus the Younger, &quot;Imagines&quot;, in &quot;Philostratus the Elder, Imagines. Philostratus the Younger, Imagines. Callistratus, Descriptions.&quot; Translated by Arthur Fairbanks. Loeb Classical Library No. 256. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1931. . Online version at Harvard University Press. Internet Archive 1926 edition. 14. Hyacinthus (170–245 CE)
* Pindar, &quot;Odes&quot;, Diane Arnson Svarlien. 1990. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pliny, &quot;Natural History, Volume I: Books 1-2&quot;, translated by H. Rackham, Loeb Classical Library No. 330, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 1938. . Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Plutarch. &quot;Lives, Volume I: Theseus and Romulus. Lycurgus and Numa. Solon and Publicola.&quot; Translated by Bernadotte Perrin. Loeb Classical Library No. 46. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1914. . Online version at Harvard University Press. &quot;Numa&quot; at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pseudo-Plutarch, &quot;De fluviis&quot;, in &quot;Plutarch&#x27;s morals, Volume V&quot;, edited and translated by William Watson Goodwin, Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Co., 1874. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Lucian, &quot;Dialogues of the Dead. Dialogues of the Sea-Gods. Dialogues of the Gods. Dialogues of the Courtesans&quot;, translated by M. D. MacLeod, Loeb Classical Library No. 431, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 1961. . Online version at Harvard University Press. Internet Archive.
* First Vatican Mythographer, 197. Thamyris et Musae
* Servius, &quot;Servii grammatici qui feruntur in Vergilii carmina commentarii&quot;, Volume I, edited by Georgius Thilo and Hermannus Hagen, Bibliotheca Teubneriana, Leipzig, Teubner, 1881. Internet Archive. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Stephanus of Byzantium, &quot;Stephani Byzantii Ethnicorum quae supersunt&quot;, edited by August Meineke, Berlin, Impensis G. Reimeri, 1849. Internet Archive. Google Books. Online version at ToposText.
* Tzetzes, John, &quot;Chiliades&quot;, editor Gottlieb Kiessling, F.C.G. Vogel, 1826. Google Books. (English translation: Book I by Ana Untila; Books II–IV, by Gary Berkowitz; Books V–VI by Konstantino Ramiotis; Books VII–VIII by Vasiliki Dogani; Books IX–X by Jonathan Alexander; Books XII–XIII by Nikolaos Giallousis. Internet Archive).
* Valerius Flaccus, &quot;Argonautica&quot;, translated by J. H. Mozley, Loeb Classical Library No. 286. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1928. . Online version at Harvard University Press. Online translated text available at theoi.com.
* Vergil, &quot;Aeneid.&quot; Theodore C. Williams. trans. Boston. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1910. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
===Secondary sources===

* Athanassakis, Apostolos N., and Benjamin M. Wolkow, &quot;The Orphic Hymns&quot;, Johns Hopkins University Press; owlerirst Printing edition (29 May 2013). . Google Books.
* M. Bieber, 1964. &quot;Alexander the Great in Greek and Roman Art&quot;. Chicago.
* Hugh Bowden, 2005. &quot;Classical Athens and the Delphic Oracle: Divination and Democracy&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Walter Burkert, 1985. &quot;Greek Religion&quot; (Harvard University Press) III.2.5 &quot;passim&quot;
* Fontenrose, Joseph Eddy, &quot;Python: A Study of Delphic Myth and Its Origins&quot;, University of California Press, 1959. .
* Gantz, Timothy, &quot;Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources&quot;, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, Two volumes: (Vol. 1), (Vol. 2).
* Miranda J. Green, 1997. &quot;Dictionary of Celtic Myth and Legend&quot;, Thames and Hudson.
* Grimal, Pierre, &quot;The Dictionary of Classical Mythology&quot;, Wiley-Blackwell, 1996. .
* Hard, Robin, &quot;The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose&#x27;s &quot;Handbook of Greek Mythology&quot;&quot;, Psychology Press, 2004, . Google Books.
* Karl Kerenyi, 1953. &quot;Apollon: Studien über Antiken Religion und Humanität&quot; revised edition.
* Kerényi, Karl 1951, &quot;The Gods of the Greeks&quot;, Thames and Hudson, London.
* Mertens, Dieter; Schutzenberger, Margareta. &quot;Città e monumenti dei Greci d&#x27;Occidente: dalla colonizzazione alla crisi di fine V secolo a.C.&quot;. Roma L&#x27;Erma di Bretschneider, 2006. .
* Martin Nilsson, 1955. &quot;Die Geschichte der Griechische Religion&quot;, vol. I. C.H. Beck.
* Parada, Carlos, &quot;Genealogical Guide to Greek Mythology&quot;, Jonsered, Paul Åströms Förlag, 1993. .
* Pauly–Wissowa, &quot;Realencyclopädie der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft&quot;: II, &quot;Apollon&quot;. The best repertory of cult sites (Burkert).
* Peck, Harry Thurston, &quot;Harpers Dictionary of Classical Antiquities&quot;, New York. Harper and Brothers. 1898. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pfeiff, K.A., 1943. &quot;Apollon: Wandlung seines Bildes in der griechischen Kunst&quot;. Traces the changing iconography of Apollo.
* D.S.Robertson (1945) &quot;A handbook of Greek and Roman Architecture&quot; Cambridge University Press
* West, M. L. (2003), &quot;Greek Epic Fragments: From the Seventh to the Fifth Centuries BC&quot;, Loeb Classical Library No. 497, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 2003. . Online version at Harvard University Press. Internet Archive.
* Smith, William, &quot;Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology&quot;, London (1873). Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Smith, William, &quot;A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities&quot;. William Smith, LLD. William Wayte. G. E. Marindin. Albemarle Street, London. John Murray. 1890. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Spivey Nigel (1997) &quot;Greek art&quot; Phaedon Press Ltd.
* Tripp, Edward, &quot;Crowell&#x27;s Handbook of Classical Mythology&quot;, Thomas Y. Crowell Co; First edition (June 1970). . Internet Archive.
==External links==

* Apollo at the Greek Mythology Link, by Carlos Parada
* The Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (c. 1650 images of Apollo)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="0" end="6" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q101609" start="21" end="37" title="Twelve Olympians" label="Olympian deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="41" end="54" title="Ancient Greek religion" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="59" end="73" title="Ancient Roman religion" label="Roman religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="78" end="83" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="88" end="103" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="216" end="219" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="323" end="327" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103107" start="332" end="336" title="Leto" label="Leto"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="362" end="369" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q937330" start="483" end="489" title="kouros" label="kouros"/>
<link wikidata="Q11884379" start="574" end="592" title="Etruscan mythology" label="Etruscan mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634020" start="602" end="607" title="Apulu" label="Apulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="639" end="645" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="689" end="697" title="oracular" label="oracular"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="716" end="721" title="deity" label="deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="729" end="743" title="Pythia" label="Delphic Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="1090" end="1099" title="Asclepius" label="Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="1200" end="1206" title="Plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1649" end="1668" title="#Attributes and symbols" label="attribute of Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094394" start="2409" end="2418" title="Colonies in antiquity" label="colonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848037" start="2518" end="2525" title="Agyieus" label="Agyieus"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="2598" end="2609" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="2724" end="2730" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199937" start="2850" end="2853" title="Sol (Roman mythology)" label="Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946528" start="2868" end="2878" title="conflation" label="conflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q506588" start="2973" end="2978" title="Attic Greek" label="Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q504165" start="2980" end="2985" title="Ionic Greek" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q990062" start="2991" end="3004" title="Homeric Greek" label="Homeric Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q285494" start="3013" end="3018" title="Doric Greek" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q499602" start="3024" end="3037" title="Arcadocypriot Greek" label="Arcadocypriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q406373" start="3043" end="3049" title="Aeolic Greek" label="Aeolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956586" start="3105" end="3115" title="List of Mycenaean deities" label="older name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862189" start="3122" end="3127" title="Paean (god)" label="Paean"/>
<link wikidata="Q190102" start="3164" end="3172" title="Linear B" label="Linear B"/>
<link wikidata="Q668366" start="3174" end="3188" title="Mycenean Greek" label="Mycenean Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396158" start="3245" end="3253" title="Lacuna (manuscripts)" label="lacunose"/>
<link wikidata="Q173527" start="3304" end="3306" title="Knossos" label="KN"/>
<link wikidata="Q179209" start="3395" end="3403" title="Hyperion (Titan)" label="Hyperion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="3434" end="3443" title="etymology" label="etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q506588" start="3488" end="3503" title="Attic Greek" label="Classical Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="3567" end="3577" title="common era" label="common era"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="3587" end="3592" title="Dorians" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q514435" start="4021" end="4027" title="Apella" label="Apella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508757" start="4103" end="4118" title="Robert S. P. Beekes" label="R. S. P. Beekes"/>
<link wikidata="Q965052" start="4188" end="4197" title="Pre-Greek" label="Pre-Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013103" start="4253" end="4270" title="popular etymology" label="popular etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="4410" end="4415" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q125247" start="4425" end="4433" title="Cratylus" label="Cratylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q443510" start="4693" end="4702" title="Hesychius of Alexandria" label="Hesychius"/>
<link wikidata="Q35974" start="4954" end="4981" title="ancient Macedonian language" label="ancient Macedonian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="5019" end="5027" title="toponyms" label="toponyms"/>
<link wikidata="Q213679" start="5060" end="5065" title="Pella" label="Pella"/>
<link wikidata="Q83958" start="5082" end="5099" title="Macedonia (ancient kingdom)" label="ancient Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068130" start="5132" end="5139" title="Pellene" label="Pellene"/>
<link wikidata="Q35668" start="5153" end="5160" title="Hittite language" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q389081" start="5172" end="5181" title="Apaliunas" label="Apaliunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746922" start="5223" end="5245" title="Manapa-Tarhunta letter" label="Manapa-Tarhunta letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q35668" start="5251" end="5258" title="Hittite language" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q10713" start="5640" end="5646" title="Luwian language" label="Luwian"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="5833" end="5840" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q184890" start="6246" end="6262" title="Latin literature" label="Latin literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="6373" end="6379" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814239" start="6416" end="6422" title="Apollo Lyceus" label="Lyceus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231805" start="6455" end="6466" title="Proto-Greek language" label="Proto-Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q103107" start="6586" end="6590" title="Leto" label="Leto"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927" start="6622" end="6627" title="Lycia" label="Lycia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199937" start="6887" end="6890" title="Sol (Roman mythology)" label="Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q285086" start="7198" end="7211" title="Cynthus" label="Mount Cynthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="7229" end="7234" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="7541" end="7548" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="7575" end="7581" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q216551" start="7586" end="7592" title="Actium" label="Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="7788" end="7795" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15394073" start="7805" end="7814" title="Acraephia (Boeotia)" label="Acraephia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675035" start="7848" end="7858" title="Acraepheus" label="Acraepheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156318" start="8045" end="8053" title="etiology" label="etiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q329342" start="8067" end="8080" title="Homeric Hymns" label="Homeric Hymns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382007" start="8119" end="8128" title="Epactaeus" label="Epactaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="8182" end="8187" title="Samos" label="Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822608" start="8287" end="8296" title="Apollo Smintheus" label="Smintheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454671" start="8414" end="8419" title="Troad" label="Troad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822608" start="8428" end="8437" title="Hamaxitus" label="Hamaxitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121147" start="8475" end="8479" title="Nape (Lesbos)" label="Nape"/>
<link wikidata="Q128087" start="8497" end="8503" title="Lesbos" label="Lesbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378952" start="8534" end="8542" title="Eutresis (Boeotia)" label="Eutresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="8587" end="8593" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217667" start="8758" end="8762" title="Elis (city)" label="Elis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187909" start="8793" end="8798" title="agora" label="agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q417496" start="8801" end="8808" title="Acestor" label="Acestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q867143" start="9071" end="9077" title="Roman temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q207234" start="9162" end="9169" title="Bellona (goddess)" label="Bellona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862189" start="9172" end="9177" title="Paean (god)" label="Paean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848037" start="9321" end="9328" title="Agyieus" label="Agyieus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721374" start="9428" end="9438" title="Alexicacus" label="Alexicacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q632548" start="9583" end="9593" title="Archegetes" label="Archegetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q285494" start="9779" end="9784" title="Doric Greek" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q853462" start="10279" end="10282" title="Ion (mythology)" label="Ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q465331" start="10302" end="10309" title="Ionians" label="Ionians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142437" start="10332" end="10356" title="Temple of Apollo Patroos" label="Temple of Apollo Patroos"/>
<link wikidata="Q619265" start="10368" end="10379" title="Apollo Sauroctonos" label="Sauroctonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15721" start="10475" end="10481" title="Python (mythology)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q285494" start="11165" end="11170" title="Doric Greek" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="11211" end="11215" title="Muse" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q21560738" start="11940" end="11947" title="Amphion" label="Amphion"/>
<link wikidata="Q213621" start="11952" end="11957" title="Niobe" label="Niobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740901" start="12220" end="12229" title="Amazonius" label="Amazonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="12234" end="12243" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825645" start="12251" end="12272" title="Description of Greece" label="Description of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263760" start="12290" end="12300" title="Pyrrhichus" label="Pyrrhichus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134154" start="12414" end="12421" title="Amazons" label="Amazons"/>
<link wikidata="Q758195" start="12699" end="12709" title="Boedromion" label="Boedromion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811302" start="12723" end="12732" title="Boedromia" label="Boedromia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="13051" end="13063" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q236626" start="13086" end="13092" title="Celtic nations" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q258883" start="13175" end="13186" title="List of Celtic gods" label="Celtic gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q754544" start="13211" end="13228" title="Apollo Atepomarus" label="Apollo Atepomarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137626" start="13328" end="13337" title="Mauvières" label="Mauvières"/>
<link wikidata="Q12553" start="13339" end="13344" title="Indre" label="Indre"/>
<link wikidata="Q463956" start="13410" end="13424" title="Apollo Belenus" label="Apollo Belenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="13517" end="13521" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q131434" start="13542" end="13549" title="Noricum" label="Noricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194369" start="13620" end="13637" title="Apollo Cunomaglus" label="Apollo Cunomaglus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297030" start="13703" end="13718" title="Nettleton Scrubb" label="Nettleton Shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333602" start="13837" end="13851" title="Apollo Grannus" label="Apollo Grannus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203230" start="14015" end="14022" title="Maponus" label="Maponus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636301" start="14026" end="14043" title="Apollo Moritasgus" label="Apollo Moritasgus"/>
<link wikidata="Q463956" start="14190" end="14206" title="Apollo Vindonnus" label="Apollo Vindonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q844730" start="14267" end="14275" title="Essarois" label="Essarois"/>
<link wikidata="Q244707" start="14282" end="14301" title="Châtillon-sur-Seine" label="Châtillon-sur-Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="14317" end="14325" title="Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899176" start="14378" end="14394" title="Apollo Virotutis" label="Apollo Virotutis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12751" start="14508" end="14520" title="Haute-Savoie" label="Haute-Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060319" start="14529" end="14537" title="Jublains" label="Jublains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12584" start="14539" end="14553" title="Maine-et-Loire" label="Maine-et-Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q101609" start="14624" end="14637" title="Olympian Gods" label="Olympian gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="14678" end="14684" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="14689" end="14694" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="14774" end="14781" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15721" start="14881" end="14887" title="Python (mythology)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q271834" start="15010" end="15024" title="Archaic Greece" label="Archaic Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q42857" start="15036" end="15043" title="prophet" label="prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="15124" end="15140" title="Classical Greece" label="Classical Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q61888" start="15247" end="15261" title="Walter Burkert" label="Walter Burkert"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="15717" end="15719" title="verb" label="v."/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="15722" end="15724" title="noun" label="n."/>
<link wikidata="Q1581290" start="16200" end="16207" title="healing" label="healing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862189" start="16291" end="16296" title="Paean (god)" label="Paean"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="16389" end="16394" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q181264" start="16521" end="16530" title="Mycenaean Greece" label="Mycenaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q620591" start="16788" end="16798" title="apotropaic" label="apotropaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="16905" end="16913" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="16925" end="16931" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="16954" end="16963" title="Asclepius" label="Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q15721" start="17300" end="17306" title="Python (mythology)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="17375" end="17380" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="17698" end="17703" title="Vedic" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q855310" start="17719" end="17724" title="Rudra" label="Rudra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514911" start="17754" end="17762" title="Achaeans (Homer)" label="Achaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q873470" start="17917" end="17925" title="hecatomb" label="hecatomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q329342" start="17958" end="17980" title="Homeric Hymns" label="Homeric Hymn to Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="18075" end="18082" title="Dorians" label="Dorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155801" start="18119" end="18126" title="apellai" label="apellai"/>
<link wikidata="Q203711" start="18257" end="18262" title="Dorians" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q35974" start="18469" end="18487" title="Ancient Macedonian language" label="Ancient Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q213679" start="18512" end="18517" title="Pella" label="Pella"/>
<link wikidata="Q761739" start="18640" end="18648" title="Omphalos" label="Omphalos"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="19112" end="19119" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q831577" start="19197" end="19208" title="Britomartis" label="Britomartis"/>
<link wikidata="Q103107" start="19785" end="19789" title="Leto" label="Leto"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="19794" end="19799" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="19849" end="19859" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="19932" end="19940" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q273320" start="19965" end="19970" title="Sibyl" label="Sibyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="20089" end="20095" title="Assyria" label="Assyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="20096" end="20103" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="20163" end="20171" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="20202" end="20207" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="20243" end="20250" title="Troy" label="Trojans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514911" start="20273" end="20281" title="Achaeans (Homer)" label="Achaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="20294" end="20304" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q337767" start="20457" end="20463" title="Wilusa" label="Wilusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="20465" end="20469" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="20558" end="20563" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="20710" end="20717" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q36095" start="20816" end="20822" title="Lydian language" label="Lydian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848037" start="20979" end="20986" title="agyieus" label="agyieus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104641" start="21169" end="21178" title="full moon" label="full moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="21322" end="21331" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="21375" end="21380" title="Vedic" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q855310" start="21381" end="21386" title="Rudra" label="Rudra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="21520" end="21525" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="21675" end="21688" title="Indo-European language" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="21907" end="21912" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="21917" end="21923" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="21943" end="21956" title="Delos" label="Delian Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="21961" end="21975" title="Pythian Apollo" label="Pythian Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927" start="22072" end="22077" title="Lycia" label="Lycia"/>
<link wikidata="Q756820" start="22155" end="22159" title="Cult (religion)" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q271834" start="22318" end="22332" title="Archaic Greece" label="archaic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501358" start="22355" end="22371" title="theophoric names" label="theophoric names"/>
<link wikidata="Q671358" start="22600" end="22606" title="Didyma" label="Didyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933754" start="22611" end="22617" title="Claros" label="Claros"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22748" end="22779" title="Monism#Monism, pantheism, and panentheism" label="all-encompassing, highest deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q33941" start="22827" end="22846" title="Julian the Apostate" label="Julian the Apostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="22956" end="22962" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933754" start="23000" end="23006" title="Claros" label="Claros"/>
<link wikidata="Q671358" start="23011" end="23017" title="Didyma" label="Didyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q304823" start="23042" end="23046" title="Abae" label="Abae"/>
<link wikidata="Q19890323" start="23050" end="23056" title="Phocis" label="Phocis"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="23076" end="23083" title="toponym" label="toponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560461" start="23100" end="23106" title="Abaeus" label="Abaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184462" start="23185" end="23192" title="Croesus" label="Croesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q304823" start="23227" end="23231" title="Abae" label="Abae"/>
<link wikidata="Q19890323" start="23235" end="23241" title="Phocis" label="Phocis"/>
<link wikidata="Q464923" start="23245" end="23251" title="Bassae" label="Bassae"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="23259" end="23270" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933754" start="23277" end="23283" title="Clarus" label="Clarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="23306" end="23316" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="23417" end="23424" title="Ancient Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428857" start="23470" end="23475" title="Tenea" label="Tenea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23533" end="23539" title="Khyrse" label="Khyrse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454671" start="23544" end="23549" title="Troad" label="Troad"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="23599" end="23604" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="23786" end="23792" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="23798" end="23804" title="Pythia" label="Pythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048935" start="23834" end="23840" title="pneuma" label="pneuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q380239" start="23896" end="23902" title="Adyton" label="Adyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q671358" start="23909" end="23915" title="Didyma" label="Didyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="23943" end="23951" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="23967" end="23972" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10713" start="23975" end="23981" title="Luwian" label="Luwian"/>
<link wikidata="Q232615" start="23983" end="23989" title="Sardis" label="Sardis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923696" start="24158" end="24166" title="Branchus" label="Branchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146939" start="24197" end="24215" title="Manbij" label="Hierapolis Bambyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438430" start="24272" end="24284" title="De Dea Syria" label="De Dea Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q221735" start="24313" end="24327" title="Atargatis" label="Syrian Goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q233121" start="24441" end="24447" title="Patara (Lycia)" label="Patara"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927" start="24452" end="24457" title="Lycia" label="Lycia"/>
<link wikidata="Q692847" start="24616" end="24623" title="Segesta" label="Segesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q18073696" start="24684" end="24690" title="Oropus" label="Oropus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="24701" end="24707" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q330584" start="24720" end="24730" title="Amphiaraus" label="Amphiaraus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166183" start="24829" end="24839" title="Trophonius" label="Trophonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="25261" end="25266" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="25427" end="25433" title="divinity" label="divine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="25516" end="25527" title="Doric order" label="Doric order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033171" start="25709" end="25716" title="Canon (basic principle)" label="canonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="26134" end="26144" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="26251" end="26262" title="Doric order" label="Doric order"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="26491" end="26502" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic order"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="26620" end="26636" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="26745" end="26759" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes, Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="26911" end="26916" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813885" start="27024" end="27036" title="Daphnephoria" label="Daphnephoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q320367" start="27274" end="27281" title="Eretria" label="Eretria"/>
<link wikidata="Q465110" start="27907" end="27916" title="stylobate" label="stylobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116171" start="27958" end="27964" title="pteron" label="pteron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306985" start="27986" end="27992" title="Dreros" label="Dreros"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="27994" end="27999" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="28225" end="28231" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q134178" start="28349" end="28355" title="Minoan civilization" label="Minoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="28413" end="28418" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352674" start="28429" end="28435" title="Gortyn" label="Gortyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="28437" end="28442" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q38281115" start="28669" end="28676" title="Thermon" label="Thermon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170291" start="28678" end="28689" title="West Greece" label="West Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="28696" end="28701" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q725453" start="28883" end="28892" title="peristyle" label="peristyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="29107" end="29114" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="29118" end="29123" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q465110" start="29182" end="29191" title="stylobate" label="stylobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="29357" end="29363" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="29424" end="29435" title="Doric order" label="Doric order"/>
<link wikidata="Q128087" start="29446" end="29452" title="Lesbos" label="Lesbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355791" start="29458" end="29464" title="Aeolic order" label="Aeolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355791" start="29621" end="29627" title="Aeolic order" label="Aeolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="29683" end="29696" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene, Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="29709" end="29714" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q137721" start="29939" end="29948" title="Naukratis" label="Naukratis"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="29953" end="29958" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="30123" end="30134" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic order"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="30138" end="30154" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse, Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="30158" end="30163" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q465110" start="30239" end="30248" title="stylobate" label="stylobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q952173" start="30466" end="30473" title="Selinus" label="Selinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="30475" end="30481" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="30487" end="30492" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983175" start="30493" end="30501" title="Temple C (Selinus)" label="Temple C"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="30751" end="30759" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="30762" end="30768" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="31164" end="31178" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes, Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="31383" end="31388" title="Chios" label="Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="31393" end="31398" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q304823" start="31559" end="31563" title="Abae" label="Abae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637650" start="31565" end="31571" title="Phocis (ancient region)" label="Phocis"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="31606" end="31612" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q129165" start="31634" end="31640" title="Xerxes I of Persia" label="Xerxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="31669" end="31676" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="31698" end="31705" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="31740" end="31747" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q464923" start="31847" end="31853" title="Bassae" label="Bassae"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="31855" end="31867" title="Peloponnesus" label="Peloponnesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q311502" start="31988" end="31995" title="Iktinos" label="Iktinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="32009" end="32014" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="32019" end="32024" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="32075" end="32085" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q465110" start="32161" end="32170" title="stylobate" label="stylobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="32213" end="32218" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q725453" start="32219" end="32228" title="peristyle" label="peristyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="32308" end="32313" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="32454" end="32459" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q661559" start="32627" end="32635" title="Ambracia" label="Ambracia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="32639" end="32644" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q208573" start="32762" end="32766" title="Arta, Greece" label="Arta"/>
<link wikidata="Q465110" start="32927" end="32936" title="stylobate" label="stylobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q671358" start="33008" end="33014" title="Didyma" label="Didyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="33021" end="33028" title="Miletus" label="Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="33044" end="33049" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933754" start="33286" end="33292" title="Clarus" label="Clarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142488" start="33307" end="33315" title="Colophon (city)" label="Colophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192664" start="33467" end="33472" title="Doric order" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="33682" end="33689" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822608" start="33764" end="33773" title="Hamaxitus" label="Hamaxitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454671" start="33775" end="33780" title="Troad" label="Troad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="33790" end="33795" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q852301" start="33797" end="33804" title="Chryses" label="Chryses"/>
<link wikidata="Q465110" start="34209" end="34218" title="stylobate" label="stylobate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="34321" end="34327" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658567" start="34337" end="34343" title="Ilisos" label="Ilisos"/>
<link wikidata="Q685394" start="34462" end="34471" title="Thargelia" label="Thargelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007637" start="34474" end="34487" title="Setae (Lydia)" label="Setae (Lydia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q271925" start="34552" end="34569" title="Apollonia Pontica" label="Apollonia Pontica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5995390" start="34705" end="34738" title="Ikaros (Failaka Island)" label="Ikaros island in the Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392962" start="34747" end="34761" title="Failaka Island" label="Failaka Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="34818" end="34824" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378952" start="34926" end="34934" title="Eutresis (Boeotia)" label="Eutresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="34971" end="34981" title="Lacedaemon" label="Lacedaemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q677935" start="35123" end="35127" title="Veii" label="Veii"/>
<link wikidata="Q206730" start="35129" end="35136" title="Etruria" label="Etruria"/>
<link wikidata="Q654057" start="35308" end="35314" title="Tuscan order" label="Tuscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431856" start="35350" end="35365" title="Falerii Veteres" label="Falerii Veteres"/>
<link wikidata="Q206730" start="35367" end="35374" title="Etruria" label="Etruria"/>
<link wikidata="Q942519" start="35594" end="35608" title="Soranus (mythology)" label="Apollo Soranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="35662" end="35669" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q654057" start="36018" end="36024" title="Tuscan order" label="Tuscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="36118" end="36123" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q582353" start="36216" end="36241" title="temple of Apollo Sosianus" label="temple of Apollo Sosianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q705416" start="36425" end="36437" title="Gaius Sosius" label="Gaius Sosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q54124" start="36482" end="36492" title="Corinthian order" label="Corinthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236860" start="36626" end="36652" title="temple of Apollo Palatinus" label="temple of Apollo Palatinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="36746" end="36754" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="36803" end="36808" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352142" start="37031" end="37037" title="Melite (ancient city)" label="Melite"/>
<link wikidata="Q207277" start="37046" end="37051" title="Mdina" label="Mdina"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="37053" end="37058" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q25240925" start="37063" end="37079" title="Temple of Apollo (Melite)" label="Temple of Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="37400" end="37404" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103107" start="37432" end="37436" title="Leto" label="Leto"/>
<link wikidata="Q94066" start="38686" end="38696" title="Eileithyia" label="Eileithyia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159168" start="39277" end="39283" title="Themis" label="Themis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131409" start="39331" end="39339" title="ambrosia" label="ambrosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="39467" end="39471" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18642285" start="39684" end="39691" title="Asteria" label="Asteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q213621" start="40309" end="40314" title="Niobe" label="Niobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q898947" start="42338" end="42346" title="Lachesis" label="Lachesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180287" start="42365" end="42371" title="Moirai" label="Moirai"/>
<link wikidata="Q109220" start="42888" end="42894" title="Boreas (god)" label="Boreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="42934" end="42942" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12879305" start="43712" end="43719" title="Curetes (tribe)" label="Curetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="43982" end="43989" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44404" end="44414" title="Attic calendar#Festival calendar (lunisolar)" label="Thargelion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44461" end="44467" title="Hellenic calendars#Delphic" label="Bysios"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="44622" end="44632" title="Hyperborea" label="Hyperborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q649128" start="44772" end="44785" title="Pythian games" label="Pythian games"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="45221" end="45227" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q922942" start="45642" end="45650" title="Pleiades (Greek mythology)" label="Pleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q305567" start="46366" end="46372" title="Abaris" label="Abaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q520917" start="46377" end="46385" title="Aristeas" label="Aristeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q128430" start="46666" end="46674" title="Cyclopes" label="Cyclopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545810" start="46799" end="46807" title="Veritas" label="Aletheia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183281" start="46839" end="46845" title="Phoebe (Titaness)" label="Phoebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="46892" end="46898" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q632548" start="47136" end="47146" title="Archegetes" label="Archegetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302504" start="47624" end="47630" title="Thriae" label="Thriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q116939061" start="48205" end="48220" title="Lycian peasants" label="Lycian peasants"/>
<link wikidata="Q15721" start="48844" end="48850" title="Python (mythology)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q611361" start="48854" end="48862" title="chthonic" label="chthonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="48923" end="48937" title="Delphic Oracle" label="Delphic Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q180237" start="49121" end="49127" title="Typhon" label="Typhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="52420" end="52430" title="Hyperborea" label="Hyperborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11912529" start="53853" end="53861" title="Carmanor (of Crete)" label="Carmanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132777" start="53899" end="53907" title="Crotopus" label="Crotopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q258540" start="54059" end="54072" title="Vale of Tempe" label="Vale of Tempe"/>
<link wikidata="Q192109" start="54695" end="54702" title="Admetus" label="Admetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="55656" end="55662" title="Pythia" label="Pythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q656887" start="55765" end="55771" title="Tityos" label="Tityus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192109" start="56454" end="56461" title="Admetus" label="Admetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330631" start="56478" end="56484" title="Pherae" label="Pherae"/>
<link wikidata="Q320449" start="57025" end="57033" title="Alcestis" label="Alcestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182439" start="57051" end="57062" title="Pelias" label="King Pelias"/>
<link wikidata="Q180287" start="57397" end="57402" title="Moirai" label="Fates"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="57544" end="57553" title="Asclepius" label="Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q128430" start="57632" end="57640" title="Cyclopes" label="Cyclopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q101322" start="57714" end="57722" title="Tartarus" label="Tartarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103107" start="57748" end="57752" title="Leto" label="Leto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373376" start="57892" end="57902" title="Penal labour" label="hard labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="58006" end="58010" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q355350" start="58015" end="58022" title="Maurus Servius Honoratus" label="Servius"/>
<link wikidata="Q213621" start="58049" end="58054" title="Niobe" label="Niobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="58143" end="58149" title="Thebes (Greece)" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q21560738" start="58162" end="58169" title="Amphion" label="Amphion"/>
<link wikidata="Q735766" start="58185" end="58191" title="hubris" label="hubris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738502" start="58274" end="58281" title="Niobids" label="Niobids"/>
<link wikidata="Q532698" start="58835" end="58848" title="Spil Mount" label="Mount Sipylos"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="58852" end="58862" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q391379" start="58925" end="58933" title="Achelous" label="Achelous"/>
<link wikidata="Q193267" start="59160" end="59166" title="Nestor (mythology)" label="Nestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="59315" end="59323" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q332324" start="59353" end="59361" title="Laomedon" label="Laomedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="59775" end="59781" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q206187" start="59824" end="59830" title="Aeacus" label="Aeacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="60133" end="60137" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206187" start="60196" end="60204" title="Aeacidae" label="Aeacidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="60234" end="60242" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q322639" start="60322" end="60333" title="Neoptolemus" label="Neoptolemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269950" start="60681" end="60686" title="Cetus (mythology)" label="Cetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137657" start="60756" end="60763" title="Hesione" label="Hesione"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="60793" end="60801" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="61027" end="61037" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="61111" end="61120" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q611124" start="61130" end="61138" title="Chryseis" label="Chryseis"/>
<link wikidata="Q852301" start="61177" end="61184" title="Chryses" label="Chryses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61405" end="61422" title="Achilles and Patroclus#In the Iliad" label="anger of Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="61462" end="61467" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q190662" start="61490" end="61495" title="aegis" label="aegis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208256" start="62034" end="62042" title="Diomedes" label="Diomedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="62067" end="62073" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="62075" end="62084" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="62360" end="62364" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q762520" start="62407" end="62415" title="Sarpedon (Trojan War hero)" label="Sarpedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q189347" start="62551" end="62557" title="Hypnos" label="Hypnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q199647" start="62570" end="62578" title="Thanatos" label="Thanatos"/>
<link wikidata="Q159666" start="62723" end="62729" title="Hector" label="Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q193433" start="62785" end="62791" title="Hecuba" label="Hecuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q186271" start="63037" end="63046" title="Patroclus" label="Patroclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="63455" end="63458" title="Helios" label="sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q426788" start="63556" end="63561" title="Tenes" label="Tenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q867342" start="63617" end="63624" title="Troilus" label="Troilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q167646" start="63938" end="63943" title="Paris (mythology)" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="63949" end="63957" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q392631" start="64098" end="64104" title="Agenor" label="Agenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205276" start="64106" end="64115" title="Polydamas (mythology)" label="Polydamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q385397" start="64121" end="64128" title="Glaucus" label="Glaucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="64539" end="64544" title="Muses" label="Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q183417" start="64684" end="64690" title="Chiron" label="Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q83203" start="64706" end="64713" title="centaur" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="64851" end="64860" title="Asclepius" label="Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q374275" start="65012" end="65017" title="Anius" label="Anius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782599" start="65040" end="65045" title="Rhoeo" label="Rhoeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655431" start="65216" end="65221" title="Iamus" label="Iamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q259886" start="65248" end="65254" title="Evadne" label="Evadne"/>
<link wikidata="Q180287" start="65302" end="65308" title="Moirai" label="Moirai"/>
<link wikidata="Q59771616" start="65572" end="65577" title="Idmon" label="Idmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165510" start="65690" end="65699" title="Argonauts" label="Argonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044177" start="65894" end="65900" title="Carnus" label="Carnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165170" start="65932" end="65938" title="Europa (consort of Zeus)" label="Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996222" start="66038" end="66046" title="Melaneus of Oechalia" label="Melaneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622228" start="66102" end="66112" title="Stratonice (mythology)" label="Stratonice"/>
<link wikidata="Q600094" start="66456" end="66461" title="paean" label="paean"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="66619" end="66624" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="66759" end="66767" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="67356" end="67366" title="Hyperborea" label="Hyperborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q313782" start="67368" end="67374" title="Claudius Aelianus" label="Aelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="67483" end="67495" title="Pythagoreanism" label="Pythagoreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478979" start="67831" end="67851" title="music of the spheres" label="music of the spheres"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="67893" end="67898" title="Muses" label="Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="67907" end="67916" title="Musagetes" label="Musagetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q105261" start="67996" end="68005" title="Parnassus" label="Parnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="68140" end="68147" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241660" start="68152" end="68157" title="Linus of Thrace" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="68243" end="68247" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q121973" start="68367" end="68371" title="Eros" label="Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q135662" start="68376" end="68382" title="Cupid and Psyche" label="Psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q178641" start="68384" end="68390" title="Peleus" label="Peleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184437" start="68395" end="68401" title="Thetis" label="Thetis"/>
<link wikidata="Q331341" start="68433" end="68444" title="Bacchanalia" label="Bacchanalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209599" start="68508" end="68515" title="maenads" label="maenads"/>
<link wikidata="Q735766" start="68698" end="68704" title="hubris" label="hubris"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="68785" end="68791" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263152" start="69059" end="69064" title="Pylos" label="Pylos"/>
<link wikidata="Q46360" start="69113" end="69121" title="tortoise" label="tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="69240" end="69244" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q599737" start="69830" end="69837" title="Marsyas" label="Marsyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q132582" start="69925" end="69928" title="Pan (mythology)" label="Pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17996944" start="70052" end="70058" title="Tmolus (son of Ares)" label="Tmolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q308398" start="70193" end="70198" title="Midas" label="Midas"/>
<link wikidata="Q599737" start="70601" end="70608" title="Marsyas" label="Marsyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q163709" start="70615" end="70620" title="satyr" label="satyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q735766" start="70656" end="70662" title="hubris" label="hubris"/>
<link wikidata="Q324299" start="70680" end="70685" title="aulos" label="aulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="70737" end="70743" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="71090" end="71094" title="Muse" label="Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238530" start="71114" end="71118" title="Nysa (mythology)" label="Nysa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903444" start="71606" end="71613" title="Nysiads" label="Nysiads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145315" start="72782" end="72788" title="flaying" label="flayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163924" start="72831" end="72839" title="Celaenae" label="Celaenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="72843" end="72850" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q735766" start="72859" end="72865" title="hubris" label="hubris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241660" start="73259" end="73264" title="Linus of Thrace" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="73269" end="73276" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188236" start="73566" end="73572" title="Cybele" label="Cybele"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="73604" end="73614" title="Hyperborea" label="Hyperborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="73670" end="73676" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="73698" end="73707" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="73905" end="73909" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q878246" start="73931" end="73938" title="Cinyras" label="Cinyras"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="74145" end="74153" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q165510" start="74398" end="74407" title="Argonauts" label="Argonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q176758" start="74432" end="74437" title="Jason" label="Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q217253" start="74618" end="74624" title="Anafi" label="Anaphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q208256" start="74702" end="74710" title="Diomedes" label="Diomedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="74922" end="74930" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q852301" start="75012" end="75019" title="Chryses" label="Chryses"/>
<link wikidata="Q312422" start="75160" end="75165" title="Arion" label="Arion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="75743" end="75751" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="75756" end="75765" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q186271" start="75794" end="75803" title="Patroclus" label="Patroclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159666" start="75908" end="75914" title="Hector" label="Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724065" start="76068" end="76074" title="Brygoi" label="Brygoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="76120" end="76128" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="76150" end="76154" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="76495" end="76503" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209599" start="76652" end="76662" title="Bacchantes" label="Bacchantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q163709" start="76667" end="76673" title="satyrs" label="satyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q392435" start="76698" end="76707" title="Aristaeus" label="Aristaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="76928" end="76934" title="nymphs" label="nymphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q130890" start="77158" end="77165" title="Oedipus" label="Oedipus"/>
<link wikidata="Q330584" start="77182" end="77192" title="Amphiaraus" label="Amphiaraus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179038" start="77422" end="77429" title="Hypseus" label="Hypseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4289278" start="77715" end="77723" title="Melaneus (mythology)" label="Melaneus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28045388" start="77725" end="77733" title="Antiphus" label="Antiphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826559" start="77755" end="77761" title="Lampus" label="Lampus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191192" start="78063" end="78075" title="gigantomachy" label="gigantomachy"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="78088" end="78096" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q227313" start="78115" end="78124" title="Ephialtes (disambiguation)" label="Ephialtes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421201" start="78218" end="78228" title="Porphyrion" label="Porphyrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q909765" start="78297" end="78304" title="Aloadae" label="Aloadae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18479157" start="78838" end="78845" title="Phorbas" label="Phorbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568135" start="78873" end="78881" title="Phlegyas (Boeotia)" label="Phlegyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="79471" end="79484" title="Olympic games" label="Olympic games"/>
<link wikidata="Q40901" start="79502" end="79506" title="Ares" label="Ares"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="79553" end="79559" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="79690" end="79700" title="Hyperborea" label="Hyperborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="79839" end="79847" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485996" start="79915" end="79923" title="Periphas" label="Periphas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782599" start="80764" end="80769" title="Rhoeo" label="Rhoeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28555204" start="81383" end="81391" title="Hemithea (mythology)" label="Hemithea"/>
<link wikidata="Q83160" start="81437" end="81447" title="Prometheus" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="81936" end="81944" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q212087" start="82133" end="82143" title="Eurystheus" label="Eurystheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q466882" start="82352" end="82366" title="Ceryneian Hind" label="Ceryneian Hind"/>
<link wikidata="Q486698" start="83646" end="83653" title="Omphale" label="Omphale"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="83664" end="83669" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q909765" start="84194" end="84198" title="Aloadae" label="Otis"/>
<link wikidata="Q909765" start="84203" end="84212" title="Aloadae" label="Ephialtes"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="84233" end="84246" title="Mount Olympus" label="Mount Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9597" start="84600" end="84607" title="abdomen" label="abdomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43801" start="84679" end="84684" title="navel" label="navel"/>
<link wikidata="Q190138" start="84981" end="84987" title="Lefkada" label="Leukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q163920" start="85175" end="85181" title="Adonis" label="Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="86603" end="86607" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="86657" end="86661" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80344" start="86732" end="86745" title="Mount Olympus" label="Mount Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="86777" end="86784" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="86789" end="86795" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="86911" end="86916" title="Muses" label="Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q631406" start="87004" end="87014" title="Corybantes" label="Corybantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q108019" start="87027" end="87033" title="Thalia (Muse)" label="Thalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103975" start="87038" end="87046" title="Calliope" label="Calliope"/>
<link wikidata="Q506770" start="87055" end="87064" title="Hymenaios" label="Hymenaios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147223" start="87066" end="87073" title="Ialemus" label="Ialemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="87075" end="87082" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241660" start="87087" end="87092" title="Linus (Thracian)" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104002" start="87159" end="87165" title="Urania" label="Urania"/>
<link wikidata="Q104042" start="87169" end="87180" title="Terpsichore" label="Terpsichore"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="87224" end="87230" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q393261" start="87278" end="87284" title="Cyrene (mythology)" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q392435" start="87489" end="87498" title="Aristaeus" label="Aristaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q59771616" start="87504" end="87509" title="Idmon" label="Idmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q259886" start="87512" end="87518" title="Evadne" label="Evadne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655431" start="87591" end="87596" title="Iamos" label="Iamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q94066" start="87645" end="87655" title="Eileithyia" label="Eileithyia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782599" start="87699" end="87704" title="Rhoeo" label="Rhoeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q374275" start="87877" end="87882" title="Anius" label="Anius"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="88031" end="88039" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q332324" start="88116" end="88124" title="Laomedon" label="Laomedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="88167" end="88171" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="88271" end="88275" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783276" start="88310" end="88315" title="Thero (mythology)" label="Thero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188469" start="88329" end="88335" title="Phylas" label="Phylas"/>
<link wikidata="Q549874" start="88568" end="88577" title="Chaeronea" label="Chaeronea"/>
<link wikidata="Q604672" start="88614" end="88620" title="Cycnus (son of Apollo)" label="Cycnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193433" start="88731" end="88737" title="Hecuba" label="Hecuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q170473" start="88759" end="88764" title="Priam" label="Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="88768" end="88772" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q867342" start="88810" end="88817" title="Troilus" label="Troilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="88822" end="88828" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="88954" end="88963" title="Achilleus" label="Achilleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q725286" start="89077" end="89084" title="Coronis (lover of Apollo)" label="Coronis"/>
<link wikidata="Q831583" start="89101" end="89109" title="Phlegyas" label="Phlegyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q334794" start="89123" end="89130" title="Lapiths" label="Lapiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="89152" end="89161" title="Asclepius" label="Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479189" start="89189" end="89195" title="Ischys" label="Ischys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253971" start="89204" end="89210" title="Elatus" label="Elatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q116188714" start="89320" end="89325" title="Lycius (son of Clinis)" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q83203" start="89469" end="89476" title="centaur" label="centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q183417" start="89477" end="89483" title="Chiron" label="Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q910403" start="89495" end="89501" title="Dryope (daughter of Dryops)" label="Dryope"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="89622" end="89631" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q614607" start="89649" end="89652" title="Ion (play)" label="Ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q853462" start="89676" end="89679" title="Ion (mythology)" label="Ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196048" start="89683" end="89689" title="Creusa (daughter of Erechtheus)" label="Creusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q514746" start="89699" end="89705" title="Xuthus" label="Xuthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="89829" end="89835" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="89885" end="89891" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q785598" start="89975" end="89980" title="Melia (consort of Apollo)" label="Melia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161419" start="89993" end="90000" title="Oceanus" label="Oceanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305446" start="90023" end="90031" title="Caanthus" label="Caanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="90254" end="90260" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q182570" start="90350" end="90356" title="Discus throw" label="discus"/>
<link wikidata="Q467515" start="90424" end="90432" title="Zephyrus" label="Zephyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q158758" start="90579" end="90585" title="hyacinth (plant)" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080551" start="90779" end="90789" title="Hyacinthia" label="Hyacinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056143" start="90908" end="90918" title="Cyparissus" label="Cyparissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="90936" end="90944" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q308989" start="91034" end="91041" title="Pilum" label="javelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q146037" start="91222" end="91229" title="Cupressaceae" label="Cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q192109" start="91336" end="91343" title="Admetus" label="Admetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="91563" end="91574" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="91785" end="91789" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q109598" start="91910" end="91918" title="Tibullus" label="Tibullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q320449" start="92229" end="92237" title="Alcestis" label="Alcestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180287" start="92462" end="92468" title="Moirai" label="Moirai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4095839" start="92508" end="92516" title="Branchus (lover of Apollo)" label="Branchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163920" start="92829" end="92835" title="Adonis" label="Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628100" start="92966" end="92974" title="Atymnius" label="Atymnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q762520" start="93008" end="93016" title="Sarpedon (brother of Minos)" label="Sarpedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q109220" start="93018" end="93024" title="Boreas (god)" label="Boreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q878246" start="93050" end="93057" title="Cinyras" label="Cinyras"/>
<link wikidata="Q729332" start="93103" end="93110" title="Helenus" label="Helenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170473" start="93136" end="93141" title="Priam" label="Priam"/>
<link wikidata="Q193433" start="93146" end="93152" title="Hecuba" label="Hecuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q368628" start="93257" end="93263" title="Sicyon" label="Sicyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q338201" start="93281" end="93311" title="Hippolytus (mythology)" label="Hippolytus, the son of Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q506770" start="93314" end="93323" title="Hymenaios" label="Hymenaios"/>
<link wikidata="Q10323051" start="93336" end="93342" title="Magnes (son of Argos)" label="Magnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180888" start="93344" end="93349" title="Iapis" label="Iapis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30097019" start="93393" end="93400" title="Phorbas of Thessaly" label="Phorbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="93680" end="93689" title="Asclepius" label="Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q392435" start="93888" end="93897" title="Aristaeus" label="Aristaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q631406" start="94110" end="94120" title="Corybantes" label="Corybantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159666" start="94242" end="94248" title="Hector" label="Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q867342" start="94253" end="94260" title="Troilus" label="Troilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q426788" start="94273" end="94278" title="Tenes" label="Tenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q211817" start="94292" end="94299" title="Tenedos" label="Tenedos"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="94434" end="94441" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241660" start="94443" end="94448" title="Linus of Thrace" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147223" start="94450" end="94457" title="Ialemus" label="Ialemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q506770" start="94459" end="94464" title="Hymen (god)" label="Hymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q53606" start="94470" end="94479" title="Philammon" label="Philammon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125049" start="94481" end="94489" title="Eumolpus" label="Eumolpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28114161" start="94494" end="94502" title="Eleuther" label="Eleuther"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780401" start="94533" end="94542" title="Apollonis" label="Apollonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130326424" start="94544" end="94555" title="Borysthenis" label="Borysthenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16826167" start="94560" end="94568" title="Cephisso" label="Cephisso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993240" start="94790" end="94798" title="Phemonoe" label="Phemonoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620609" start="94855" end="94859" title="Apis (Greek mythology)" label="Apis"/>
<link wikidata="Q59771616" start="94861" end="94866" title="Idmon" label="Idmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655431" start="94868" end="94873" title="Iamus" label="Iamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15543873" start="94875" end="94882" title="Tenerus (son of Apollo)" label="Tenerus"/>
<link wikidata="Q59772475" start="94884" end="94890" title="Mopsus" label="Mopsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132746018" start="94892" end="94898" title="Galeus (son of Apollo)" label="Galeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q374275" start="94940" end="94945" title="Anius" label="Anius"/>
<link wikidata="Q51078829" start="94960" end="94967" title="Ismenus" label="Ismenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q59771958" start="95037" end="95043" title="Arabius (mythology)" label="Arabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322448" start="95045" end="95052" title="Delphos (mythology)" label="Delphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q65078665" start="95054" end="95060" title="Dryops (mythology)" label="Dryops"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="95062" end="95069" title="Miletos" label="Miletos"/>
<link wikidata="Q426788" start="95071" end="95076" title="Tenes" label="Tenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726853" start="95078" end="95087" title="Epidaurus (mythology)" label="Epidaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127782068" start="95089" end="95093" title="Ceos (mythology)" label="Ceos"/>
<link wikidata="Q43764515" start="95095" end="95102" title="Lycorus" label="Lycoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663536" start="95104" end="95109" title="Syrus" label="Syrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130101829" start="95111" end="95116" title="Pisus" label="Pisus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638952" start="95118" end="95126" title="Marathon (mythology)" label="Marathus"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417138" start="95128" end="95135" title="Megarus" label="Megarus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="95137" end="95144" title="Patarus" label="Patarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675035" start="95146" end="95156" title="Acraepheus" label="Acraepheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17625356" start="95158" end="95163" title="Cicon" label="Cicon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="95165" end="95172" title="Chaeron (mythology)" label="Chaeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q547303" start="95377" end="95385" title="Eurynome" label="Eurynome"/>
<link wikidata="Q61121369" start="95387" end="95395" title="Chariclo" label="Chariclo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183417" start="95404" end="95410" title="Chiron" label="Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q208588" start="95412" end="95420" title="Eurydice" label="Eurydice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389488" start="95442" end="95449" title="Eriopis" label="Eriopis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4289514" start="95482" end="95488" title="Melite (heroine)" label="Melite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129419" start="95502" end="95510" title="Pamphile" label="Pamphile"/>
<link wikidata="Q193115" start="95580" end="95586" title="Scylla" label="Scylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q183417" start="95700" end="95706" title="Chiron" label="Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044177" start="95837" end="95843" title="Carnus" label="Carnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="95856" end="95860" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165170" start="95865" end="95871" title="Europa (consort of Zeus)" label="Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q194015" start="96433" end="96439" title="Daphne" label="Daphne"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="96446" end="96451" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q93172" start="96669" end="96673" title="Gaia" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="96766" end="96770" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011" start="96803" end="96808" title="Cupid" label="Cupid"/>
<link wikidata="Q26006" start="96931" end="96937" title="Bay Laurel" label="laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="97031" end="97037" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q649128" start="97131" end="97144" title="Pythian games" label="Pythian games"/>
<link wikidata="Q932325" start="97147" end="97155" title="Marpessa (daughter of Evenus)" label="Marpessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136130" start="97173" end="97177" title="Idas" label="Idas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="97211" end="97215" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539539" start="97347" end="97353" title="Sinope (mythology)" label="Sinope"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939448" start="97572" end="97578" title="Bolina" label="Bolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q170053" start="97716" end="97724" title="Castalia" label="Castalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="97731" end="97736" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q152348" start="97792" end="97798" title="castalian Spring" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q105261" start="97825" end="97838" title="Mt. Parnassos" label="Mt. Parnassos"/>
<link wikidata="Q170779" start="97979" end="97988" title="Cassandra" label="Cassandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q762835" start="98388" end="98402" title="Cumaean Sibyl" label="Sibyl of Cumae"/>
<link wikidata="Q41419" start="98831" end="98837" title="Hestia" label="Hestia"/>
<link wikidata="Q656881" start="99012" end="99020" title="Tiresias" label="Tiresias"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="99768" end="99783" title="Hellenic period" label="Hellenic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q194015" start="100091" end="100097" title="daphne" label="daphne"/>
<link wikidata="Q320367" start="100268" end="100275" title="Eretria" label="Eretria"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="100408" end="100414" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q131585" start="100450" end="100456" title="Selene" label="Selene"/>
<link wikidata="Q131575" start="100487" end="100493" title="Hecate" label="Hecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="101564" end="101570" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="101800" end="101806" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="101840" end="101846" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="101910" end="101915" title="Muses" label="Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q190662" start="102110" end="102115" title="aegis" label="aegis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="102326" end="102335" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="102348" end="102356" title="Oresteia" label="Oresteia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131157" start="102372" end="102384" title="Clytemnestra" label="Clytemnestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q128176" start="102409" end="102418" title="Agamemnon" label="Agamemnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192673" start="102460" end="102469" title="Iphigenia" label="Iphigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192407" start="102588" end="102595" title="Orestes" label="Orestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212091" start="102625" end="102634" title="Aegisthus" label="Aegisthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180262" start="102733" end="102740" title="Erinyes" label="Erinyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712140" start="102779" end="102788" title="revenge" label="vengeance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136456" start="102838" end="102847" title="matricide" label="matricide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644480" start="103243" end="103253" title="Supplication" label="supplicant"/>
<link wikidata="Q516588" start="103442" end="103451" title="List of Greek deities" label="Greek god"/>
<link wikidata="Q201038" start="103643" end="103656" title="Roman Kingdom" label="kings of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q193047" start="103677" end="103696" title="Tarquinius Superbus" label="Tarquinius Superbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q582353" start="103762" end="103774" title="Temple of Apollo Sosianus" label="first temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="103907" end="103923" title="Second Punic War" label="Second Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983534" start="103946" end="103962" title="Ludi Apollinares" label="Ludi Apollinares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="104106" end="104114" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160387" start="104289" end="104305" title="Battle of Actium" label="Battle of Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062856" start="104449" end="104461" title="quinquennial" label="quinquennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236860" start="104499" end="104511" title="Temple of Apollo (Palatine)" label="a new temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="104530" end="104543" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q132543" start="104598" end="104603" title="Diana (mythology)" label="Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q739680" start="104634" end="104647" title="Secular Games" label="Secular Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q649128" start="104753" end="104766" title="Pythian Games" label="Pythian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q508557" start="104829" end="104846" title="Panhellenic Games" label="Panhellenic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441599" start="104881" end="104886" title="Delia (festival)" label="Delia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811302" start="104958" end="104967" title="Boedromia" label="Boedromia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282993" start="104969" end="104980" title="Metageitnia" label="Metageitnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355023" start="104982" end="104991" title="Pyanepsia" label="Pyanepsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q685394" start="104997" end="105006" title="Thargelia" label="Thargelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q744759" start="105042" end="105049" title="Carneia" label="Carneia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080551" start="105058" end="105068" title="Hyacinthia" label="Hyacinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760" start="105070" end="105076" title="Thebes, Greece" label="Thebes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813885" start="105103" end="105115" title="Daphnephoria" label="Daphnephoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q45922" start="105200" end="105205" title="arrow" label="arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q12634515" start="105244" end="105251" title="kithara" label="kithara"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="105287" end="105291" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q181890" start="105298" end="105306" title="plectrum" label="plectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q915527" start="105352" end="105370" title="sacrificial tripod" label="sacrificial tripod"/>
<link wikidata="Q649128" start="105411" end="105424" title="Pythian Games" label="Pythian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="105478" end="105484" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q26006" start="105490" end="105500" title="bay laurel" label="bay laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q734844" start="105558" end="105574" title="laurel wreath" label="crown of victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="105596" end="105605" title="palm tree" label="palm tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="105670" end="105675" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="105711" end="105717" title="wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q122069" start="105729" end="105737" title="roe deer" label="roe deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564928" start="105739" end="105743" title="swan" label="swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947892" start="105746" end="105752" title="cicada" label="cicada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8335" start="105784" end="105789" title="raven" label="raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="105792" end="105796" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43365" start="105799" end="105803" title="Corvus (genus)" label="crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q130223" start="105930" end="105937" title="griffin" label="griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="105988" end="105993" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q203445" start="105998" end="106006" title="Porphyry (philosopher)" label="Porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q313782" start="106116" end="106133" title="Claudius Aelianus" label="Claudius Aelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="106148" end="106161" title="Egyptians" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="106388" end="106396" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q84122" start="106551" end="106556" title="Horus" label="Horus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313782" start="106559" end="106576" title="Claudius Aelianus" label="Claudius Aelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q84122" start="106612" end="106617" title="Horus" label="Horus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="106808" end="106814" title="Crete" label="Cretan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898802" start="106818" end="106825" title="Arcadia (ancient region)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="106855" end="106859" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="106947" end="106954" title="Hittites" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="106955" end="106964" title="Cuneiform script" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q337767" start="107082" end="107088" title="Wilusa" label="Wilusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="107189" end="107194" title="Troy" label="Ilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="107409" end="107423" title="folk etymology" label="folk etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="107535" end="107543" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q618929" start="107671" end="107695" title="Apollonian and Dionysian" label="Apollonian and Dionysian"/>
<link wikidata="Q243333" start="107826" end="107836" title="Hyperborea" label="Hyperborea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901063" start="107943" end="107956" title="Borghese Vase" label="Borghese Vase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054131" start="107995" end="108006" title="Golden mean (philosophy)" label="Golden Mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q840396" start="108026" end="108031" title="Ideal (ethics)" label="ideal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888525" start="108035" end="108045" title="moderation" label="moderation"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="108052" end="108058" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q181022" start="108072" end="108080" title="gluttony" label="gluttony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="108686" end="108697" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q443786" start="108864" end="108877" title="Maurice Bowra" label="Maurice Bowra"/>
<link wikidata="Q271834" start="109783" end="109797" title="Archaic Greece" label="Archaic Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q937330" start="109975" end="109981" title="kouros" label="kouros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714384" start="110036" end="110043" title="Keratea" label="Keratea"/>
<link wikidata="Q465331" start="110219" end="110224" title="Ionians" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="110252" end="110257" title="Delos" label="Delos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="110459" end="110466" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197669" start="110726" end="110740" title="Piraeus Apollo" label="Piraeus Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="110764" end="110771" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="110775" end="110784" title="port city" label="port city"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="110850" end="110862" title="Peloponnesus" label="Peloponnesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q107313657" start="110962" end="110978" title="Apollo of Mantua" label="Apollo of Mantua"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780294" start="111019" end="111037" title="Apollo Citharoedus" label="Apollo Citharoedus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12634515" start="111078" end="111085" title="cithara" label="cithara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858461" start="111313" end="111329" title="Apollo Barberini" label="Apollo Barberini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814239" start="111509" end="111523" title="Apollo Lykeios" label="Apollo Lykeios"/>
<link wikidata="Q619265" start="111528" end="111546" title="Apollo Sauroctonos" label="Apollo Sauroctonos"/>
<link wikidata="Q619135" start="111559" end="111575" title="Apollo Belvedere" label="Apollo Belvedere"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="111581" end="111587" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="111688" end="111707" title="Classical Antiquity" label="Classical Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="111732" end="111743" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15155713" start="111786" end="111797" title="Hellenistic Greece" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q323430" start="111855" end="111864" title="Leochares" label="Leochares"/>
<link wikidata="Q163920" start="111927" end="111933" title="Adonis" label="Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q918230" start="111977" end="111992" title="Roman villa" label="villa suburbana"/>
<link wikidata="Q763100" start="112008" end="112020" title="Via Labicana" label="Via Labicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q291012" start="112147" end="112154" title="El Djem" label="El Djem"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="112206" end="112219" title="Helios" label="Apollo Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341893" start="112237" end="112241" title="Halo (religious iconography)" label="halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10791" start="112279" end="112288" title="nudity" label="nakedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="112373" end="112379" title="Roman Empire" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736539" start="112420" end="112431" title="Hadrumentum" label="Hadrumentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q180717" start="112453" end="112459" title="Sousse" label="Sousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q327496" start="112556" end="112564" title="Hairstyle" label="hair cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="112640" end="112659" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="112819" end="112825" title="Modernity" label="modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602028" start="112830" end="112845" title="Greek mythology in popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q93343" start="113029" end="113049" title="Percy Bysshe Shelley" label="Percy Bysshe Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314" start="113162" end="113177" title="Igor Stravinsky" label="Igor Stravinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q619275" start="113191" end="113207" title="Apollon musagète" label="Apollon musagète"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="113254" end="113258" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q168219" start="113268" end="113276" title="Hemispheres (Rush album)" label="an album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699870" start="113288" end="113363" title="Cygnus X-1 Book II" label="&amp;quot;Apollo: Bringer of Wisdom&amp;quot;/&amp;quot;Dionysus: Bringer of Love&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064743" start="113443" end="113456" title="Charles Handy" label="Charles Handy"/>
<link wikidata="Q730573" start="113556" end="113578" title="organizational culture" label="organizational culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="113650" end="113661" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q618929" start="113795" end="113819" title="Apollonian and Dionysian" label="Apollonian and Dionysian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="113933" end="113952" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="114018" end="114027" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780365" start="114035" end="114051" title="Apollo archetype" label="Apollo archetype"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="114219" end="114223" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="114296" end="114302" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="114307" end="114311" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2774189" start="114320" end="114335" title="Abe Silverstein" label="Abe Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q313782" start="114455" end="114461" title="Claudius Aelianus" label="Aelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="114542" end="114564" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="114619" end="114628" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q249769" start="114636" end="114649" title="Oresteia" label="The Eumenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="114789" end="114813" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q443765" start="114870" end="114889" title="Antoninus Liberalis" label="Antoninus Liberalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="115036" end="115047" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192638" start="115299" end="115319" title="Apollonius of Rhodes" label="Apollonius of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="115446" end="115457" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="115807" end="115829" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="115865" end="115889" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="115945" end="115967" title="Cicero" label="Cicero, Marcus Tullius"/>
<link wikidata="Q370414" start="115975" end="115991" title="De Natura Deorum" label="De Natura Deorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="116147" end="116171" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="116231" end="116247" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064817" start="116321" end="116336" title="Charles Henry Oldfather" label="C. H. Oldfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="116338" end="116360" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="116396" end="116420" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q175630" start="116513" end="116532" title="Etymologicum Magnum" label="Etymologicum Magnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="116659" end="116668" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="116749" end="116773" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="116840" end="116846" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233074" start="116854" end="116872" title="Catalogue of Women" label="Catalogue of Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q328969" start="116977" end="116990" title="Glenn W. Most" label="Glenn W. Most"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="116992" end="117014" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="117050" end="117074" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="117136" end="117142" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="117150" end="117158" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q329342" start="117399" end="117411" title="Homeric Hymn" label="Homeric Hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q329342" start="117663" end="117675" title="Homeric Hymns" label="Homeric Hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="117832" end="117856" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="117944" end="117949" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="118166" end="118171" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="118392" end="118413" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus, Gaius Julius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393179" start="118421" end="118434" title="De astronomia" label="De astronomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="118594" end="118615" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus, Gaius Julius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738147" start="118623" end="118630" title="Fabulae" label="Fabulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="118790" end="118794" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="118902" end="118926" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="118968" end="118974" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q634519" start="118982" end="118992" title="Dionysiaca" label="Dionysiaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945630" start="119014" end="119026" title="W. H. D. Rouse" label="Rouse, W H D"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="119042" end="119064" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q312916" start="119182" end="119188" title="Nonnus" label="Nonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q634519" start="119196" end="119206" title="Dionysiaca" label="Dionysiaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945630" start="119228" end="119240" title="W. H. D. Rouse" label="Rouse, W H D"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="119261" end="119283" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q523175" start="119401" end="119424" title="Denys Page" label="Page, Denys Lionel, Sir"/>
<link wikidata="Q243203" start="119495" end="119502" title="Statius" label="Statius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708117" start="119510" end="119529" title="Thebaid (Latin poem)" label="&amp;quot;Thebaid&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="119687" end="119693" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q690653" start="119701" end="119724" title="Geographica" label="The Geography of Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="119773" end="119797" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="119886" end="119895" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q580565" start="119923" end="119934" title="Palaephatus" label="Palaephatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="119997" end="120001" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="120009" end="120022" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="120152" end="120161" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q691292" start="120426" end="120448" title="Philostratus the Elder" label="Philostratus the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q110842887" start="120456" end="120464" title="Imagines (work by Philostratus)" label="Imagines"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="120617" end="120639" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="120675" end="120699" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231472" start="120815" end="120839" title="Philostratus the Younger" label="Philostratus the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q110842887" start="120847" end="120855" title="Imagines (work by Philostratus)" label="Imagines"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="121008" end="121030" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="121066" end="121090" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="121205" end="121211" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="121309" end="121314" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="121322" end="121337" title="Natural History (Pliny the Elder)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="121392" end="121414" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="121450" end="121474" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="121530" end="121538" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="121663" end="121685" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="121720" end="121744" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657275" start="121849" end="121864" title="Pseudo-Plutarch" label="Pseudo-Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020099" start="121964" end="121986" title="William Watson Goodwin" label="William Watson Goodwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="122076" end="122082" title="Lucian" label="Lucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="122227" end="122249" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="122285" end="122309" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401638" start="122383" end="122409" title="First Vatican Mythographer" label="First Vatican Mythographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q355350" start="122436" end="122443" title="Servius the Grammarian" label="Servius"/>
<link wikidata="Q771323" start="122577" end="122600" title="Bibliotheca Teubneriana" label="Bibliotheca Teubneriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q380881" start="122693" end="122715" title="Stephanus of Byzantium" label="Stephanus of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q77628" start="122784" end="122798" title="August Meineke" label="August Meineke"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="122898" end="122911" title="John Tzetzes" label="Tzetzes, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="122919" end="122928" title="Chiliades" label="Chiliades"/>
<link wikidata="Q316090" start="123238" end="123254" title="Gaius Valerius Flaccus (poet)" label="Valerius Flaccus"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="123309" end="123331" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="123525" end="123531" title="Virgil" label="Vergil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="123539" end="123545" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780707" start="123691" end="123717" title="Apostolos Athanassakis" label="Athanassakis, Apostolos N."/>
<link wikidata="Q61888" start="124077" end="124091" title="Walter Burkert" label="Walter Burkert"/>
<link wikidata="Q961830" start="124182" end="124205" title="Joseph Fontenrose" label="Fontenrose, Joseph Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27816" start="124268" end="124298" title="University of California Press" label="University of California Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q506973" start="124837" end="124849" title="Karl Kerenyi" label="Karl Kerenyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q506973" start="124941" end="124954" title="Károly Kerényi" label="Kerényi, Karl"/>
<link wikidata="Q132460627" start="125432" end="125445" title="Pauly–Wissowa" label="Pauly–Wissowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5672840" start="125586" end="125606" title="Harry Thurston Peck" label="Peck, Harry Thurston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4423796" start="125614" end="125657" title="Harpers Dictionary of Classical Antiquities" label="Harpers Dictionary of Classical Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q669908" start="125992" end="126003" title="Martin Litchfield West" label="West, M. L."/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="126090" end="126112" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587900" start="126148" end="126172" title="Harvard University Press" label="Harvard University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="126246" end="126260" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="Smith, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210336" start="126268" end="126321" title="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology" label="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="126393" end="126407" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="Smith, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q783118" start="126415" end="126458" title="A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities" label="A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345648" start="126674" end="126687" title="Edward Tripp" label="Tripp, Edward"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="595" wikidata="Q7407" url="?curid=595" title="Andre Agassi">
<text>Andre Kirk Agassi ( ; born April 29, 1970) is an American former professional tennis player. He was ranked as the world No. 1 in men&#x27;s singles by the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) for 101 weeks, including as the year-end No. 1 in 1999. Agassi won 60 ATP Tour-level singles titles, including eight majors, completing the career Grand Slam. He also won an Olympic gold medal, the 1990 ATP Tour World Championships, 17 Masters titles and was part of the winning United States Davis Cup teams in 1990, 1992 and 1995. Agassi is one of five men in the Open Era to achieve the career Grand Slam in singles, and one of three men to complete the career Golden Slam in singles.

A teen phenom and rebel, Agassi contested multiple major finals before winning his first at the 1992 Wimbledon Championships. He won the 1994 US Open and 1995 Australian Open to reach the world No. 1 ranking for the first time, but was troubled by personal issues during the mid-to-late 1990s. Despite an Olympic gold medal at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics, Agassi&#x27;s ranking declined to as low as No. 141 in 1997, prompting many to believe that his career among the elite was over. Following a rigorous training regimen, Agassi then enjoyed the most successful run of his career over the next several years. He returned to the world No. 1 position in 1999 after completing the career Golden Slam at the French Open, and during this latter half of his career also claimed a US Open title and three Australian Open titles. Competing well into the 2000s, Agassi retired from the sport following the 2006 US Open.

Agassi is regarded by many as one of the greatest tennis players of all time. He was the first man to win all four singles majors on three different surfaces (hard, clay and grass), and remains the most recent American man to win the French Open (in 1999) and the Australian Open (in 2003). During his 20-plus year tour career, Agassi was known as &quot;The Punisher&quot; due to his excellent return of serve. Outside of tennis, he is the founder of the Andre Agassi Charitable Foundation, which has raised over $60 million for at-risk children in Southern Nevada. In 2001, the Foundation opened the Andre Agassi College Preparatory Academy in Las Vegas, a K–12 public charter school for at-risk children. He has been married to fellow tennis player Steffi Graf since 2001.

==Early life==
Andre Agassi was born in Las Vegas, Nevada, to Emmanuel &quot;Mike&quot; Agassi (Aghassian), a former Olympic boxer from Iran, and American Elizabeth &quot;Betty&quot; Agassi (née Dudley). His father is of Armenian and Assyrian heritage and was a casino worker and former amateur boxer. His parents married in 1959 after dating for two months, then moved from Chicago to Las Vegas. He has three older siblings: Rita (who was married to former number one tennis player Pancho Gonzales), Philip and Tami. Andre was given the middle name Kirk after Kirk Kerkorian, an Armenian-American businessman. Emmanuel Agassi, then a waiter at Tropicana Las Vegas, had met his employer Kerkorian in 1963 and they became friends.

At the age of 12, Agassi and his good friend and doubles partner, Roddy Parks, won the 1982 National Indoor Boys 14s Doubles Championship in Chicago. Agassi describes memorable experiences and juvenile pranks with Roddy in his book &quot;Open&quot;.

When he was 13, Agassi was sent to Nick Bollettieri&#x27;s Tennis Academy in Florida. He was meant to stay for only three months, because that was all his father could afford. After thirty minutes of watching Agassi play, Bollettieri, deeply impressed by his talent, called Mike and said: &quot;Take your check back. He&#x27;s here for free.&quot; Agassi then dropped out of school in the ninth grade to pursue a full-time tennis career.

==Professional career==

===1986–1993: Breakthrough and the first major title===
Agassi turned professional at the age of 16 and competed in his first tournament at La Quinta, California. He won his first match against John Austin, but then lost his second match to Mats Wilander. By the end of 1986, Agassi was ranked No. 91. He won his first top-level singles title in 1987 at the Sul American Open in Itaparica and ended the year ranked No. 25. He won six additional tournaments in 1988 (Memphis, U.S. Men&#x27;s Clay Court Championships, Forest Hills WCT, Stuttgart Outdoor, Volvo International and Livingston Open), and, by December of that year, he had surpassed US$1 million in career prize money after playing in just 43 tournaments—the fastest anyone in history had reached that level. During 1988, he also set the open-era record for most consecutive victories by a male teenager (a record that stood for 17 years until Rafael Nadal broke it in 2005). His year-end ranking was No. 3, behind second-ranked Ivan Lendl and top-ranked Mats Wilander. Both the Association of Tennis Professionals and &quot;Tennis&quot; magazine named Agassi the Most Improved Player of the Year for 1988.

In addition to not playing the Australian Open (which later became his best Grand Slam event) for the first eight years of his career, Agassi chose not to play at Wimbledon from 1988 through 1990 (although he first played there in 1987, only to lose in the first round to Henri Leconte) and publicly stated that he did not wish to play there because of the event&#x27;s traditionalism, particularly its &quot;predominantly white&quot; dress code to which players at the event are required to conform.

Strong performances on the tour meant that Agassi was quickly tipped as a future Grand Slam champion. While still a teenager, he reached the semi-finals of both the French Open and the US Open in 1988 and made the US Open semi-finals in 1989. He began the 1990s with a series of near-misses. He reached his first Grand Slam final in 1990 at the French Open, where he was favored before losing in four sets to Andrés Gómez, which he later attributed in his book to worrying about his wig falling off during the match. He reached his second Grand Slam final of the year at the US Open, defeating defending champion Boris Becker in the semi-finals. His opponent in the final was Pete Sampras; a year earlier, Agassi had crushed Sampras, after which time he told his coach that he felt bad for Sampras because he was never going to make it as a pro. Agassi lost the US Open final to Sampras in three sets. The Agassi-Sampras rivalry became the biggest one in tennis over the rest of the decade. Agassi ended 1990 on a high note as he helped the United States win its first Davis Cup in 8 years on home soil against Australia (3–2) and won his only Tennis Masters Cup, beating reigning Wimbledon champion Stefan Edberg in the final.

In 1991, Agassi reached his second consecutive French Open final, where he faced fellow Bollettieri Academy alumnus Jim Courier. Courier emerged the victor in a five-set final. The Las Vegan was a set and 3–1 up when came the rain. The rain delay proved to be a confidence builder for Courier. Agassi decided to play at Wimbledon in 1991, leading to weeks of speculation in the media about the clothes he would wear. He eventually emerged for the first round in a completely white outfit. He reached the quarterfinals on that occasion, losing in five sets to David Wheaton.

Agassi&#x27;s Grand Slam tournament breakthrough came at Wimbledon, not at the French Open or the US Open, where he had previously enjoyed success. In 1992, he defeated Goran Ivanišević in a five-set final. Along the way, Agassi overcame two former Wimbledon champions: Boris Becker and John McEnroe. No other baseliner would triumph at Wimbledon until Lleyton Hewitt ten years later. Agassi was named the BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year in 1992. Agassi once again played on the United States&#x27; Davis Cup winning team in 1992. It was their second Davis cup title in three years. Agassi famously played the game wearing Oakley brand sunglasses, and a photo of him from the day appeared on the cover of &quot;Tennis&quot; magazine. In his memoir, he wrote that he was covering up bloodshot eyes from a hangover and claimed that the founder of Oakley, Jim Jannard, had sent him a Dodge Viper to thank him for the inadvertent publicity.

In 1993, Agassi won the only doubles title of his career, at the Cincinnati Masters, partnered with Petr Korda. He missed much of the early part of that year due to injuries. Although he made the quarterfinals in his Wimbledon title defense, he lost to eventual champion and No. 1 Pete Sampras in five sets. Agassi lost in the first round at the US Open to Thomas Enqvist and required wrist surgery late in the year.

===1994–1997: Rise to the top, Olympic Gold and the fall===
With new coach Brad Gilbert on board, Agassi began to employ more of a tactical, consistent approach, which fueled his resurgence. He started slowly in 1994, losing in the first week at the French Open and Wimbledon, although he did receive a much-needed confidence boost after defeating Mark Petchey at the Miami Open in March. Nevertheless, he emerged during the hard-court season, winning the Canadian Open. His comeback culminated at the 1994 US Open with a five-set fourth-round victory against Michael Chang. He then became the first man to capture the US Open as an unseeded player, beating Michael Stich in the final. Along the way, he beat 5 seeded players.

In 1995, Agassi shaved his balding head, breaking with his old &quot;image is everything&quot; style. He competed in the 1995 Australian Open (his first appearance at the event) and won, beating defending champion Sampras in a four-set final. Agassi and Sampras met in five tournament finals in 1995, all on hardcourt, with Agassi winning three. Agassi won three Masters Series events in 1995 (Cincinnati, Key Biscayne, and the Canadian Open) and seven titles total. He compiled a career-best 26-match winning streak during the summer hard-court circuit, with the last victory being in an intense late-night four-set semi-final of the US Open against Boris Becker. The streak ended the next day when Agassi lost the final to Sampras. Agassi admitted this loss, which gave Sampras a 9–8 lead in their head-to-head meetings, took two years for him to get over mentally.

Agassi reached the world No. 1 ranking for the first time in April 1995. He held that ranking until November, for a total of 30 weeks. Agassi skipped most of the fall indoor season which allowed Sampras to surpass him and finish ranked No. 1 at the year-end ranking. In terms of win–loss record, 1995 was Agassi&#x27;s best year. He won 73 and lost 9 matches, and was also once again a key player on the United States&#x27; Davis Cup winning team—the third and final Davis Cup title of his career.

1996 was a less successful year for Agassi, as he failed to reach any Grand Slam final. He suffered two early-round losses to Chris Woodruff and Doug Flach at the French Open and Wimbledon, respectively, and lost to Chang in straight sets in the Australian and US Open semi-finals. At the time, Agassi blamed the Australian Open loss on the windy conditions, but later said in his biography that he had lost the match on purpose, as he did not want to play Boris Becker, whom he would have faced in that final. The high point for Agassi was winning the men&#x27;s singles gold medal at the Olympic Games in Atlanta, beating Sergi Bruguera of Spain in the final. Agassi also successfully defended his singles titles in Cincinnati and Key Biscayne.

1997 was the low point of Agassi&#x27;s career. His wrist injury resurfaced, and he played only 24 matches during the year. He later confessed that he used crystal methamphetamine during that time, allegedly on the urging of a friend. He failed an ATP drug test, but wrote a letter claiming the same friend had spiked a drink. The ATP dropped the failed drug test as a warning. In his autobiography, Agassi admitted that the letter was a lie. He quit the drug soon after. At this time Agassi was also in a failing marriage with actress, model, and socialite Brooke Shields and had lost interest in the game. He won no top-level titles, and his ranking sank to No. 141 on November 10, 1997, prompting many to believe that his run as one of the sport&#x27;s premier competitors was over and he would never again win any significant tournaments.

===1998–2003: Return to glory and Career Super Slam===

In 1998, Agassi began a rigorous conditioning program and worked his way back up the rankings by playing in Challenger Series tournaments, a circuit for pro players ranked outside the world&#x27;s top 50. After returning to top physical and mental shape, Agassi recorded the most successful period of his tennis career and also played classic matches in that period against Pete Sampras and Patrick Rafter.

In 1998, Agassi won five titles and leapt from No. 110 to No. 6, the highest jump into the top 10 made by any player during a calendar year. At Wimbledon, he had an early loss in the second round to Tommy Haas. He won five titles in ten finals and was runner-up at the Masters Series tournament in Key Biscayne, losing to Marcelo Ríos, who became No. 1 as a result. At the year end he was awarded the ATP Most Improved Player of the Year for the second time in his career (the first being 10 years earlier in 1988).

Agassi entered the history books in 1999 when he came back from two sets to love down to beat Andrei Medvedev in a five-set French Open final, becoming, at the time, only the fifth male player (joining Rod Laver, Fred Perry, Roy Emerson and Don Budge—these have since been joined by Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal, and Novak Djokovic) to win all four Grand Slam singles titles during his career. Only Laver, Agassi, Federer, Nadal and Djokovic have achieved this feat during the Open Era. This win also made him the first (of only four, the next being Federer, Nadal and Djokovic respectively) male player in history to have won all four Grand Slam titles on three different surfaces (clay, grass and hard courts). Agassi also became the first male player to win the Career Super Slam, consisting of all four Grand Slam tournaments plus an Olympic gold medal in singles and a Year-end championship.

Agassi followed his 1999 French Open victory by reaching the Wimbledon final, where he lost to Sampras in straight sets. He rebounded from his Wimbledon defeat by winning the US Open, beating Todd Martin in five sets (rallying from a two sets to one deficit) in the final. Overall during the year Agassi won 5 titles including two majors and the ATP Masters Series in Paris, where he beat Marat Safin. Agassi ended 1999 as the No. 1, ending Sampras&#x27;s record of six consecutive year-ending top rankings (1993–98). This was the only time Agassi ended the year at No. 1. Agassi was runner-up to Sampras at the year-end Tennis Masters Cup losing 1–6, 5–7, 4–6 despite beating Sampras in the round-robin 6–2, 6–2.

He began the next year 2000 by capturing his second Australian Open title, beating Sampras in a five-set semi-final and Yevgeny Kafelnikov in a four-set final. He was the first male player to have reached four consecutive Grand Slam finals since Rod Laver achieved the Grand Slam in 1969. At the time, Agassi was also only the fourth player since Laver to be the reigning champion of three of four Grand Slam events, missing only the Wimbledon title.. 2000 also saw Agassi reach the semi-finals at Wimbledon, where he lost in five sets to Rafter in a match considered by many to be one of the best ever at Wimbledon. At the inaugural Tennis Masters Cup in Lisbon, Agassi reached the final after defeating world No. 1 Marat Safin in the semi-finals to end the Russian&#x27;s hopes of becoming the youngest year-end No. 1 in the history of tennis. Agassi then lost to Gustavo Kuerten in the final, allowing Kuerten to be crowned year-end No. 1.

Agassi opened 2001 by successfully defending his Australian Open title with a straight-sets final win over Arnaud Clément. En route, he beat a cramping Rafter in five sets in front of a sell-out crowd in what turned out to be the Aussie&#x27;s last Australian Open. At Wimbledon, they met again in the semi-finals, where Agassi lost another close match to Rafter, 8–6 in the fifth set. In the quarterfinals at the US Open, Agassi lost a 3-hour, 33 minute epic match with Sampras, 7–6, 6–7, 6–7, 6–7, with no breaks of serve during the 52-game match. Despite the setback, Agassi finished 2001 ranked No. 3, becoming the only male tennis player to finish a year ranked in the top 3 in three different decades.

2002 opened with disappointment for Agassi, as injury forced him to skip the Australian Open, where he was a two-time defending champion. Agassi recovered from the injury and later that year defended his Key Biscayne title beating then rising Roger Federer in a four-set final. At the US Open, Agassi overcame No.1 ranked and defending champion Lleyton Hewitt in the semi-finals. This led to what turned out to be the last duel between Agassi and Sampras in final of the US Open, which Sampras won in four sets and left Sampras with a 20–14 edge in their 34 career meetings. The match was the last of Sampras&#x27;s career. Agassi&#x27;s US Open finish, along with his Masters Series victories in Key Biscayne, Rome and Madrid, helped him finish 2002 as the oldest year-end No. 2 at 32 years and 8 months.

In 2003, Agassi won the eighth (and final) Grand Slam title of his career at the Australian Open, where he beat Rainer Schüttler in straight sets in the final.

On April 28, 2003, he recaptured the No. 1 ranking to become the oldest top-ranked male player since the ATP rankings began at 33 years and 13 days. The record was later surpassed by Roger Federer in 2018. He had held the No. 1 ranking for two weeks, when Lleyton Hewitt took it back on May 12, 2003. Agassi then recaptured the No. 1 ranking once again on June 16, 2003, which he held for 12 weeks until September 7, 2003. There he managed to reach the US Open semi-finals, where he lost to Juan Carlos Ferrero, surrendering his No. 1 ranking to him. During his career, Agassi held the ranking for a total of 101 weeks. Agassi&#x27;s ranking slipped when injuries forced him to withdraw from a number of events. At the year-end Tennis Masters Cup, Agassi lost in the final to Federer, his third time to finish as runner-up in the event after losses in 1999 and 2000, and finished the year ranked No. 4. At age 33, he had been one of the oldest players to rank in the top 5 since Connors, at age 35, was No. 4 in 1987.

===2004–2006: Final years===

In 2004, Agassi began the year with a five-set loss in the semi-finals of the Australian Open to Marat Safin; the loss ended Agassi&#x27;s 26-match winning streak at the event. He won the Masters series event in Cincinnati to bring his career total to 59 top-level singles titles and a record 17 ATP Masters Series titles, having already won seven of the nine ATP Masters tournament—all except the tournaments in Monte Carlo and Hamburg. At 34, he became the second-oldest singles champion in Cincinnati tournament history (the tournament began in 1899), tied with Roger Federer and surpassed only by Ken Rosewall, who won the title in 1970 at age 35. He finished the year ranked No. 8, one of the oldest players to finish in the top 10 since the 36-year-old Connors was No. 7 in 1988. At the time, Agassi also became the sixth male player during the open era to reach 800 career wins with his first-round victory over Alex Bogomolov in Countrywide Classic in Los Angeles.

Agassi&#x27;s 2005 began with a quarterfinal loss to Federer at the Australian Open. Agassi had several other deep runs at tournaments, but had to withdraw from several events due to injury. He lost to Jarkko Nieminen in the first round of the French Open. He won his fourth title in Los Angeles and reached the final of the Rogers Cup, before falling to No. 2 Rafael Nadal.

Agassi&#x27;s 2005 was defined by an improbable run to the US Open final. After beating Răzvan Sabău and Ivo Karlović in straight sets and Tomáš Berdych in four sets, Agassi won three consecutive five-set matches to advance to the final. The most notable of these matches was his quarterfinal victory over James Blake, where he rallied from two sets down to win in the fifth set tie-breaker. His other five-set victories were over Xavier Malisse in the fourth round and Robby Ginepri in the semi-finals. In the final, Agassi faced Federer, who was seeking his second consecutive US Open title and his sixth Grand Slam title in two years. Federer defeated Agassi in four sets. Agassi finished 2005 ranked No. 7, his 16th time in the year-end top-10 rankings, which tied Connors for the most times ranked in the top 10 at year&#x27;s end.

Agassi had a poor start to 2006, as he was still recovering from an ankle injury and also suffering from back and leg pain and lack of match play. Agassi withdrew from the Australian Open because of the ankle injury, and his back injury and other pains forced him to withdraw from several other events, eventually skipping the entire clay-court season including the French Open. This caused his ranking to drop out of the top 10 for the last time. Agassi returned for the grass-court season, playing a tune-up, and then Wimbledon. He was defeated in the third round by world No. 2 (and eventual runner-up) Rafael Nadal. Against conventions, Agassi, the losing player, was interviewed on court after the match. At Wimbledon, Agassi announced his plans to retire following the US Open. Agassi played only two events during the summer hard-court season with his best result being a quarterfinal loss at the Countrywide Classic in Los Angeles to Fernando González of Chile, which resulted in him being unseeded at the US Open.

Agassi had a short, but dramatic, run in his final US Open. Because of extreme back pain, Agassi was forced to receive anti-inflammatory injections after every match. After a four-set win against Andrei Pavel, Agassi faced eighth-seeded Marcos Baghdatis in the second round who had earlier advanced to the 2006 Australian Open final and Wimbledon semi-finals. Agassi won in five sets as the younger Baghdatis succumbed to muscle cramping in the final set. In his last match, Agassi fell to 112th-ranked big-serving Benjamin Becker of Germany in four sets. Agassi received a four-minute standing ovation from the crowd after the match and delivered a retirement speech.

==Rivalries==
===Agassi vs. Sampras===
The rivalry has been called the greatest of the generation of players competing in the 1990s, as Sampras and Agassi were the most successful players of that decade. They also had very contrasting playing styles, with Sampras being considered the greatest server and Agassi the greatest serve returner at the time. Agassi and Sampras met 34 times on the tour level with Agassi trailing 14–20.

The 1990 US Open was their first meeting in a Grand Slam tournament final. Agassi was favored as he was ranked No. 4 at the time, compared to the No. 12 ranking of Sampras and because Agassi had defeated Sampras in their only previously completed match. Agassi, however, lost the final to Sampras in straight sets. Their next meeting in a Grand Slam was at the 1992 French Open, where they met in the quarterfinals. Although Sampras was ranked higher, Agassi came out winning in straight sets. They met again on a Grand Slam level at the quarterfinals of Wimbledon in 1993, where Agassi was the defending champion and Sampras was the newly minted world No. 1. Agassi dug himself out from a two-sets-to-love hole, levelling the match at two sets apiece; however, Sampras prevailed in five sets, and went on to win his first Wimbledon championship.

With both Sampras and Agassi participating, the US won the Davis Cup in 1995. The year should be considered the peak of the rivalry as together they won three out of four major titles, meeting each other twice in the finals, and were occupying the top two spots in the rankings for the whole year. They met five times during the year, all in the title matches, including the Australian Open, the Newsweek Champions Cup (now Indian Wells), the Lipton International Players Championships (now Miami Open), the Canadian Open, and the US Open. Agassi won three of the finals, including the Australian Open; however, Sampras took the US Open title, ending Agassi&#x27;s 26-match winning streak. After Agassi had taken most of the fall season off, Sampras took over the No. 1 ranking for the end of the season. Agassi admitted this loss, which gave Sampras a 9–8 lead in their head-to-head meetings, took two years for him to get over it mentally.

In the following three years, while Sampras continued winning Grand Slam titles every season, Agassi slumped in the rankings and struggled in major competitions. The next time Sampras and Agassi met in a Grand Slam final was at Wimbledon in 1999, where Sampras won in straight sets. For both, it was considered a career rejuvenation, as Sampras had suffered a string of disappointments in the previous year while Agassi was regaining his status as a top-ranked player after winning the French Open. Sampras forfeited the No. 1 ranking to Agassi when injury forced him to withdraw from that year&#x27;s US Open, which Agassi went on to win. They faced each other twice in the season-ending ATP Tour World Championships, with Sampras losing the round-robin match, but winning the final.

In the 2000s, they met three more times on the Grand Slam level offering three memorable contests. In 2000, the top-ranked Agassi defeated No. 3 Sampras in the semi-finals of the Australian Open in five sets, which was an important win for Agassi who had lost 4 of the previous five matches against Sampras. In arguably their most memorable match ever, Sampras defeated Agassi in the 2001 US Open quarterfinals in four sets. There were no breaks of serve during the entire match. Reruns of the match are frequently featured on television, especially during US Open rain delays, and the match is considered one of the best in history because of the level of play presented by both players.

Their last meeting was the final of the 2002 US Open, which was their third meeting in a US Open final, but the first since 1995. The match was also notable because they had defeated several up-and-coming players en route to the final. Sampras had defeated No. 3 Tommy Haas in the fourth round and future No. 1 Andy Roddick in the quarterfinals, while Agassi had defeated No. 1 and defending champion Lleyton Hewitt in the semi-finals. Sampras defeated Agassi in four sets. This was the final ATP tour singles match of Sampras&#x27;s career.

===Agassi vs. Chang===
Michael Chang was the opponent Agassi faced most frequently from all the players other than Sampras. They met 22 times on the tour level with Agassi leading 15–7. Chang, unlike most of Agassi&#x27;s big rivals, had a playing style similar to his. Both players preferred to stay at the baseline with Chang being more defensive-minded. The outcome was that most of their meetings were built on long and entertaining rallies. The rivalry began late in the 1980s with both players being considered the prodigies of the next great generation of American tennis players and both being of foreign descent.

Agassi won the first four matches including a straight-set victory in round 16 of the 1988 US Open and defeating Chang, the defending champion, in the 1990 French Open in a four-set quarterfinal. Arguably their best match took place in the round of 16 of the 1994 US Open. While both players presented high-quality shot-making, the momentum changed from set to set with Agassi eventually prevailing in a five-set victory. It turned out to be the toughest contest on his way to his first US Open title. Their next two Grand Slam meetings came in 1996, with Chang recording easy straight-set victories in the semi-finals of both the Australian Open and the US Open. Years after, Agassi shockingly admitted in his book that he had lost the first of the matches on purpose as he did not want to face Boris Becker, who was awaiting the winner in the final. Agassi won the last four of their matches, with the last being in 2003 at the Miami Open with Chang being clearly past his prime.

===Agassi vs. Becker===
Boris Becker and Agassi played 14 times with Agassi leading 10–4. Becker won their first three matches in 1988 and 1989 before Agassi reversed the rivalry in 1990, and won 10 of their last 11 matches. One contributing factor is that after their third match, Agassi picked up a tell regarding Becker&#x27;s serve and knew where his serves would be directed. They first played at Indian Wells in 1988, with Becker prevailing. Their most notable match was the 1989 Davis Cup semi-final match, which Becker won in five sets after losing the first two in tiebreaks. Agassi, considered a baseliner with a playing style not suiting grass, shocked Becker, a three-time champion, in a five-set quarterfinal at Wimbledon in 1992 on his way to his first Grand Slam title. The intensity of the rivalry peaked in 1995. Becker won that year&#x27;s Wimbledon semi-final after being down a set and two breaks, to eventually win in four sets. In a highly anticipated rematch in the US Open semi-final, this time it was Agassi who came out victorious in four tight sets. Their final match was played at Hong Kong in 1999, which Agassi won in three sets.

===Agassi vs. Rafter===
Agassi and Pat Rafter played fifteen times with Agassi leading 10–5. The rivalry has been considered special and delivered memorable encounters, because of the players&#x27; contrasting styles of play, with Rafter using traditional serve-&amp;-volley methods against Agassi&#x27;s variety of return of serves and passing shots as his main weapons. Agassi led 8–2 on hard courts, but Rafter surprisingly won their sole match on clay at the 1999 Rome Masters. They played four matches at Wimbledon with both winning two matches each. Agassi won the first two in 1993 and 1999, while Rafter took their 2000 and 2001 encounters, the latter two matches being gruelling 5-setters often being presented on the lists of best matches ever played. Agassi also won both their meetings at the Australian Open, in 1995 and 2001, on his way to the title on both occasions. Rafter, however, took their only US Open encounter in 1997 and went on to win the title.

===Agassi vs. Federer===
Agassi and Roger Federer played 11 times, and Federer led their head-to-head series 8–3. With the retirement of Sampras, the rivalry against the 11-years-younger Federer, who was another great server like Sampras, became Agassi&#x27;s main rivalry for the final years of his career. Agassi won their first three matches, but then went on to lose eight consecutive ones. They first met in just the third tournament of Federer&#x27;s career at the 1998 Swiss Indoors in Federer&#x27;s hometown, with Agassi prevailing over the 17-year-old. Agassi also defeated Federer at the 2001 US Open and the finals of the Miami Open in 2002. Federer began to turn the tide at the Masters Cup in 2003, when he defeated Agassi in both the round-robin and the final. They played a quarterfinal match at the 2004 US Open that spanned over two windy days, with Federer eventually prevailing in five sets. At the 2005 Dubai Championships, Federer and Agassi attracted worldwide headlines with a publicity stunt that saw the two tennis legends play on a helipad almost 220 meters above sea level at the hotel Burj al-Arab. Their final duel took place in the final of the 2005 US Open. Federer was victorious in four sets in front of a pro-Agassi crowd. The match was the last appearance by Agassi in a Grand Slam final.

===Agassi vs. Lendl===
Agassi and Ivan Lendl played eight times, and Lendl led their head-to-head series 6–2.

===Agassi vs. Edberg===
Agassi and Stefan Edberg played nine times, and Agassi led their head-to-head series 6–3.

==Post-retirement: Exhibition appearances==
Since retiring after the 2006 US Open, Agassi has participated in a series of charity tournaments and continues his work with his own charity. On September 5, 2007, he was a surprise guest commentator for the Andy Roddick/Roger Federer US Open quarterfinal. He played an exhibition match at Wimbledon, teaming with his wife, Steffi Graf, to play with Tim Henman and Kim Clijsters. He played World Team Tennis for the Philadelphia Freedoms in the summer of 2009. At the 2009 French Open, Agassi was on hand to present Roger Federer, who completed his Career Grand Slam by winning the tournament and joined Agassi as one of six men to complete the Career Grand Slam, with the trophy.

Also in 2009, Agassi played at the Outback Champions Series event for the first time. He played the Cancer Treatment Centers of America Tennis Championships at Surprise, Arizona, where he reached the final before bowing to eventual champion Todd Martin. Agassi returned to the tour renamed for the PowerShares Series in 2011 and participated in a total of seven events while winning two. Agassi beat Courier in the final of the Staples Champions Cup in Boston and later defeated Sampras at the CTCA Championships at his hometown Las Vegas.

In 2012, Agassi took part in five tournaments, winning three of those. In November, at first he won BILT Champions Showdown in San Jose, beating John McEnroe in the final. The following day, he defended his title of the CTCA Championships, while defeating Courier in the decisive match. In the series season finale, he beat Michael Chang for the Acura Champions Cup. The series and Agassi came back to action in 2014. Agassi won both tournaments he participated in. At the Camden Wealth Advisors Cup&#x27;s final in Houston, Agassi beat James Blake for a rematch of their 2005 US Open quarterfinal. He defeated Blake again in Portland to win the title of the Cancer Treatment Centers of America Championships. In 2015, Agassi took part in just one event of the PowerShares Series, losing to Mark Philippoussis in the final of the Champions Shootout. The following year he took part in two events, at first losing to Blake in Chicago, and the next day defeating Mardy Fish, but losing to Roddick in Charleston.

In 2009, in Macau Agassi and Sampras met for the first time on court since the 2002 US Open final. Sampras won the exhibition in three sets. The rivalry between the former champions headlined sports media again in March 2010 after the two participated in the &quot;Hit for Haiti&quot; charity event organized to raise money for the victims of the earthquake. Partnered with Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal, the old rivals began making jokes at each other&#x27;s expense, which ended up with Sampras intentionally striking a serve at Agassi&#x27;s body. After the event, Agassi admitted that he had crossed the line with his jokes and publicly apologized to Sampras. Agassi and Sampras met again one year later for an exhibition match at Madison Square Garden in New York in front of 19 000 spectators as Sampras defeated Agassi in two sets. On March 3, 2014, Agassi and Sampras squared off for an exhibition in London for the annual World Tennis Day. This time, it was Agassi who came out on top in two straight sets.

He returned to the tour in May 2017 in the position of coach to Novak Djokovic for the French Open. Agassi announced the end of the partnership on March 31, 2018, stating that there were too many disagreements in the relationship.

==Legacy==
Considered by numerous sources to be one of the greatest tennis players of all time, Agassi has also been called one of the greatest service returners ever to play the game, and was described by the BBC upon his retirement as &quot;perhaps the biggest worldwide star in the sport&#x27;s history&quot;. As a result, he is credited for helping to revive the popularity of tennis during the 1990s.

Among his numerous career accolades, Agassi was named the BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year in 1992, and the 7th greatest male player of all time by &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; in 2010. On July 9, 2011, Agassi was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame at a ceremony in Newport, Rhode Island.

Agassi earned more than $30 million in prize-money during his career, sixth only to Djokovic, Federer, Nadal, Sampras and Murray to date (May 2018). He also earned more than $25 million a year through endorsements during his career, which was ranked fourth in all sports at the time.

==Playing style==
Early in his career, Agassi would look to end points quickly by playing first-strike tennis, typically by inducing a weak return with a deep, hard shot, and then playing a winner at an extreme angle. On the rare occasion that he charged the net, Agassi liked to take the ball in the air and hit a swinging volley for a winner. His favored groundstroke was his flat, accurate two-handed backhand, hit well cross-court but especially down the line. His forehand was nearly as strong, especially his inside-out to the ad court.

Agassi&#x27;s strength was in dictating play from the baseline, and he was able to consistently take the ball on the rise. While he was growing up, his father and Nick Bollettieri trained him in this way. When in control of a point, Agassi would often pass up an opportunity to attempt a winner and hit a conservative shot to minimize his errors, and to make his opponent run more. This change to more methodical, less aggressive baseline play was largely initiated by his longtime coach, Brad Gilbert, in their first year together in 1994. Gilbert encouraged Agassi to wear out opponents with his deep, flat groundstrokes and to use his fitness to win attrition wars, and noted Agassi&#x27;s two-handed backhand down the line as his very best shot. A signature play later in his career was a change-up drop shot to the deuce court after deep penetrating groundstrokes. This would often be followed by a passing shot or lob if the opponent was fast enough to retrieve it.

Agassi was raised on hardcourts, but found much of his early major-tournament success on the red clay of Roland Garros, reaching two consecutive finals there early in his career. Despite grass being his worst surface, his first major win was at the slick grass of Wimbledon in 1992, a tournament that he professed to hating at the time. His strongest surface over the course of his career, was indeed hardcourt, where he won six of his eight majors.

==Business ventures==
Agassi established a limited liability company named Andre Agassi Ventures (formerly named Agassi Enterprises). Agassi, along with five athlete partners (including Wayne Gretzky, Joe Montana, Shaquille O&#x27;Neal, Ken Griffey Jr., and Monica Seles) opened a chain of sports-themed restaurant named Official All Star Café in April 1996. The restaurant closed down in 2001.

In 1999, he paid $1 million for a 10 percent stake in Nevada First Bank and made a $10 million profit when it was sold to Western Alliance Bancorp in 2006.

In 2002, he joined the Tennis Channel to promote the channel to consumers and cable and satellite industry, and made an equity investment in the network. After meeting chef Michael Mina at one of his restaurants in San Francisco, Agassi partnered with him in 2002 to start Mina Group Inc. and opened 18 concept restaurants in San Francisco, San Jose, Dana Point, Atlantic City and Las Vegas. Agassi was an equity investor of a group that acquired Golden Nugget Las Vegas and Golden Nugget Laughlin from MGM Mirage for $215 million in 2004. One year later, the group sold the hotel-casino to Landry&#x27;s, Inc. for $163 million in cash and $182 million in assumed debt. In 2007, he sat on the board of Meadows Bank, an independent bank in Nevada. He has invested in start-up companies backed by Allen &amp; Company.

Agassi and Graf formed a company called Agassi Graf Holdings. They invested in PURE, a nightclub at Caesars Palace, which opened in 2004, and sold it to Angel Management Group in 2010. In August 2006, Agassi and Graf developed a joint venture with high-end furniture maker Kreiss Enterprises. They launched a furniture line called Agassi Graf Collection. In September, Agassi and Graf, through their company Agassi Graf Development LLC, along with Bayview Financial LP, finalized an agreement to develop a condominium hotel, Fairmont Tamarack, at Tamarack Resort in Donnelly, Idaho. Owing to difficult market conditions and delays, they withdrew from the project in 2009. The group still owns three small chunks of land. In September, they collaborated with Steve Case&#x27;s Exclusive Resorts to co-develop luxury resorts and design Agassi-Graf Tennis and Fitness Centers.

They also invested in online ticket reseller viagogo in 2009 and both serve as board members and advisors of the company.

In October 2012, Village Roadshow and investors including Agassi and Graf announced plans to build a new water park called Wet&#x27;n&#x27;Wild Las Vegas in Las Vegas. Village Roadshow has a 51% stake in the park while Agassi, Graf, and other private investors hold the remaining 49%. The park opened in May 2013.

IMG managed Agassi from the time he turned pro in 1986 through January 2000 before switching to SFX Sports Group. His business manager, lawyer and agent was childhood friend Perry Rogers, but they have been estranged since 2008. In 2009, he and Graf signed with CAA.

===Equipment and endorsements===
Agassi used Prince Graphite rackets early in his career. He signed a $7 million endorsement contract with Belgian tennis racquet makers Donnay. He later switched to Head Ti Radical racket and Head&#x27;s LiquidMetal Radical racket, having signed a multimillion-dollar endorsement deal with Head in 1993. He renewed his contract in 1999, and in November 2003 he signed a lifetime agreement with Head. He also endorses Penn tennis balls. On July 25, 2005, Agassi left Nike after 17 years and signed an endorsement deal with Adidas. A major reason for Agassi leaving Nike was because Nike refused to donate to Agassi&#x27;s charities, and Adidas did. On May 13, 2013, Agassi rejoined Nike.

Agassi was sponsored by DuPont, Ebel, Mountain Dew in 1993, Mazda in 1997, Kia Motors in 2002, American Express and Deutsche Bank in 2003. In 1990, he appeared in a television commercial for Canon Inc., promoting the Canon EOS Rebel camera. Between 1999 and 2000, he signed a multimillion-dollar, multiyear endorsement deal with Schick and became the worldwide spokesman for the company. Agassi signed a multiyear contract with Twinlab and promoted the company&#x27;s nutritional supplements. In mid-2003, he was named the spokesman of Aramis Life, a fragrance by Aramis, and signed a five-year deal with the company. In March 2004, he signed a ten-year agreement worth $1.5 million a year with 24 Hour Fitness, which will open five Andre Agassi fitness centers by year-end. Prior to the 2012 Australian Open, Agassi and Australian winemaker Jacobs Creek announced a three-year partnership and created the Open Film Series to &quot;[share] personal stories about the life defining moments that shaped his character on and off the court.&quot; In 2007, watchmaker Longines named Agassi as their brand ambassador.

Agassi and his mother appeared in a Got Milk? advertisement in 2002.

Agassi has appeared in many advertisements and television commercials with Graf. They both endorsed Deutsche Telekom in 2002, Genworth Financial and Canon Inc. in 2004, LVMH in 2007, and Nintendo Wii and Wii Fit U and Longines in 2013.

==In popular culture==
In 2017, Agassi appeared in the documentary film &quot;Love Means Zero&quot;, which highlighted the troubled relationship between his coach Nick Bollettieri and him.

==Other endeavors==
===Politics===
Agassi has donated more than $100,000 to Democratic candidates, and $2,000 to Republicans. On September 1, 2010, when he appeared on daily WNYC public radio program &quot;The Brian Lehrer Show&quot;, he stated that he is registered as Independent.

===Philanthropy===
Agassi founded the Andre Agassi Charitable Association in 1994, which assists Las Vegas&#x27; young people. He was awarded the ATP Arthur Ashe Humanitarian award in 1995 for his efforts to help disadvantaged youth. He has been cited as the most charitable and socially involved player in professional tennis. It has also been claimed that he may be the most charitable athlete of his generation.

Agassi&#x27;s charities help in assisting children reach their athletic potential. His Boys &amp; Girls Club sees 2,000 children throughout the year and boasts a world-class junior tennis team. It also has a basketball program (the Agassi Stars) and a rigorous system that encourages a mix of academics and athletics.

In 2001, Agassi opened the Andre Agassi College Preparatory Academy in Las Vegas, a tuition-free charter school for at-risk children in the area. He personally donated $35 million to the school. In 2009, the graduating class had a 100 percent graduation rate and expected a 100 percent college acceptance rate. Among other child-related programs that Agassi supports through his Andre Agassi Charitable Foundation is Clark County&#x27;s only residential facility for abused and neglected children, Child Haven. In 1997, Agassi donated funding to Child Haven for a six-room classroom building now named the Agassi Center for Education. His foundation also provided $720,000 to assist in the building of the Andre Agassi Cottage for Medically Fragile Children. This 20-bed facility opened in December 2001, and accommodates developmentally delayed or handicapped children and children quarantined for infectious diseases.

In 2007, along with several other athletes, Agassi founded the charity Athletes for Hope, which helps professional athletes get involved in charitable causes and aims to inspire all people to volunteer and support their communities. He created the Canyon-Agassi Charter School Facilities Fund, now known as the Turner-Agassi Charter School Facilities Fund. The Fund is an investment initiative for social change, focusing on the &quot;nationwide effort to move charters from stopgap buildings into permanent campuses.&quot;

In September 2013, the Andre Agassi Foundation for Education formed a partnership with V20 Foods to launch Box Budd!es, a line of kids&#x27; healthy snacks. All proceeds go to the Foundation.

In February 2014, Agassi remodeled the vacant University of Phoenix building in Las Vegas as a new school, called the Doral Academy West through the Canyon-Agassi Charter School Facilities Fund. Doral Academy opened in August 2014. The Fund purchased a 4.6-acre plot in Henderson, Nevada, to house the Somerset Academy of Las Vegas, which will relocate from its campus inside a church.

On April 2, 2023, Agassi participated with Michael Chang, Andy Roddick and John McEnroe in the first live airing of Pickleball on ESPN in the Million dollar Pickleball Slam at the Hard Rock Casino in Hollywood, Fla.

==Personal life==
===Relationships and family===
In the early 1990s, after dating Wendi Stewart, Agassi dated American singer and entertainer Barbra Streisand. He wrote about the relationship in his 2009 autobiography, &quot;We agree that we&#x27;re good for each other, and so what if she&#x27;s twenty-eight years older? We&#x27;re sympatico, and the public outcry only adds spice to our connection. It makes our friendship feel forbidden, taboo — another piece of my overall rebellion. Dating Barbra Streisand is like wearing Hot Lava.&quot;

He was married to actress and socialite Brooke Shields from 1997 to 1999.

He married Steffi Graf on October 22, 2001, at their Las Vegas home; the only witnesses were their mothers. They have two children: son Jaden Gil (born 2001) and daughter Jaz Elle (born 2003). Agassi has said that he and Graf are not pushing their children toward becoming tennis players. The Graf-Agassi family resides in Summerlin, a community in the Las Vegas Valley. Graf&#x27;s mother and brother, Michael, with his four children, also live there.

His mother is a breast cancer survivor.

Long-time trainer Gil Reyes has been called one of Agassi&#x27;s closest friends; some have described him as being a &quot;father figure&quot; to Agassi. In 2012, Agassi and Reyes introduced their own line of fitness equipment, BILT By Agassi and Reyes. In December 2008, Agassi&#x27;s childhood friend and former business manager, Perry Rogers, sued Graf for $50,000 in management fees he claimed that she owed him.

===Autobiography===
Agassi&#x27;s autobiography, &quot;&quot;, (written with assistance from J. R. Moehringer), was published in November 2009. In it, Agassi talks about his childhood and his unconventional Armenian father, who came to the United States from Iran, where he was a professional boxer. Overly demanding and emotionally abusive to the whole family, his father groomed young Agassi for tennis greatness by building a tennis court in their backyard and sending Agassi to tennis boarding school under the supervision of Nick Bollettieri, who later coached and managed part of Agassi&#x27;s professional career.

There is also mention in the book of using and testing positive for methamphetamine in 1997. In response to this revelation, Roger Federer declared himself shocked and disappointed, while Marat Safin argued that Agassi should return his prize money and be stripped of his titles. In an interview with CBS, Agassi justified himself and asked for understanding, saying that &quot;It was a period in my life where I needed help.&quot;

Agassi said that he had always hated tennis during his career because of the constant pressure it exerted on him. He also said he wore a hairpiece earlier in his career and thought Pete Sampras was &quot;robotic&quot;.

The book reached No. 1 on the &quot;New York Times&quot; Best Seller list and received favorable reviews. It won the Autobiography category of the 2010 British Sports Book Awards. In 2018, the book was listed on &quot;Esquire&quot; as one of &quot;The 30 Best Sports Books Ever Written&quot;, and was also recommended by self-help author Tim Ferriss who described it as &quot;very candid, very amusing, and very instructional&quot;.

==Career statistics==
===Singles performance timeline===

===Grand Slam finals (8 titles, 7 runner-ups)===
By winning the 1999 French Open, Agassi completed a men&#x27;s singles Career Grand Slam. He is the 5th of 8 male players in history (after Budge, Perry, Laver and Emerson, and before Federer, Nadal and Djokovic) to achieve this.
==== Open Era records ====
* These records were attained in the Open Era of tennis and in ATP World Tour Masters 1000 series since 1990.
* Records in bold indicate peer-less achievements.



==Professional awards==
* ITF World Champion: 1999.
* ATP Player of the Year: 1999.
* ATP Most Improved Player: 1988, 1998

==Video==
* &quot;Wimbledon 2000 Semi-final – Agassi vs. Rafter (2003)&quot; Starring: Andre Agassi, Patrick Rafter; Standing Room Only, DVD Release Date: August 16, 2005, Run Time: 213 minutes, .
* &quot;Charlie Rose with Andre Agassi (May 7, 2001)&quot; Charlie Rose, Inc., DVD Release Date: August 15, 2006, Run Time: 57 minutes.
* &quot;Wimbledon: The Record Breakers (2005)&quot; Starring: Andre Agassi, Boris Becker; Standing Room Only, DVD Release Date: August 16, 2005, Run Time: 52 minutes, .

==Video games==
* &quot;Andre Agassi Tennis&quot; for Super Nintendo Entertainment System, Genesis, Game Gear, Master System, and mobile phones
* &quot;Agassi Tennis Generation&quot; for PlayStation 2, Game Boy Advance, and Windows
* &quot;Agassi Tennis Generation 2002&quot; for Windows
* &quot;Smash Court Pro Tournament&quot; for PlayStation 2
* &quot;Top Spin 4&quot; for Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, and Wii
* &quot;Tennis World Tour&quot; for Xbox One, PlayStation 4, Nintendo Switch, and Windows
* &quot;Top Spin 2K25&quot; for PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X, and Windows

==See also==

* All-time tennis records – men&#x27;s singles
* List of Grand Slam men&#x27;s singles champions
* Tennis male players statistics
* Tennis records of the Open Era – men&#x27;s singles

== Notes ==
==References==
==Sources==
* 

==External links==
* 
* 
* Andre Agassi Ventures
* Farewell to Tennis Speech at the U.S. Open
* Agassi&#x27;s Tennis Hall of Fame Induction for Steffi Graf</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="0" end="17" title="Andre Agassi" label="Andre Kirk Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="78" end="84" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q583537" start="114" end="125" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles players" label="world No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q744089" start="155" end="190" title="Association of Tennis Professionals" label="Association of Tennis Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q299857" start="247" end="251" title="1999 ATP Tour" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q300008" start="267" end="275" title="ATP Tour" label="ATP Tour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="314" end="319" title="Grand Slam (tennis)#Tournaments" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="337" end="354" title="List of Grand Slam men&amp;#x27;s singles champions#Career Grand Slam" label="career Grand Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q270163" start="371" end="389" title="Tennis at the Summer Olympics" label="Olympic gold medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089889" start="395" end="428" title="1990 ATP Tour World Championships – Singles" label="1990 ATP Tour World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q300029" start="433" end="440" title="ATP Masters 1000 tournaments" label="Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389353" start="476" end="504" title="United States Davis Cup team" label="United States Davis Cup team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="563" end="571" title="History of tennis#Open Era" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="654" end="672" title="List of Grand Slam men&amp;#x27;s singles champions#Career Golden Slam" label="career Golden Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085805" start="782" end="810" title="1992 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1992 Wimbledon Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q961765" start="823" end="835" title="1994 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1994 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q659421" start="840" end="860" title="1995 Australian Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1995 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q927660" start="1017" end="1038" title="Tennis at the 1996 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="1996 Atlanta Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069842" start="1390" end="1401" title="1999 French Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q912506" start="1583" end="1595" title="2006 US Open – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="2006 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330871" start="1757" end="1761" title="Hardcourt" label="hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q198718" start="1763" end="1767" title="Clay court" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151291" start="1772" end="1777" title="Grass court" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q43605" start="1832" end="1843" title="French Open" label="French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q60874" start="1862" end="1877" title="Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q750792" start="1882" end="1886" title="2003 Australian Open" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1992" end="2007" title="Serve (tennis)#Returning" label="return of serve"/>
<link wikidata="Q11662" start="2349" end="2360" title="Steffi Graf" label="Steffi Graf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338179" start="2436" end="2468" title="Emmanuel Agassi" label="Emmanuel &amp;quot;Mike&amp;quot; Agassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584186" start="2595" end="2603" title="Iranian Armenians" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="2608" end="2616" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573533" start="2661" end="2674" title="Amateur boxing" label="amateur boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="2749" end="2756" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q53554" start="2857" end="2872" title="Pancho Gonzales" label="Pancho Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q356068" start="2935" end="2949" title="Kirk Kerkorian" label="Kirk Kerkorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q280339" start="3019" end="3038" title="Tropicana Las Vegas" label="Tropicana Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q82335" start="3391" end="3407" title="Nick Bollettieri" label="Nick Bollettieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q983614" start="3960" end="3981" title="La Quinta, California" label="La Quinta, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180953" start="4014" end="4025" title="John Austin (tennis)" label="John Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16475" start="4061" end="4074" title="Mats Wilander" label="Mats Wilander"/>
<link wikidata="Q299475" start="4178" end="4195" title="ATP Itaparica" label="Sul American Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095391" start="4199" end="4208" title="Itaparica" label="Itaparica"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001506" start="4295" end="4335" title="1988 U.S. Men&amp;#x27;s Clay Court Championships" label="U.S. Men&amp;#x27;s Clay Court Championships"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4337" end="4353" title="World Championship Tennis#WCT 1988" label="Forest Hills WCT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3602218" start="4374" end="4393" title="1988 Volvo International" label="Volvo International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3835592" start="4398" end="4413" title="1988 Livingston Open" label="Livingston Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="4725" end="4737" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182736" start="4810" end="4820" title="Ivan Lendl" label="Ivan Lendl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16475" start="4836" end="4849" title="Mats Wilander" label="Mats Wilander"/>
<link wikidata="Q744089" start="4860" end="4895" title="Association of Tennis Professionals" label="Association of Tennis Professionals"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="5152" end="5161" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q455322" start="5261" end="5274" title="Henri Leconte" label="Henri Leconte"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="5676" end="5683" title="US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q335350" start="5900" end="5912" title="Andrés Gómez" label="Andrés Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q76334" start="6104" end="6116" title="Boris Becker" label="Boris Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9446" start="6167" end="6179" title="Pete Sampras" label="Pete Sampras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456722" start="6397" end="6419" title="Agassi-Sampras rivalry" label="Agassi-Sampras rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="6560" end="6569" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q270907" start="6635" end="6653" title="Tennis Masters Cup" label="Tennis Masters Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q189542" start="6691" end="6704" title="Stefan Edberg" label="Stefan Edberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q53396" start="6836" end="6847" title="Jim Courier" label="Jim Courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177146" start="7279" end="7292" title="David Wheaton" label="David Wheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q204279" start="7464" end="7480" title="Goran Ivanišević" label="Goran Ivanišević"/>
<link wikidata="Q76334" start="7565" end="7577" title="Boris Becker" label="Boris Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16474" start="7582" end="7594" title="John McEnroe" label="John McEnroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="7648" end="7662" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494048" start="7701" end="7744" title="BBC Sports Personality of the Year Overseas Personality" label="BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="7806" end="7815" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q161906" start="7930" end="7936" title="Oakley, Inc." label="Oakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q720452" start="8012" end="8039" title="Tennis (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Tennis&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207334" start="8111" end="8119" title="hangover" label="hangover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136811" start="8160" end="8171" title="Jim Jannard" label="Jim Jannard"/>
<link wikidata="Q644430" start="8188" end="8199" title="Dodge Viper" label="Dodge Viper"/>
<link wikidata="Q461834" start="8310" end="8328" title="Cincinnati Masters" label="Cincinnati Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q312717" start="8345" end="8355" title="Petr Korda" label="Petr Korda"/>
<link wikidata="Q335222" start="8602" end="8616" title="Thomas Enqvist" label="Thomas Enqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q715134" start="8738" end="8750" title="Brad Gilbert" label="Brad Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585351" start="9011" end="9023" title="Mark Petchey" label="Mark Petchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q431360" start="9031" end="9041" title="Miami Open (tennis)" label="Miami Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q595467" start="9119" end="9132" title="Canada Masters" label="Canadian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q935652" start="9165" end="9177" title="1994 US Open (tennis)" label="1994 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q53370" start="9223" end="9236" title="Michael Chang" label="Michael Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q864897" start="9296" end="9304" title="Seed (tennis)" label="unseeded"/>
<link wikidata="Q60109" start="9321" end="9334" title="Michael Stich" label="Michael Stich"/>
<link wikidata="Q782045" start="9512" end="9532" title="1995 Australian Open" label="1995 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330871" start="9699" end="9708" title="hardcourt" label="hardcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q461834" start="9785" end="9795" title="Cincinnati Masters" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q431360" start="9797" end="9809" title="Miami Masters" label="Key Biscayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048943" start="10026" end="10033" title="1995 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q76334" start="10042" end="10054" title="Boris Becker" label="Boris Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q583537" start="10279" end="10290" title="List of ATP number 1 ranked singles tennis players" label="world No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="10684" end="10693" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077886" start="10885" end="10899" title="Chris Woodruff" label="Chris Woodruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q463811" start="10904" end="10914" title="Doug Flach" label="Doug Flach"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="11349" end="11362" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="11366" end="11373" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q311177" start="11383" end="11397" title="Sergi Bruguera" label="Sergi Bruguera"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="11663" end="11686" title="methamphetamine" label="crystal methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189400" start="12065" end="12079" title="Brooke Shields" label="Brooke Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q9446" start="12781" end="12793" title="Pete Sampras" label="Pete Sampras"/>
<link wikidata="Q204068" start="12798" end="12812" title="Patrick Rafter" label="Patrick Rafter"/>
<link wikidata="Q53560" start="13014" end="13024" title="Tommy Haas" label="Tommy Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q431360" start="13084" end="13125" title="Miami Masters" label="Masters Series tournament in Key Biscayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q272532" start="13137" end="13149" title="Marcelo Ríos" label="Marcelo Ríos"/>
<link wikidata="Q355338" start="13426" end="13441" title="Andrei Medvedev (tennis)" label="Andrei Medvedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="13534" end="13543" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q312639" start="13545" end="13555" title="Fred Perry" label="Fred Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q312545" start="13557" end="13568" title="Roy Emerson" label="Roy Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q53343" start="13573" end="13582" title="Don Budge" label="Don Budge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="13615" end="13628" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="13630" end="13642" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="13648" end="13662" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="13808" end="13816" title="Open Era" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q102113" start="14096" end="14113" title="Career Super Slam" label="Career Super Slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q270907" start="14205" end="14226" title="ATP World Tour Finals" label="Year-end championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q856521" start="14404" end="14411" title="1999 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q54536" start="14421" end="14432" title="Todd Martin" label="Todd Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133318" start="14618" end="14629" title="Marat Safin" label="Marat Safin"/>
<link wikidata="Q299102" start="14850" end="14868" title="1999 Tennis Masters Cup" label="Tennis Masters Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q207705" start="15064" end="15082" title="Yevgeny Kafelnikov" label="Yevgeny Kafelnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="15190" end="15199" title="Rod Laver" label="Rod Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q580306" start="15578" end="15596" title="2000 Tennis Masters Cup" label="Tennis Masters Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q190723" start="15810" end="15825" title="Gustavo Kuerten" label="Gustavo Kuerten"/>
<link wikidata="Q299944" start="15995" end="16009" title="Arnaud Clément" label="Arnaud Clément"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689037" start="16801" end="16813" title="Key Biscayne" label="Key Biscayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="16942" end="16956" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q319496" start="17308" end="17312" title="Rome Masters" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161519" start="17317" end="17323" title="Madrid Open (tennis)" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q76760" start="17516" end="17532" title="Rainer Schüttler" label="Rainer Schüttler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="17748" end="17761" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="17821" end="17835" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q185722" start="18056" end="18075" title="Juan Carlos Ferrero" label="Juan Carlos Ferrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q133318" start="18711" end="18722" title="Marat Safin" label="Marat Safin"/>
<link wikidata="Q461834" start="18802" end="18836" title="Cincinnati Masters" label="Masters series event in Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q459528" start="19027" end="19038" title="Monte Carlo Masters" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22829012" start="19043" end="19050" title="Hamburg Masters" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q312728" start="19215" end="19227" title="Ken Rosewall" label="Ken Rosewall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="19465" end="19473" title="Tennis open era" label="open era"/>
<link wikidata="Q440482" start="19533" end="19547" title="Alex Bogomolov" label="Alex Bogomolov"/>
<link wikidata="Q299531" start="19551" end="19570" title="Countrywide Classic" label="Countrywide Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10270" start="19790" end="19805" title="Jarkko Nieminen" label="Jarkko Nieminen"/>
<link wikidata="Q595467" start="19913" end="19923" title="Canada Masters" label="Rogers Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="19949" end="19961" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097906" start="20052" end="20064" title="Răzvan Sabău" label="Răzvan Sabău"/>
<link wikidata="Q295483" start="20069" end="20081" title="Ivo Karlović" label="Ivo Karlović"/>
<link wikidata="Q193665" start="20103" end="20116" title="Tomáš Berdych" label="Tomáš Berdych"/>
<link wikidata="Q53333" start="20270" end="20281" title="James Blake (tennis)" label="James Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q312620" start="20395" end="20409" title="Xavier Malisse" label="Xavier Malisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q53551" start="20434" end="20447" title="Robby Ginepri" label="Robby Ginepri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074654" start="21322" end="21331" title="2006 Wimbledon Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="21408" end="21420" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q299531" start="21706" end="21725" title="Countrywide Classic" label="Countrywide Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208517" start="21744" end="21761" title="Fernando González" label="Fernando González"/>
<link wikidata="Q179364" start="22022" end="22034" title="Andrei Pavel" label="Andrei Pavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q207084" start="22063" end="22079" title="Marcos Baghdatis" label="Marcos Baghdatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q598746" start="22132" end="22152" title="2006 Australian Open" label="2006 Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q77176" start="22341" end="22356" title="Benjamin Becker" label="Benjamin Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9446" start="22632" end="22639" title="Pete Sampras" label="Sampras"/>
<link wikidata="Q10911683" start="22790" end="22796" title="serve (tennis)" label="server"/>
<link wikidata="Q221492" start="22932" end="22944" title="1990 U.S. Open (tennis)" label="1990 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q580682" start="23289" end="23305" title="1992 French Open" label="1992 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389353" start="23824" end="23826" title="USA Davis Cup team" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q782045" start="24151" end="24166" title="1995 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q974505" start="24172" end="24194" title="Indian Wells Masters" label="Newsweek Champions Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q431360" start="24219" end="24261" title="Lipton International Players Championships" label="Lipton International Players Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q595467" start="24284" end="24297" title="Canada Masters" label="Canadian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048943" start="24307" end="24314" title="1995 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q270907" start="25408" end="25436" title="Tennis Masters Cup" label="ATP Tour World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q782192" start="25684" end="25699" title="2000 Australian Open" label="Australian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q856527" start="25889" end="25901" title="2001 U.S. Open (tennis)" label="2001 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q856524" start="26235" end="26247" title="2002 U.S. Open (tennis)" label="2002 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q53560" start="26458" end="26468" title="Tommy Haas" label="Tommy Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="26506" end="26518" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q180104" start="26596" end="26610" title="Lleyton Hewitt" label="Lleyton Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q300008" start="26688" end="26696" title="ATP tour" label="ATP tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q53370" start="26761" end="26774" title="Michael Chang" label="Michael Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q76334" start="28368" end="28380" title="Boris Becker" label="Boris Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q132377" start="28830" end="28839" title="Davis Cup" label="Davis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q204068" start="29540" end="29550" title="Pat Rafter" label="Pat Rafter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297943" start="29968" end="29985" title="1999 Italian Open (tennis)" label="1999 Rome Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="30015" end="30024" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="30514" end="30527" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q856527" start="31077" end="31089" title="2001 US Open (tennis)" label="2001 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q431360" start="31112" end="31122" title="Miami Open (tennis)" label="Miami Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q840907" start="31294" end="31306" title="2004 US Open (tennis)" label="2004 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q589969" start="31654" end="31666" title="2005 US Open (tennis)" label="2005 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q182736" start="31838" end="31848" title="Ivan Lendl" label="Ivan Lendl"/>
<link wikidata="Q189542" start="31950" end="31963" title="Stefan Edberg" label="Stefan Edberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q266346" start="32099" end="32111" title="2006 US Open (tennis)" label="2006 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q54584" start="32283" end="32295" title="Andy Roddick" label="Andy Roddick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="32296" end="32309" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q756439" start="32310" end="32317" title="2007 US Open (tennis)" label="US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q221737" start="32425" end="32435" title="Tim Henman" label="Tim Henman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11685" start="32440" end="32453" title="Kim Clijsters" label="Kim Clijsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044168" start="32465" end="32482" title="World Team Tennis" label="World Team Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087335" start="32491" end="32512" title="Philadelphia Freedoms" label="Philadelphia Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q381118" start="32543" end="32559" title="2009 French Open" label="2009 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070083" start="32792" end="32816" title="Outback Champions Series" label="Outback Champions Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031424" start="32857" end="32913" title="Cancer Treatment Centers of America Championship at Surprise" label="Cancer Treatment Centers of America Tennis Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q51687" start="32917" end="32934" title="Surprise, Arizona" label="Surprise, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q54536" start="32998" end="33009" title="Todd Martin" label="Todd Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="33210" end="33216" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="33425" end="33433" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q16474" start="33443" end="33455" title="John McEnroe" label="John McEnroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q53370" start="33622" end="33635" title="Michael Chang" label="Michael Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q53333" start="33835" end="33846" title="James Blake (tennis)" label="James Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="33924" end="33932" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q310949" start="34089" end="34107" title="Mark Philippoussis" label="Mark Philippoussis"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="34321" end="34326" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q43777" start="34656" end="34666" title="2010 Haiti earthquake" label="earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="34701" end="34713" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Rafael Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="35045" end="35066" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q796839" start="35241" end="35257" title="World Tennis Day" label="World Tennis Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="35391" end="35405" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Novak Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="35769" end="35772" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494048" start="36024" end="36067" title="BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year" label="BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="36131" end="36149" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q52454" start="36211" end="36244" title="International Tennis Hall of Fame" label="International Tennis Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q149789" start="38582" end="38607" title="limited liability company" label="limited liability company"/>
<link wikidata="Q209518" start="38725" end="38738" title="Wayne Gretzky" label="Wayne Gretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q348011" start="38740" end="38751" title="Joe Montana" label="Joe Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q169452" start="38753" end="38774" title="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Shaquille O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q536900" start="38776" end="38791" title="Ken Griffey Jr." label="Ken Griffey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q173633" start="38797" end="38809" title="Monica Seles" label="Monica Seles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079490" start="38860" end="38882" title="Official All Star Café" label="Official All Star Café"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747964" start="39115" end="39129" title="Tennis Channel" label="Tennis Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11989278" start="39265" end="39277" title="Michael Mina" label="Michael Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16553" start="39433" end="39441" title="San Jose, California" label="San Jose"/>
<link wikidata="Q852638" start="39443" end="39453" title="Dana Point" label="Dana Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q139564" start="39455" end="39468" title="Atlantic City" label="Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535018" start="39539" end="39562" title="Golden Nugget Las Vegas" label="Golden Nugget Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682155" start="39567" end="39589" title="Golden Nugget Laughlin" label="Golden Nugget Laughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872602" start="39595" end="39605" title="Mirage Resorts" label="MGM Mirage"/>
<link wikidata="Q107211050" start="39683" end="39702" title="Landry&amp;#x27;s, Inc." label="Landry&amp;#x27;s, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q4731492" start="39887" end="39906" title="Allen &amp;amp; Company" label="Allen &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q569978" start="40009" end="40023" title="Caesars Palace" label="Caesars Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903380" start="40182" end="40188" title="Kreiss" label="Kreiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q14687338" start="40456" end="40471" title="Tamarack Resort" label="Tamarack Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512142" start="40475" end="40490" title="Donnelly, Idaho" label="Donnelly, Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q562917" start="40667" end="40677" title="Steve Case" label="Steve Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924463" start="40829" end="40836" title="viagogo" label="viagogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q825291" start="40924" end="40940" title="Village Roadshow" label="Village Roadshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989943" start="41030" end="41060" title="Wet&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;Wild Las Vegas" label="Wet&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;Wild Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348428" start="41222" end="41225" title="IMG (company)" label="IMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002407" start="41484" end="41487" title="Creative Artists Agency" label="CAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550716" start="41535" end="41541" title="Prince Sports" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016713" start="41542" end="41550" title="Prince original graphite" label="Graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q10475908" start="41659" end="41665" title="Donnay (sports)" label="Donnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q631894" start="41688" end="41703" title="Head (company)" label="Head Ti Radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930675" start="41940" end="41944" title="Penn Racquet Sports" label="Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="41989" end="41993" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="42045" end="42051" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="42235" end="42241" title="DuPont (1802–2017)" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q869734" start="42243" end="42247" title="Ebel" label="Ebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q896" start="42249" end="42261" title="Mountain Dew" label="Mountain Dew"/>
<link wikidata="Q35996" start="42271" end="42276" title="Mazda" label="Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q35349" start="42286" end="42296" title="Kia Motors" label="Kia Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q194360" start="42306" end="42322" title="American Express" label="American Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q66048" start="42327" end="42340" title="Deutsche Bank" label="Deutsche Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q62621" start="42402" end="42412" title="Canon Inc." label="Canon Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q62944" start="42428" end="42437" title="Canon EOS" label="Canon EOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911846" start="42540" end="42546" title="Schick (razors)" label="Schick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7858394" start="42639" end="42646" title="Twinlab" label="Twinlab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260606" start="42775" end="42781" title="Estée Lauder Companies" label="Aramis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631849" start="42906" end="42921" title="24 Hour Fitness" label="24 Hour Fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119741" start="43053" end="43065" title="Jacobs Creek (Australia)" label="Jacobs Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q603698" start="43274" end="43282" title="Longines" label="Longines"/>
<link wikidata="Q513278" start="43360" end="43369" title="Got Milk?" label="Got Milk?"/>
<link wikidata="Q9396" start="43494" end="43510" title="Deutsche Telekom" label="Deutsche Telekom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502712" start="43520" end="43538" title="Genworth Financial" label="Genworth Financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q62621" start="43543" end="43553" title="Canon Inc." label="Canon Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q504998" start="43563" end="43567" title="LVMH" label="LVMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="43581" end="43589" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="43590" end="43593" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269283" start="43598" end="43607" title="Wii Fit U" label="Wii Fit U"/>
<link wikidata="Q603698" start="43612" end="43620" title="Longines" label="Longines"/>
<link wikidata="Q42947787" start="43709" end="43724" title="Love Means Zero" label="Love Means Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q82335" start="43794" end="43810" title="Nick Bollettieri" label="Nick Bollettieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551068" start="43995" end="43999" title="WNYC" label="WNYC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964474" start="44027" end="44048" title="The Brian Lehrer Show" label="The Brian Lehrer Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407" start="44143" end="44178" title="Andre Agassi Charitable Association" label="Andre Agassi Charitable Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q434468" start="44251" end="44285" title="ATP Arthur Ashe Humanitarian award" label="ATP Arthur Ashe Humanitarian award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813727" start="45832" end="45849" title="Athletes for Hope" label="Athletes for Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889100" start="46525" end="46546" title="University of Phoenix" label="University of Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q49267" start="46749" end="46766" title="Henderson, Nevada" label="Henderson, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="47225" end="47241" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q189400" start="47669" end="47683" title="Brooke Shields" label="Brooke Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q11662" start="47715" end="47726" title="Steffi Graf" label="Steffi Graf"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="47757" end="47766" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472796" start="48027" end="48036" title="Summerlin, Nevada" label="Summerlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="48057" end="48073" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560597" start="48217" end="48226" title="Gil Reyes (tennis)" label="Gil Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q345764" start="48710" end="48726" title="J. R. Moehringer" label="J. R. Moehringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="49307" end="49322" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="49364" end="49377" title="Roger Federer" label="Roger Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q133318" start="49427" end="49438" title="Marat Safin" label="Marat Safin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9446" start="49853" end="49865" title="Pete Sampras" label="Pete Sampras"/>
<link wikidata="Q578913" start="49922" end="49965" title="New York Times Best Seller list" label="&amp;quot;New York Times&amp;quot; Best Seller list"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971090" start="50044" end="50070" title="British Sports Book Awards" label="British Sports Book Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="50110" end="50117" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q563672" start="50230" end="50241" title="Tim Ferriss" label="Tim Ferriss"/>
<link wikidata="Q846722" start="50448" end="50464" title="1999 French Open" label="1999 French Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q53343" start="50573" end="50578" title="Don Budge" label="Budge"/>
<link wikidata="Q312639" start="50580" end="50585" title="Fred Perry" label="Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q105550" start="50587" end="50592" title="Rod Laver" label="Laver"/>
<link wikidata="Q312545" start="50597" end="50604" title="Roy Emerson" label="Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426" start="50617" end="50624" title="Roger Federer" label="Federer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10132" start="50626" end="50631" title="Rafael Nadal" label="Nadal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5812" start="50636" end="50644" title="Novak Djokovic" label="Djokovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295996" start="50727" end="50735" title="Open Era" label="Open Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q300029" start="50753" end="50780" title="ATP World Tour Masters 1000" label="ATP World Tour Masters 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q693708" start="50880" end="50898" title="Tennis world champions named by the International Tennis Federation" label="ITF World Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q434468" start="50908" end="50930" title="ATP Awards" label="ATP Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q434468" start="50940" end="50964" title="ATP Awards" label="ATP Most Improved Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846258" start="51505" end="51524" title="Andre Agassi Tennis" label="Andre Agassi Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691423" start="51633" end="51657" title="Agassi Tennis Generation" label="Agassi Tennis Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276932" start="51836" end="51846" title="Top Spin 4" label="Top Spin 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q30918320" start="51898" end="51915" title="Tennis World Tour" label="Tennis World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q124304169" start="51988" end="52001" title="Top Spin 2K25" label="Top Spin 2K25"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016846" start="52096" end="52140" title="All-time tennis records – men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="All-time tennis records – men&amp;#x27;s singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426439" start="52143" end="52190" title="List of Grand Slam men&amp;#x27;s singles champions" label="List of Grand Slam men&amp;#x27;s singles champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422468" start="52193" end="52223" title="Tennis male players statistics" label="Tennis male players statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232431" start="52226" end="52277" title="Tennis records of the Open Era – men&amp;#x27;s singles" label="Tennis records of the Open Era – men&amp;#x27;s singles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="597" wikidata="Q33199" url="?curid=597" title="Austroasiatic languages">
<text>The Austroasiatic languages ( ) are a large language family spoken throughout Mainland Southeast Asia, South Asia and East Asia. These languages are natively spoken by the majority of the population in Vietnam and Cambodia, and by minority populations scattered throughout parts of Thailand, Laos, India, Myanmar, Malaysia, Bangladesh, Nepal, and southern China. Approximately 117 million people speak an Austroasiatic language, of which more than two-thirds are Vietnamese speakers. Of the Austroasiatic languages, only Vietnamese, Khmer, and Mon have lengthy, established presences in the historical record. Only two are presently considered to be the national languages of sovereign states: Vietnamese in Vietnam, and Khmer in Cambodia. The Mon language is a recognized indigenous language in Myanmar and Thailand, while the Wa language is a &quot;recognized national language&quot; in the de facto autonomous Wa State within Myanmar. Santali is one of the 22 scheduled languages of India. The remainder of the family&#x27;s languages are spoken by minority groups and have no official status.

&quot;Ethnologue&quot; identifies 168 Austroasiatic languages. These form thirteen established families (plus perhaps Shompen, which is poorly attested, as a fourteenth), which have traditionally been grouped into two, as Mon–Khmer, and Munda. However, one recent classification posits three groups (Munda, Mon-Khmer, and Khasi–Khmuic), while another has abandoned Mon–Khmer as a taxon altogether, making it synonymous with the larger family.

Scholars generally date the ancestral language to with a homeland in southern China or the Mekong River valley. Sidwell (2022) proposes that the locus of Proto-Austroasiatic was in the Red River Delta area around . Genetic and linguistic research in 2015 about ancient people in East Asia suggest an origin and homeland of Austroasiatic in today&#x27;s southern China or even further north.

==Etymology==
The name &quot;Austroasiatic&quot; was coined by Wilhelm Schmidt () based on , the Latin word for &quot;South&quot; (but idiosyncratically used by Schmidt to refer to the southeast), and &quot;Asia&quot;. Despite the literal meaning of its name, only three Austroasiatic branches are actually spoken in South Asia: Khasic, Munda, and Nicobarese.

==Typology==
Regarding word structure, Austroasiatic languages are well known for having an iambic &quot;sesquisyllabic&quot; pattern, with basic nouns and verbs consisting of an initial, unstressed, reduced minor syllable followed by a stressed, full syllable. This reduction of presyllables has led to a variety of phonological shapes of the same original Proto-Austroasiatic prefixes, such as the causative prefix, ranging from CVC syllables to consonant clusters to single consonants among the modern languages. As for word formation, most Austroasiatic languages have a variety of derivational prefixes, many have infixes, but suffixes are almost completely non-existent in most branches except Munda, and a few specialized exceptions in other Austroasiatic branches.

The Austroasiatic languages are further characterized as having unusually large vowel inventories and employing some sort of register contrast, either between modal (normal) voice and breathy (lax) voice or between modal voice and creaky voice. Languages in the Pearic branch and some in the Vietic branch can have a three- or even four-way voicing contrast.

However, some Austroasiatic languages have lost the register contrast by evolving more diphthongs or in a few cases, such as Vietnamese, tonogenesis. Vietnamese has been so heavily influenced by Chinese that its original Austroasiatic phonological quality is obscured and now resembles that of South Chinese languages, whereas Khmer, which had more influence from Sanskrit, has retained a more typically Austroasiatic structure.

==Proto-language==

Much work has been done on the reconstruction of Proto-Mon–Khmer in Harry L. Shorto&#x27;s &quot;Mon–Khmer Comparative Dictionary&quot;. Little work has been done on the Munda languages, which are not well documented. With their demotion from a primary branch, Proto-Mon–Khmer becomes synonymous with Proto-Austroasiatic. Paul Sidwell (2005) reconstructs the consonant inventory of Proto-Mon–Khmer as follows:
This is identical to earlier reconstructions except for . is better preserved in the Katuic languages, which Sidwell has specialized in.

==Internal classification==
Linguists traditionally recognize two primary divisions of Austroasiatic: the Mon–Khmer languages of Southeast Asia, Northeast India and the Nicobar Islands, and the Munda languages of East and Central India and parts of Bangladesh and Nepal. However, no evidence for this classification has ever been published.

Each of the families that is written in boldface type below is accepted as a valid clade. By contrast, the relationships &quot;between&quot; these families within Austroasiatic are debated. In addition to the traditional classification, two recent proposals are given, neither of which accepts traditional &quot;Mon–Khmer&quot; as a valid unit. However, little of the data used for competing classifications has ever been published, and therefore cannot be evaluated by peer review.

In addition, there are suggestions that additional branches of Austroasiatic might be preserved in substrata of Acehnese in Sumatra (Diffloth), the Chamic languages of Vietnam, and the Land Dayak languages of Borneo (Adelaar 1995).

===Diffloth (1974)===
Diffloth&#x27;s widely cited original classification, now abandoned by Diffloth himself, is used in &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; and—except for the breakup of Southern Mon–Khmer—in &quot;Ethnologue&quot;.
* Austro‑Asiatic
** Munda
*** North Munda
**** Korku
**** Kherwarian
*** South Munda
**** Kharia–Juang
**** Koraput Munda
** Mon–Khmer
*** Eastern Mon–Khmer
**** Khmer (Cambodian)
**** Pearic
**** Bahnaric
**** Katuic
**** Vietic (Vietnamese, Muong)
*** Northern Mon–Khmer
**** Khasi (Meghalaya, India)
**** Palaungic
**** Khmuic
*** Southern Mon–Khmer
**** Mon
**** Aslian (Malaya)
**** Nicobarese (Nicobar Islands)
=== Peiros (2004) ===
Peiros is a lexicostatistic classification, based on percentages of shared vocabulary. This means that languages can appear to be more distantly related than they actually are due to language contact. Indeed, when Sidwell (2009) replicated Peiros&#x27;s study with languages known well enough to account for loans, he did not find the internal (branching) structure below.

* Austro‑Asiatic
** Nicobarese
** Munda–Khmer
*** Munda
*** Mon–Khmer
**** Khasi
**** Nuclear Mon–Khmer
***** Mangic (Mang + Palyu) (perhaps in Northern MK)
***** Vietic (perhaps in Northern MK)
***** Northern Mon–Khmer
****** Palaungic
****** Khmuic
***** Central Mon–Khmer
****** Khmer dialects
****** Pearic
****** Asli-Bahnaric
******* Aslian
******* Mon–Bahnaric
******** Monic
******** Katu–Bahnaric
********* Katuic
********* Bahnaric


=== Diffloth (2005) ===
Diffloth compares reconstructions of various clades, and attempts to classify them based on shared innovations, though like other classifications the evidence has not been published. As a schematic, we have:

Or in more detail,
* Austro‑Asiatic
** Munda languages (India)
*** Koraput: 7 languages
*** Core Munda languages
**** Kharian–Juang: 2 languages
**** North Munda languages
***** &quot;Korku&quot;
***** Kherwarian: 12 languages
** Khasi–Khmuic languages (Northern Mon–Khmer)
*** Khasian: 3 languages of north eastern India and adjacent region of Bangladesh
*** Palaungo-Khmuic languages
**** Khmuic: 13 languages of Laos and Thailand
**** Palaungo-Pakanic languages
***** Pakanic or Palyu: 4 or 5 languages of southern China and Vietnam
***** Palaungic: 21 languages of Burma, southern China, and Thailand
** Nuclear Mon–Khmer languages
*** Khmero-Vietic languages (Eastern Mon–Khmer)
**** Vieto-Katuic languages ?
***** Vietic: 10 languages of Vietnam and Laos, including Muong and Vietnamese, which has the most speakers of any Austroasiatic language.
***** Katuic: 19 languages of Laos, Vietnam, and Thailand.
**** Khmero-Bahnaric languages
***** Bahnaric: 40 languages of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia.
***** Khmeric languages
****** The Khmer dialects of Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam.
****** Pearic: 6 languages of Cambodia.
*** Nico-Monic languages (Southern Mon–Khmer)
**** Nicobarese: 6 languages of the Nicobar Islands, a territory of India.
**** Asli-Monic languages
***** Aslian: 19 languages of peninsular Malaysia and Thailand.
***** Monic: 2 languages, the Mon language of Burma and the Nyahkur language of Thailand.
=== Sidwell (2009–2015) ===

Paul Sidwell (2009), in a lexicostatistical comparison of 36 languages which are well known enough to exclude loanwords, finds little evidence for internal branching, though he did find an area of increased contact between the Bahnaric and Katuic languages, such that languages of all branches apart from the geographically distant Munda and Nicobarese show greater similarity to Bahnaric and Katuic the closer they are to those branches, without any noticeable innovations common to Bahnaric and Katuic.

He therefore takes the conservative view that the thirteen branches of Austroasiatic should be treated as equidistant on current evidence. Sidwell &amp; Blench (2011) discuss this proposal in more detail, and note that there is good evidence for a Khasi–Palaungic node, which could also possibly be closely related to Khmuic.

If this would the case, Sidwell &amp; Blench suggest that Khasic may have been an early offshoot of Palaungic that had spread westward. Sidwell &amp; Blench (2011) suggest Shompen as an additional branch, and believe that a Vieto-Katuic connection is worth investigating. In general, however, the family is thought to have diversified too quickly for a deeply nested structure to have developed, since Proto-Austroasiatic speakers are believed by Sidwell to have radiated out from the central Mekong river valley relatively quickly.

Subsequently, Sidwell (2015a: 179) proposed that Nicobarese subgroups with Aslian, just as how Khasian and Palaungic subgroup with each other.

A subsequent computational phylogenetic analysis (Sidwell 2015b) suggests that Austroasiatic branches may have a loosely nested structure rather than a completely rake-like structure, with an east–west division (consisting of Munda, Khasic, Palaungic, and Khmuic forming a western group as opposed to all of the other branches) occurring possibly as early as 7,000 years before present. However, he still considers the subbranching dubious.

Integrating computational phylogenetic linguistics with recent archaeological findings, Paul Sidwell (2015c) further expanded his Mekong riverine hypothesis by proposing that Austroasiatic had ultimately expanded into Indochina from the Lingnan area of southern China, with the subsequent Mekong riverine dispersal taking place after the initial arrival of Neolithic farmers from southern China.

Sidwell (2015c) tentatively suggests that Austroasiatic may have begun to split up 5,000 years B.P. during the Neolithic transition era of mainland Southeast Asia, with all the major branches of Austroasiatic formed by 4,000 B.P. Austroasiatic would have had two possible dispersal routes from the western periphery of the Pearl River watershed of Lingnan, which would have been either a coastal route down the coast of Vietnam, or downstream through the Mekong River via Yunnan. Both the reconstructed lexicon of Proto-Austroasiatic and the archaeological record clearly show that early Austroasiatic speakers around 4,000 B.P. cultivated rice and millet, kept livestock such as dogs, pigs, and chickens, and thrived mostly in estuarine rather than coastal environments.

At 4,500 B.P., this &quot;Neolithic package&quot; suddenly arrived in Indochina from the Lingnan area without cereal grains and displaced the earlier pre-Neolithic hunter-gatherer cultures, with grain husks found in northern Indochina by 4,100 B.P. and in southern Indochina by 3,800 B.P. However, Sidwell (2015c) found that iron is not reconstructable in Proto-Austroasiatic, since each Austroasiatic branch has different terms for iron that had been borrowed relatively lately from Tai, Chinese, Tibetan, Malay, and other languages.

During the Iron Age about 2,500 B.P., relatively young Austroasiatic branches in Indochina such as Vietic, Katuic, Pearic, and Khmer were formed, while the more internally diverse Bahnaric branch (dating to about 3,000 B.P.) underwent more extensive internal diversification. By the Iron Age, all of the Austroasiatic branches were more or less in their present-day locations, with most of the diversification within Austroasiatic taking place during the Iron Age.

Paul Sidwell (2018) considers the Austroasiatic language family to have rapidly diversified around 4,000 years B.P. during the arrival of rice agriculture in Indochina, but notes that the origin of Proto-Austroasiatic itself is older than that date. The lexicon of Proto-Austroasiatic can be divided into an early and late stratum. The early stratum consists of basic lexicon including body parts, animal names, natural features, and pronouns, while the names of cultural items (agriculture terms and words for cultural artifacts, which are reconstructible in Proto-Austroasiatic) form part of the later stratum.

Roger Blench (2017) suggests that vocabulary related to aquatic subsistence strategies (such as boats, waterways, river fauna, and fish capture techniques) can be reconstructed for Proto-Austroasiatic. Blench (2017) finds widespread Austroasiatic roots for &#x27;river, valley&#x27;, &#x27;boat&#x27;, &#x27;fish&#x27;, &#x27;catfish sp.&#x27;, &#x27;eel&#x27;, &#x27;prawn&#x27;, &#x27;shrimp&#x27; (Central Austroasiatic), &#x27;crab&#x27;, &#x27;tortoise&#x27;, &#x27;turtle&#x27;, &#x27;otter&#x27;, &#x27;crocodile&#x27;, &#x27;heron, fishing bird&#x27;, and &#x27;fish trap&#x27;. Archaeological evidence for the presence of agriculture in northern Indochina (northern Vietnam, Laos, and other nearby areas) dates back to only about 4,000 years ago (2,000 BC), with agriculture ultimately being introduced from further up to the north in the Yangtze valley where it has been dated to 6,000 B.P.

Sidwell (2022) proposes that the locus of Proto-Austroasiatic was in the Red River Delta area about 4,000-4,500 years before present, instead of the Middle Mekong as he had previously proposed. Austroasiatic dispersed coastal maritime routes and also upstream through river valleys. Khmuic, Palaungic, and Khasic resulted from a westward dispersal that ultimately came from the Red River valley. Based on their current distributions, about half of all Austroasiatic branches (including Nicobaric and Munda) can be traced to coastal maritime dispersals.

Hence, this points to a relatively late riverine dispersal of Austroasiatic as compared to Sino-Tibetan, whose speakers had a distinct non-riverine culture. In addition to living an aquatic-based lifestyle, early Austroasiatic speakers would have also had access to livestock, crops, and newer types of watercraft. As early Austroasiatic speakers dispersed rapidly via waterways, they would have encountered speakers of older language families who were already settled in the area, such as Sino-Tibetan.

===Sidwell (2018)===
Sidwell (2018) (quoted in Sidwell 2021) gives a more nested classification of Austroasiatic branches as suggested by his computational phylogenetic analysis of Austroasiatic languages using a 200-word list. Many of the tentative groupings are likely linkages. Pakanic and Shompen were not included.

===Possible extinct branches===
Roger Blench (2009) also proposes that there might have been other primary branches of Austroasiatic that are now extinct, based on substrate evidence in modern-day languages.
* Pre-Chamic languages (the languages of coastal Vietnam before the Chamic migrations). Chamic has various Austroasiatic loanwords that cannot be clearly traced to existing Austroasiatic branches (Sidwell 2006, 2007). Larish (1999) also notes that Moklenic languages contain many Austroasiatic loanwords, some of which are similar to the ones found in Chamic.
* Acehnese substratum (Sidwell 2006). Acehnese has many basic words that are of Austroasiatic origin, suggesting that either Austronesian speakers have absorbed earlier Austroasiatic residents in northern Sumatra, or that words might have been borrowed from Austroasiatic languages in southern Vietnam – or perhaps a combination of both. Sidwell (2006) argues that Acehnese and Chamic had often borrowed Austroasiatic words independently of each other, while some Austroasiatic words can be traced back to Proto-Aceh-Chamic. Sidwell (2006) accepts that Acehnese and Chamic are related, but that they had separated from each other before Chamic had borrowed most of its Austroasiatic lexicon.
* Bornean substrate languages (Blench 2010). Blench cites Austroasiatic-origin words in modern-day Bornean branches such as Land Dayak (Bidayuh, Dayak Bakatiq, etc.), Dusunic (Central Dusun, Visayan, etc.), Kayan, and Kenyah, noting especially resemblances with Aslian. As further evidence for his proposal, Blench also cites ethnographic evidence such as musical instruments in Borneo shared in common with Austroasiatic-speaking groups in mainland Southeast Asia. Adelaar (1995) has also noticed phonological and lexical similarities between Land Dayak and Aslian. Kaufman (2018) presents dozens of lexical comparisons showing similarities between various Bornean and Austroasiatic languages.
* Lepcha substratum (&quot;Rongic&quot;). Many words of Austroasiatic origin have been noticed in Lepcha, suggesting a Sino-Tibetan superstrate laid over an Austroasiatic substrate. Blench (2013) calls this branch &quot;Rongic&quot; based on the Lepcha autonym &quot;Róng&quot;.

Other languages with proposed Austroasiatic substrata are:
* Jiamao, based on evidence from the register system of Jiamao, a Hlai language (Thurgood 1992). Jiamao is known for its highly aberrant vocabulary in relation to other Hlai languages.
* Kerinci: van Reijn (1974) notes that Kerinci, a Malayic language of central Sumatra, shares many phonological similarities with Austroasiatic languages, such as sesquisyllabic word structure and vowel inventory.

John Peterson (2017) suggests that &quot;pre-Munda&quot; (early languages related to Proto-Munda) languages may have once dominated the eastern Indo-Gangetic Plain, and were then absorbed by Indo-Aryan languages at an early date as Indo-Aryan spread east. Peterson notes that eastern Indo-Aryan languages display many morphosyntactic features similar to those of Munda languages, while western Indo-Aryan languages do not.

== Writing systems ==
Other than Latin-based alphabets, many Austroasiatic languages are written with the Khmer, Thai, Lao, and Burmese alphabets. Vietnamese divergently had an indigenous script based on Chinese logographic writing. This has since been supplanted by the Latin alphabet in the 20th century. The following are examples of past-used alphabets or current alphabets of Austroasiatic languages.
* Chữ Nôm
* Khmer alphabet
* Khom script (used for a short period in the early 20th century for indigenous languages in Laos)
* Old Mon script
* Mon script
* Pahawh Hmong was once used to write Khmu, under the name &quot;Pahawh Khmu&quot;
* Tai Le (Palaung, Blang)
* Tai Tham (Blang)
* Ol Chiki alphabet (Santali alphabet)
* Mundari Bani (Mundari alphabet)
* Warang Citi (Ho alphabet)
* Ol Onal (Bhumij alphabet)
* Sorang Sompeng alphabet (Sora alphabet)

== External relations ==

=== Austric languages ===

Austroasiatic is an integral part of the controversial Austric hypothesis, which also includes the Austronesian languages, and in some proposals also the Kra–Dai languages and the Hmong–Mien languages.

=== Hmong-Mien ===
Several lexical resemblances are found between the Hmong-Mien and Austroasiatic language families (Ratliff 2010), some of which had earlier been proposed by Haudricourt (1951). This could imply a relation or early language contact along the Yangtze.

According to Cai (et al. 2011), Hmong–Mien people are &quot;genetically&quot; related to Austroasiatic speakers, and their languages were heavily influenced by Sino-Tibetan, especially Tibeto-Burman languages.

===Indo-Aryan languages===
It is suggested that the Austroasiatic languages have some influence on Indo-Aryan languages including Sanskrit and middle Indo-Aryan languages. Indian linguist Suniti Kumar Chatterji pointed that a specific number of substantives in languages such as Hindi, Punjabi and Bengali were borrowed from Munda languages. Additionally, French linguist Jean Przyluski suggested a similarity between the tales from the Austroasiatic realm and the Indian mythological stories of Matsyagandha (Satyavati from &quot;Mahabharata&quot;) and the Nāgas.

== Austroasiatic migrations and archaeogenetics==

Mitsuru Sakitani suggests that Haplogroup O1b1, which is common in Austroasiatic people and some other ethnic groups in southern China, and haplogroup O1b2, which is common in today&#x27;s Japanese and Koreans, are the carriers of early rice agriculture from southern China. Another study suggests that the haplogroup O1b1 is the major Austroasiatic paternal lineage and O1b2 the &quot;para-Austroasiatic&quot; lineage of the Koreans and Yayoi people.


A full genomic study by Lipson et al. (2018) identified a characteristic lineage that can be associated with the spread of Austroasiatic languages in Southeast Asia and which can be traced back to remains of Neolithic farmers from Mán Bạc () in the Red River Delta in northern Vietnam, and to closely related Ban Chiang and Vat Komnou remains in Thailand and Cambodia respectively. This Austroasiatic lineage can be modeled as a sister group of the Austronesian peoples with significant admixture (ca. 30%) from a deeply diverging eastern Eurasian source (modeled by the authors as sharing some genetic drift with the Onge, a modern Andamanese hunter-gatherer group) and which is ancestral to modern Austroasiatic-speaking groups of Southeast Asia such as the Mlabri and the Nicobarese, and partially to the Austroasiatic Munda-speaking groups of South Asia (&quot;e.g.&quot; the Juang). Significant levels of Austroasiatic ancestry were also found in Austronesian-speaking groups of Sumatra, Java, and Borneo. Austroasiatic-speaking groups in southern China (such as the Wa and Blang in Yunnan) predominatly carry the same Mainland Southeast Asian Neolithic farmer ancestry, but with additional geneflow from northern and southern East Asian lineages that can be associated with the spread of Tibeto-Burman and Kra-Dai languages, respectively.

=== Migration into India ===
According to Chaubey et al., &quot;Austro-Asiatic speakers in India today are derived from dispersal from Southeast Asia, followed by extensive sex-specific admixture with local Indian populations.&quot; According to Riccio et al., the Munda peoples are likely descended from Austroasiatic migrants from Southeast Asia.

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==

* Adams, K. L. (1989). &quot;Systems of numeral classification in the Mon–Khmer, Nicobarese and Aslian subfamilies of Austroasiatic&quot;. Canberra, A.C.T., Australia: Dept. of Linguistics, Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University. 
* Alves, Mark J. (2015). Morphological functions among Mon-Khmer languages: beyond the basics. In N. J. Enfield &amp; Bernard Comrie (eds.), &quot;Languages of Mainland Southeast Asia: the state of the art&quot;. Berlin: de Gruyter Mouton, 531–557.
* Bradley, David (2012). &quot;Languages and Language Families in China &quot;, in Rint Sybesma (ed.), &quot;Encyclopedia of Chinese Language and Linguistics&quot;.
* Chakrabarti, Byomkes. (1994). &quot;A Comparative Study of Santali and Bengali&quot;.
* Diffloth, Gérard. (2005). &quot;The contribution of linguistic palaeontology and Austro-Asiatic&quot;. in Laurent Sagart, Roger Blench and Alicia Sanchez-Mazas, eds. &quot;The Peopling of East Asia: Putting Together Archaeology, Linguistics and Genetics.&quot; 77–80. London: Routledge Curzon. 
* Filbeck, D. (1978). &quot;T&#x27;in: a historical study&quot;. Pacific linguistics, no. 49. Canberra: Dept. of Linguistics, Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University. 
* Hemeling, K. (1907). &quot;Die Nanking Kuanhua&quot;. (German language)
* Jenny, Mathias and Paul Sidwell, eds (2015). &quot;The Handbook of Austroasiatic Languages &quot;. Leiden: Brill.
* Peck, B. M., Comp. (1988). &quot;An Enumerative Bibliography of South Asian Language Dictionaries&quot;.
* Peiros, Ilia. 1998. &quot;Comparative Linguistics in Southeast Asia.&quot; Pacific Linguistics Series C, No. 142. Canberra: Australian National University.
* Shorto, Harry L. edited by Sidwell, Paul, Cooper, Doug and Bauer, Christian (2006). &quot;A Mon–Khmer comparative dictionary &quot;. Canberra: Australian National University. Pacific Linguistics. 
* Shorto, H. L. &quot;Bibliographies of Mon–Khmer and Tai Linguistics&quot;. London oriental bibliographies, v. 2. London: Oxford University Press, 1963.
* 
* van Driem, George. (2007). Austroasiatic phylogeny and the Austroasiatic homeland in light of recent population genetic studies. &quot;Mon-Khmer Studies&quot;, 37, 1–14.
* Zide, Norman H., and Milton E. Barker. (1966) &quot;Studies in Comparative Austroasiatic Linguistics&quot;, The Hague: Mouton (Indo-Iranian monographs, v. 5.).


== Further reading ==
* Mann, Noel, Wendy Smith and Eva Ujlakyova. 2009. &quot;Linguistic clusters of Mainland Southeast Asia: an overview of the language families. &quot; Chiang Mai: Payap University.
* 
* Sidwell, Paul. 2016. Bibliography of Austroasiatic linguistics and related resources .
* E. K. Brown (ed.) Encyclopedia of Languages and Linguistics. Oxford: Elsevier Press.
* Gregory D. S. Anderson and Norman H. Zide. 2002. Issues in Proto-Munda and Proto-Austroasiatic Nominal Derivation: The Bimoraic Constraint. In Marlys A. Macken (ed.) Papers from the 10th Annual Meeting of the Southeast Asian Linguistics Society. Tempe, AZ: Arizona State University, South East Asian Studies Program, Monograph Series Press. pp. 55–74.

== External links ==

* (from Wiktionary&#x27;s )
* Mon–Khmer.com Lectures by Paul Sidwell
* Mon–Khmer Languages Project at SEAlang
* Munda Languages Project at SEAlang
* RWAAI (Repository and Workspace for Austroasiatic Intangible Heritage)
* Michel Ferlus&#x27;s recordings of Mon-Khmer (Austroasiatic) languages (CNRS)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="4" end="27" title="Austroasiatic languages" label="Austroasiatic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="44" end="59" title="language family" label="language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="78" end="101" title="Mainland Southeast Asia" label="Mainland Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="103" end="113" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="118" end="127" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="202" end="209" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="214" end="222" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="282" end="290" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="292" end="296" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="298" end="303" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="305" end="312" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="314" end="322" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="324" end="334" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="336" end="341" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138179" start="347" end="361" title="southern China" label="southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="463" end="473" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="521" end="531" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="533" end="538" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13349" start="544" end="547" title="Mon language" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q319972" start="654" end="671" title="national language" label="national language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923414" start="828" end="839" title="Wa language" label="Wa language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306303" start="913" end="921" title="Wa State" label="Wa State"/>
<link wikidata="Q33965" start="938" end="945" title="Santali language" label="Santali"/>
<link wikidata="Q12414903" start="956" end="991" title="Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India" label="the 22 scheduled languages of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="1104" end="1114" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039346" start="1216" end="1223" title="Shompen language" label="Shompen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33892" start="1335" end="1340" title="Munda languages" label="Munda"/>
<link wikidata="Q118501131" start="1420" end="1432" title="Khasi–Palaungic languages" label="Khasi–Khmuic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="1463" end="1472" title="Austroasiatic languages" label="Mon–Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458559" start="1599" end="1607" title="linguistic homeland" label="homeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="1633" end="1645" title="Mekong River" label="Mekong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q342451" start="1727" end="1742" title="Red River Delta" label="Red River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038564" start="1895" end="1909" title="South China" label="southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q62827" start="1997" end="2012" title="Wilhelm Schmidt (linguist)" label="Wilhelm Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2031" end="2036" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073734" start="2263" end="2269" title="Khasic languages" label="Khasic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33892" start="2271" end="2276" title="Munda languages" label="Munda"/>
<link wikidata="Q217380" start="2282" end="2292" title="Nicobarese languages" label="Nicobarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869204" start="2394" end="2420" title="sesquisyllable" label="&amp;quot;sesquisyllabic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869204" start="2503" end="2517" title="minor syllable" label="minor syllable"/>
<link wikidata="Q201322" start="2914" end="2919" title="infix" label="infix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925633" start="3194" end="3202" title="Register (phonology)" label="register"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892707" start="3228" end="3233" title="modal voice" label="modal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328163" start="3253" end="3260" title="breathy voice" label="breathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084827" start="3300" end="3312" title="creaky voice" label="creaky voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="3566" end="3577" title="tonogenesis" label="tonogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q116773186" start="3928" end="3943" title="Proto-Mon–Khmer" label="Proto-Mon–Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5670407" start="3947" end="3962" title="Harry L. Shorto" label="Harry L. Shorto"/>
<link wikidata="Q33892" start="4049" end="4064" title="Munda languages" label="Munda languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q56697" start="4374" end="4390" title="Katuic languages" label="Katuic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="4533" end="4552" title="Mon–Khmer languages" label="Mon–Khmer languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="4556" end="4570" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="4572" end="4587" title="North-East India" label="Northeast India"/>
<link wikidata="Q157286" start="4596" end="4611" title="Nicobar Islands" label="Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33892" start="4621" end="4636" title="Munda languages" label="Munda languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151572" start="4640" end="4644" title="East India" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q29024970" start="4649" end="4662" title="Central India" label="Central India"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="4676" end="4686" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="4691" end="4696" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27683" start="5365" end="5373" title="Acehnese language" label="Acehnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997506" start="5401" end="5417" title="Chamic languages" label="Chamic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760613" start="5438" end="5458" title="Land Dayak languages" label="Land Dayak languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186719" start="5508" end="5516" title="Gérard Diffloth" label="Diffloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="5614" end="5637" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q33892" start="5740" end="5745" title="Munda languages" label="Munda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="5882" end="5887" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073022" start="5905" end="5911" title="Pearic languages" label="Pearic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56309" start="5917" end="5925" title="Bahnaric languages" label="Bahnaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q56697" start="5931" end="5937" title="Katuic languages" label="Katuic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355546" start="5943" end="5949" title="Vietic languages" label="Vietic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236789" start="5963" end="5968" title="Muong language" label="Muong"/>
<link wikidata="Q33584" start="5998" end="6003" title="Khasi language" label="Khasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195" start="6005" end="6014" title="Meghalaya" label="Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391173" start="6028" end="6037" title="Palaungic languages" label="Palaungic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323245" start="6043" end="6049" title="Khmuic languages" label="Khmuic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13349" start="6078" end="6081" title="Mon language" label="Mon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111082" start="6087" end="6093" title="Aslian languages" label="Aslian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973345" start="6095" end="6101" title="Peninsular Malaysia" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q217380" start="6108" end="6118" title="Nicobarese languages" label="Nicobarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q157286" start="6120" end="6135" title="Nicobar Islands" label="Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q284290" start="6171" end="6186" title="lexicostatistics" label="lexicostatistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410327" start="6342" end="6358" title="language contact" label="language contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q217380" start="6553" end="6563" title="Nicobarese languages" label="Nicobarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33892" start="6583" end="6588" title="Munda languages" label="Munda"/>
<link wikidata="Q33584" start="6608" end="6613" title="Khasi language" label="Khasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509556" start="6643" end="6649" title="Pakanic languages" label="Mangic"/>
<link wikidata="Q720192" start="6651" end="6655" title="Mang language" label="Mang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361723" start="6658" end="6663" title="Bolyu language" label="Palyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355546" start="6696" end="6702" title="Vietic languages" label="Vietic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391173" start="6760" end="6769" title="Palaungic languages" label="Palaungic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323245" start="6777" end="6783" title="Khmuic languages" label="Khmuic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="6815" end="6820" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073022" start="6837" end="6843" title="Pearic languages" label="Pearic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111082" start="6873" end="6879" title="Aslian languages" label="Aslian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217497" start="6910" end="6915" title="Monic languages" label="Monic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56697" start="6949" end="6955" title="Katuic languages" label="Katuic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56309" start="6966" end="6974" title="Bahnaric languages" label="Bahnaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186719" start="7001" end="7009" title="Gérard Diffloth" label="Diffloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q33892" start="7249" end="7264" title="Munda languages" label="Munda languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33715" start="7394" end="7399" title="Korku language" label="Korku"/>
<link wikidata="Q118501131" start="7440" end="7462" title="Khasi–Khmuic languages" label="Khasi–Khmuic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073734" start="7488" end="7495" title="Khasic languages" label="Khasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323245" start="7601" end="7607" title="Khmuic languages" label="Khmuic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509556" start="7681" end="7688" title="Pakanic languages" label="Pakanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361723" start="7692" end="7697" title="Bolyu language" label="Palyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391173" start="7752" end="7761" title="Palaungic languages" label="Palaungic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355546" start="7930" end="7936" title="Vietic languages" label="Vietic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236789" start="7982" end="7987" title="Muong language" label="Muong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="7992" end="8002" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q56697" start="8069" end="8075" title="Katuic languages" label="Katuic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56309" start="8159" end="8167" title="Bahnaric languages" label="Bahnaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="8249" end="8254" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073022" start="8307" end="8313" title="Pearic languages" label="Pearic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217380" start="8391" end="8401" title="Nicobarese languages" label="Nicobarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q157286" start="8422" end="8437" title="Nicobar Islands" label="Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111082" start="8493" end="8499" title="Aslian languages" label="Aslian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217497" start="8557" end="8562" title="Monic languages" label="Monic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13349" start="8581" end="8593" title="Mon language" label="Mon language"/>
<link wikidata="Q116849" start="8611" end="8627" title="Nyah Kur language" label="Nyahkur language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153598" start="8670" end="8682" title="Paul Sidwell" label="Paul Sidwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q284290" start="8696" end="8713" title="lexicostatistical" label="lexicostatistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q33892" start="9002" end="9007" title="Munda languages" label="Munda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4088081" start="9329" end="9335" title="Roger Blench" label="Blench"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039346" start="9675" end="9682" title="Shompen language" label="Shompen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="9996" end="10002" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q217380" start="10086" end="10096" title="Nicobarese languages" label="Nicobarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111082" start="10112" end="10118" title="Aslian languages" label="Aslian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="10841" end="10850" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368026" start="10860" end="10867" title="Lingnan" label="Lingnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138179" start="10876" end="10890" title="southern China" label="southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q180548" start="11131" end="11151" title="Neolithic transition" label="Neolithic transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="11159" end="11182" title="mainland Southeast Asia" label="mainland Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201463" start="11343" end="11354" title="Pearl River (China)" label="Pearl River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368026" start="11368" end="11375" title="Lingnan" label="Lingnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="11475" end="11487" title="Mekong River" label="Mekong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="11492" end="11498" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="11669" end="11675" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="12340" end="12348" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355546" start="12428" end="12434" title="Vietic languages" label="Vietic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56697" start="12436" end="12442" title="Katuic languages" label="Katuic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073022" start="12444" end="12450" title="Pearic languages" label="Pearic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="12456" end="12461" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56309" start="12509" end="12517" title="Bahnaric languages" label="Bahnaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4088081" start="13409" end="13421" title="Roger Blench" label="Roger Blench"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="14064" end="14073" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q342451" start="14384" end="14399" title="Red River Delta" label="Red River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="14956" end="14968" title="Sino-Tibetan languages" label="Sino-Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4536545" start="15641" end="15649" title="linkage (linguistics)" label="linkages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509556" start="15651" end="15658" title="Pakanic languages" label="Pakanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039346" start="15663" end="15670" title="Shompen language" label="Shompen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4088081" start="15723" end="15735" title="Roger Blench" label="Roger Blench"/>
<link wikidata="Q20730913" start="15855" end="15864" title="Stratum (linguistics)" label="substrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997506" start="15905" end="15911" title="Chamic language" label="Chamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60787593" start="16147" end="16165" title="Moklenic languages" label="Moklenic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q27683" start="16261" end="16269" title="Acehnese language" label="Acehnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427907" start="16953" end="16960" title="Bornean languages" label="Bornean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760613" start="17075" end="17085" title="Land Dayak languages" label="Land Dayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760613" start="17087" end="17094" title="Bidayuh languages" label="Bidayuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441683" start="17096" end="17109" title="Bakatiʼ language" label="Dayak Bakatiq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217447" start="17118" end="17125" title="Dusunic languages" label="Dusunic"/>
<link wikidata="Q85970302" start="17127" end="17140" title="Dusun language" label="Central Dusun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450611" start="17142" end="17149" title="Brunei Bisaya language" label="Visayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217468" start="17158" end="17163" title="Kayan–Murik languages" label="Kayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392843" start="17169" end="17175" title="Kenyah languages" label="Kenyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111082" start="17213" end="17219" title="Aslian languages" label="Aslian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2760613" start="17495" end="17505" title="Land Dayak languages" label="Land Dayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111082" start="17510" end="17516" title="Aslian languages" label="Aslian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35990" start="17648" end="17654" title="Lepcha language" label="Lepcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q35990" start="17744" end="17750" title="Lepcha language" label="Lepcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="17765" end="17777" title="Sino-Tibetan languages" label="Sino-Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178570" start="17987" end="17993" title="Jiamao language" label="Jiamao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023648" start="18051" end="18055" title="Hlai languages" label="Hlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023648" start="18154" end="18168" title="Hlai languages" label="Hlai languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195442" start="18172" end="18179" title="Kerinci language" label="Kerinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q662628" start="18220" end="18227" title="Malayic languages" label="Malayic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="18248" end="18255" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869204" start="18333" end="18347" title="sesquisyllabic" label="sesquisyllabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33892" start="18430" end="18435" title="Munda languages" label="Munda"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="18529" end="18548" title="Indo-Gangetic Plain" label="Indo-Gangetic Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="18669" end="18689" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054190" start="18915" end="18920" title="Khmer alphabet" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q236376" start="18922" end="18926" title="Thai alphabet" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815229" start="18928" end="18931" title="Lao alphabet" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q854968" start="18937" end="18944" title="Burmese alphabet" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q875344" start="19217" end="19224" title="Chữ Nôm" label="Chữ Nôm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054190" start="19227" end="19241" title="Khmer alphabet" label="Khmer alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920903" start="19244" end="19255" title="Khom script (Ong Kommadam)" label="Khom script"/>
<link wikidata="Q43887939" start="19343" end="19357" title="Old Mon script" label="Old Mon script"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19360" end="19370" title="Mon language#Alphabet" label="Mon script"/>
<link wikidata="Q365954" start="19373" end="19385" title="Pahawh Hmong" label="Pahawh Hmong"/>
<link wikidata="Q33335" start="19409" end="19413" title="Khmu language" label="Khmu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566326" start="19456" end="19462" title="Tai Le script" label="Tai Le"/>
<link wikidata="Q7126913" start="19464" end="19471" title="Palaung language" label="Palaung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925096" start="19473" end="19478" title="Blang language" label="Blang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314503" start="19482" end="19490" title="Tai Tham" label="Tai Tham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925096" start="19492" end="19497" title="Blang language" label="Blang"/>
<link wikidata="Q201688" start="19501" end="19518" title="Ol Chiki alphabet" label="Ol Chiki alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q33965" start="19520" end="19527" title="Santali language" label="Santali"/>
<link wikidata="Q106917274" start="19540" end="19552" title="Mundari Bani" label="Mundari Bani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327828" start="19554" end="19561" title="Mundari language" label="Mundari"/>
<link wikidata="Q79199" start="19574" end="19585" title="Warang Citi" label="Warang Citi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33270" start="19587" end="19589" title="Ho language" label="Ho"/>
<link wikidata="Q108607084" start="19602" end="19609" title="Ol Onal" label="Ol Onal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57920059" start="19611" end="19617" title="Bhumij language" label="Bhumij"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563292" start="19630" end="19653" title="Sorang Sompeng alphabet" label="Sorang Sompeng alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q13284" start="19655" end="19659" title="Sora language" label="Sora"/>
<link wikidata="Q783787" start="19779" end="19797" title="Austric languages" label="Austric hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="19823" end="19845" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q34171" start="19878" end="19895" title="Kra–Dai languages" label="Kra–Dai languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33322" start="19904" end="19924" title="Hmong–Mien languages" label="Hmong–Mien languages"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19946" end="19974" title="Proto-Hmong–Mien language#Austroasiatic" label="Several lexical resemblances"/>
<link wikidata="Q516291" start="20103" end="20114" title="André-Georges Haudricourt" label="Haudricourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="20187" end="20194" title="Yangtze" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q33322" start="20229" end="20239" title="Hmong–Mien languages" label="Hmong–Mien"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="20357" end="20369" title="Sino-Tibetan languages" label="Sino-Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="20382" end="20405" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Tibeto-Burman languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="20507" end="20527" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="20538" end="20546" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385894" start="20596" end="20618" title="Suniti Kumar Chatterji" label="Suniti Kumar Chatterji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="20687" end="20692" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="20694" end="20701" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="20706" end="20713" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q33892" start="20733" end="20748" title="Munda languages" label="Munda languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12900505" start="20780" end="20794" title="Jean Przyluski" label="Jean Przyluski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044655" start="20904" end="20916" title="Matsyagandha" label="Matsyagandha"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="20939" end="20950" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q271990" start="20966" end="20970" title="Nāga" label="Nāga"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21025" end="21041" title=":ja:崎谷満" label="Mitsuru Sakitani"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21056" end="21071" title="Haplogroup O-M95" label="Haplogroup O1b1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138179" start="21145" end="21159" title="southern China" label="southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="21214" end="21222" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q484464" start="21227" end="21234" title="Koreans" label="Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q484464" start="21451" end="21458" title="Koreans" label="Koreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q19921451" start="21463" end="21475" title="Yayoi people" label="Yayoi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q55624307" start="21710" end="21717" title="Mán Bạc" label="Mán Bạc"/>
<link wikidata="Q342451" start="21728" end="21743" title="Red River Delta" label="Red River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q584125" start="21788" end="21798" title="Ban Chiang" label="Ban Chiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="21825" end="21833" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="21838" end="21846" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="21928" end="21948" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q16115148" start="22097" end="22101" title="Onge people" label="Onge"/>
<link wikidata="Q489936" start="22112" end="22144" title="Andamanese peoples" label="Andamanese hunter-gatherer group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941184" start="22239" end="22245" title="Mlabri people" label="Mlabri"/>
<link wikidata="Q207750" start="22254" end="22264" title="Nicobarese people" label="Nicobarese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892228" start="22359" end="22364" title="Juang people" label="Juang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="22463" end="22470" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="22472" end="22476" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="22482" end="22488" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="22532" end="22537" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q843392" start="22551" end="22553" title="Wa people" label="Wa"/>
<link wikidata="Q881533" start="22558" end="22563" title="Blang people" label="Blang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="22567" end="22573" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="22773" end="22786" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Tibeto-Burman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34171" start="22791" end="22808" title="Kra-Dai languages" label="Kra-Dai languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="22960" end="22974" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4313436" start="23090" end="23103" title="Munda peoples" label="Munda peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004182" start="23894" end="23914" title="Byomkes Chakrabarti" label="Chakrabarti, Byomkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186719" start="23982" end="23998" title="Gérard Diffloth" label="Diffloth, Gérard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153598" start="24567" end="24579" title="Paul Sidwell" label="Paul Sidwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15752007" start="25420" end="25437" title="Mon-Khmer Studies" label="Mon-Khmer Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7153598" start="26433" end="26445" title="Paul Sidwell" label="Paul Sidwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966133" start="26479" end="26486" title="SEAlang Library" label="SEAlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966133" start="26516" end="26523" title="SEAlang Library" label="SEAlang"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="599" wikidata="Q25268" url="?curid=599" title="Afroasiatic languages">
<text>The Afroasiatic languages (also known as Afro-Asiatic, Afrasian, Hamito-Semitic, or Semito-Hamitic) are a language family (or &quot;phylum&quot;) of about 400 languages spoken predominantly in West Asia, North Africa, the Horn of Africa, and parts of the Sahara and Sahel. Over 500 million people are native speakers of an Afroasiatic language, constituting the fourth-largest language family after Indo-European, Sino-Tibetan, and Niger–Congo. Most linguists divide the family into six branches: Berber, Chadic, Cushitic, Egyptian, Omotic, and Semitic. The vast majority of Afroasiatic languages are considered indigenous to the African continent, including all those not belonging to the Semitic branch.

Arabic, if counted as a single language, is by far the most widely spoken within the family, with around 300 million native speakers concentrated primarily in the Middle East and North Africa. Other major Afroasiatic languages include the Cushitic Oromo language with 45 million native speakers, the Chadic Hausa language with over 34 million, the Semitic Amharic language with 25 million, and the Cushitic Somali language with 15 million. Other Afroasiatic languages with millions of native speakers include the Semitic Tigrinya language and Modern Hebrew, the Cushitic Sidama language, and the Omotic Wolaitta language, though most languages within the family are much smaller in size. There are many well-attested Afroasiatic languages from antiquity that have since died or gone extinct, including Egyptian and the Semitic languages Akkadian, Biblical Hebrew, Phoenician, Amorite, and Ugaritic. There is no consensus among historical linguists as to precisely where or when the common ancestor of all Afroasiatic languages, known as Proto-Afroasiatic, was originally spoken. However, most agree that the Afroasiatic homeland was located somewhere in northeastern Africa, with specific proposals including the Horn of Africa, Egypt, and the eastern Sahara. A significant minority of scholars argues for an origin in the Levant. The reconstructed timelines of when Proto-Afroasiatic was spoken vary extensively, with dates ranging from 18,000 BC to 8,000 BC. Even the latest plausible dating makes Afroasiatic the oldest language family accepted by contemporary linguists.

Comparative study of Afroasiatic is hindered by the massive disparities in textual attestation between its branches: while the Semitic and Egyptian branches are attested in writing as early as the fourth millennium BC, Berber, Cushitic, and Omotic languages were often not recorded until the 19th or 20th centuries. While systematic sound laws have not yet been established to explain the relationships between the various branches of Afroasiatic, the languages share a number of common features. One of the most important for establishing membership in the branch is a common set of pronouns. Other widely shared features include a prefix m- which creates nouns from verbs, evidence for alternations between the vowel &quot;a&quot; and a high vowel in the forms of the verb, similar methods of marking gender and plurality, and some details of phonology such as the presence of pharyngeal fricatives. Other features found in multiple branches include a specialized verb conjugation using suffixes (Egyptian, Semitic, Berber), a specialized verb conjugation using prefixes (Semitic, Berber, Cushitic), verbal prefixes deriving middle (t-), causative (s-), and passive (m-) verb forms (Semitic, Berber, Egyptian, Cushitic), and a suffix used to derive adjectives (Egyptian, Semitic).

==Name==
In current scholarship, the most common names for the family are &quot;Afroasiatic&quot; (or &quot;Afro-Asiatic&quot;), &quot;Hamito-Semitic&quot;, and &quot;Semito-Hamitic&quot;. Other proposed names that have yet to find widespread acceptance include &quot;Erythraic&quot;/&quot;Erythraean&quot;, &quot;Lisramic&quot;, &quot;Noahitic&quot;, and &quot;Lamekhite&quot;.

Friedrich Müller introduced the name &quot;Hamito-Semitic&quot; to describe the family in his (1876). The variant &quot;Semito-Hamitic&quot; is mostly used in older Russian sources. The elements of the name were derived from the names of two sons of Noah as attested in the Book of Genesis&#x27;s Table of Nations passage: &quot;Semitic&quot; from the first-born Shem, and &quot;Hamitic&quot; from the second-born Ham (Genesis 5:32). Within the Table of Nations, each of Noah&#x27;s sons is presented as the common progenitor of various people groups deemed to be closely related: among others Shem was the father of the Jews, Assyrians, and Arameans, while Ham was the father of the Egyptians and Cushites. This genealogy does not reflect the actual origins of these peoples&#x27; languages: for example, the Canaanites are descendants of Ham according to the Table, even though Hebrew is now classified as a Canaanite language, while the Elamites are ascribed to Shem despite their language being totally unrelated to Hebrew. The term &quot;Semitic&quot; for the Semitic languages had already been coined in 1781 by August Ludwig von Schlözer, following an earlier suggestion by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in 1710. &quot;Hamitic&quot; was first used by Ernest Renan in 1855 to refer to languages that appeared similar to the Semitic languages, but were not themselves provably a part of the family. The belief in a connection between Africans and the Biblical Ham, which had existed at least as far back as Isidore of Seville in the 6th century AD, led scholars in the early 19th century to speak vaguely of &quot;Hamian&quot; or &quot;Hamitish&quot; languages.

The term &quot;Hamito-Semitic&quot; has largely fallen out of favor among linguists writing in English, but is still frequently used in the scholarship of various other languages, such as German. Several issues with the label &quot;Hamito-Semitic&quot; have led many scholars to abandon the term and criticize its continued use. One common objection is that the &quot;Hamitic&quot; component inaccurately suggests that a monophyletic &quot;Hamitic&quot; branch exists alongside Semitic. In addition, Joseph Greenberg has argued that &quot;Hamitic&quot; possesses racial connotations, and that &quot;Hamito-Semitic&quot; overstates the centrality of the Semitic languages within the family. By contrast, Victor Porkhomovsky suggests that the label is simply an inherited convention, and does not imply a duality of Semitic and &quot;Hamitic&quot; any more than &quot;Indo-European&quot; implies a duality of Indic and &quot;European&quot;. Because of its use by several important scholars and in the titles of significant works of scholarship, the total replacement of &quot;Hamito-Semitic&quot; is difficult.

While Greenberg ultimately popularized the name &quot;Afroasiatic&quot; in 1960, it appears to have been coined originally by Maurice Delafosse, as French , in 1914. The name refers to the fact that it is the only major language family with large populations in both Africa and Asia. Due to concerns that &quot;Afroasiatic&quot; could imply the inclusion of &quot;all&quot; languages spoken across Africa and Asia, the name &quot;Afrasian&quot; () was proposed by Igor Diakonoff in 1980. At present it predominantly sees use among Russian scholars.

The names &quot;Lisramic&quot;—based on the Afroasiastic root &quot;*lis-&quot; (&quot;tongue&quot;) and the Egyptian word &quot;rmṯ&quot; (&quot;person&quot;)—and &quot;Erythraean&quot;—referring to the core area around which the languages are spoken, the Red Sea—have also been proposed.

==Distribution and branches==

Scholars generally consider Afroasiatic to have between five and eight branches. The five that are universally agreed upon are Berber (also called &quot;Libyco-Berber&quot;), Chadic, Cushitic, Egyptian, and Semitic. Most specialists consider the Omotic languages to constitute a sixth branch. Due to the presumed distance of relationship between the various branches, many scholars prefer to refer to Afroasiatic as a &quot;linguistic phylum&quot; rather than a &quot;language family&quot;.

M. Victoria Almansa-Villatoro and Silvia Štubňová Nigrelli write that there are about 400 languages in Afroasiatic; Ethnologue lists 375 languages. Many scholars estimate fewer languages; exact numbers vary depending on the definitions of &quot;language&quot; and &quot;dialect&quot;.

===Berber===

The Berber (or Libyco-Berber) languages are spoken today by perhaps 16 million people. They are often considered to constitute a single language with multiple dialects. Other scholars, however, argue that they are a group of around twelve languages, about as different from each other as the Romance or Germanic languages. In the past, Berber languages were spoken throughout North Africa except in Egypt; since the 7th century CE, however, they have been heavily affected by Arabic and have been replaced by it in many places.

There are two extinct languages potentially related to modern Berber. The first is the Numidian language, represented by over a thousand short inscriptions in the Libyco-Berber alphabet, found throughout North Africa and dating from the 2nd century BCE onward. The second is the Guanche language, which was formerly spoken on the Canary Islands and went extinct in the 17th century CE. The first longer written examples of modern Berber varieties only date from the 16th or 17th centuries CE.

===Chadic===

Chadic languages number between 150 and 190, making Chadic the largest family in Afroasiatic by number of extant languages. The Chadic languages are typically divided into three major branches, East Chadic, Central Chadic, and West Chadic. Most Chadic languages are located in the Chad Basin, with the exception of Hausa. Hausa is the largest Chadic language by native speakers, and is spoken by a large number of people as a lingua franca in Northern Nigeria. It may have as many as 80 to 100 million first and second language speakers. Eight other Chadic languages have around 100,000 speakers; other Chadic languages often have few speakers and may be in danger of going extinct. Only about 40 Chadic languages have been fully described by linguists.

===Cushitic===

There are about 30 Cushitic languages, more if Omotic is included, spoken around the Horn of Africa and in Sudan and Tanzania. The Cushitic family is traditionally split into four branches: the single language of Beja (c. 3 million speakers), the Agaw languages, Eastern Cushitic, and Southern Cushitic. Only one Cushitic language, Oromo, has more than 25 million speakers; other languages with more than a million speakers include Somali, Afar, Hadiyya, and Sidaama. Many Cushitic languages have relatively few speakers. Cushitic does not appear to be related to the written ancient languages known from its area, Meroitic or Old Nubian. The oldest text in a Cushitic language probably dates from around 1770; written orthographies were only developed for a select number of Cushitic languages in the early 20th century.

===Egyptian===
The Egyptian branch consists of a single language, Egyptian (often called &quot;Ancient Egyptian&quot;), which was historically spoken in the lower Nile Valley. Egyptian is first attested in writing around 3000 BCE and finally went extinct around 1300 CE, making it the language with the longest written history in the world. Egyptian is usually divided into two major periods, Earlier Egyptian (c. 3000–1300 BCE), which is further subdivided into Old Egyptian and Middle Egyptian, and Later Egyptian (1300 BCE-1300 CE), which is further subdivided into Late Egyptian, Demotic, and Coptic. Coptic is the only stage written alphabetically to show vowels, whereas Egyptian was previously written in Egyptian hieroglyphs, which only represent consonants. In the Coptic period, there is evidence for six major dialects, which presumably existed previously but are obscured by pre-Coptic writing; additionally, Middle Egyptian appears to be based on a different dialect than Old Egyptian, which in turn shows dialectal similarities to Late Egyptian. Egyptian was replaced by Arabic as the spoken language of Egypt, but Coptic continues to be the liturgical language of the Coptic Orthodox Church.

===Omotic===

The c. 30 Omotic languages are still mostly undescribed by linguists. They are all spoken in southwest Ethiopia except for the Ganza language, spoken in Sudan. Omotic is typically split into North Omotic (or Aroid) and South Omotic, with the latter more influenced by the Nilotic languages; it is unclear whether the Dizoid group of Omotic languages belongs to the Northern or Southern group. The two Omotic languages with the most speakers are Wolaitta and Gamo-Gofa-Dawro, with about 1.2 million speakers each.

A majority of specialists consider Omotic to constitute a sixth branch of Afroasiatic. Omotic was formerly considered part of the Cushitic branch; some scholars continue to consider it part of Cushitic. Other scholars have questioned whether it is Afroasiatic at all, due its lack of several typical aspects of Afroasiatic morphology.

===Semitic===

There are between 40 and 80 languages in the Semitic family. Today, Semitic languages are spoken across North Africa, West Asia, and the Horn of Africa, as well as on the island of Malta, making them the sole Afroasiatic branch with members originating outside Africa. Arabic, spoken in both Asia and Africa, is by far the most widely spoken Afroasiatic language today, with around 300 million native speakers, while the Ethiopian Amharic language has around 25 million; collectively, Semitic is the largest branch of Afroasiatic by number of current speakers. 

Most authorities divide Semitic into two branches: East Semitic, which includes the extinct Akkadian language, and West Semitic, which includes Arabic, Aramaic, the Canaanite languages (including Hebrew), as well as the Ethiopian Semitic languages such as Geʽez and Amharic. The classification within West Semitic remains contested. The only group with an African origin is Ethiopian Semitic. The oldest written attestations of Semitic languages come from Mesopotamia, Northern Syria, and Egypt and date as early as c. 3000 BCE.

===Other proposed branches===
There are also other proposed branches, but none has so far convinced a majority of scholars:
* Linguist H. Fleming proposed that the near-extinct Ongota language is a separate branch of Afroasiatic; however, this is only one of several competing theories. About half of current scholarly hypotheses on Ongota&#x27;s origins align it with Afroasiatic in some way.
* Robert Hetzron proposed that Beja is not part of Cushitic, but a separate branch. The prevailing opinion, however, is that Beja is a branch of Cushitic.
* The extinct Meroitic language has been proposed to represent a branch of Afroasiatic. Although an Afroasiatic connection is sometimes viewed as refuted, it continues to be defended by scholars such as Edward Lipiński.
* The Kujarge language is usually considered part of the Chadic languages; however, Roger Blench has proposed that it may be a separate branch of Afroasiatic.

===Further subdivisions=== 

There is no agreement on the relationships between and subgrouping of the different Afroasiatic branches. Whereas Marcel Cohen (1947) claimed he saw no evidence for internal subgroupings, numerous other scholars have made proposals, with Carsten Peust counting 27 as of 2012.

Common trends in proposals as of 2019 include using common or lacking grammatical features to argue that Omotic was the first language to branch off, often followed by Chadic. In contrast to scholars who argue for an early split of Chadic from Afroasiatic, scholars of the Russian school tend to argue that Chadic and Egyptian are closely related, and scholars who rely on percentage of shared lexicon often group Chadic with Berber. Three scholars who agree on an early split between Omotic and the other subbranches, but little else, are Harold Fleming (1983), Christopher Ehret (1995), and Lionel Bender (1997). In contrast, scholars relying on shared lexicon often produce a Cushitic-Omotic group. Additionally, the minority of scholars who favor an Asian origin of Afroasiatic tend to place Semitic as the first branch to split off. Disagreement on which features are innovative and which are inherited from Proto-Afroasiatic produces radically different trees, as can be seen by comparing the trees produced by Ehret and Igor Diakonoff.

Responding to the above, Tom Güldemann criticizes attempts at finding subgroupings based on common or lacking morphology by arguing that the presence or absence of morphological features is not a useful way of discerning subgroupings in Afroasiatic, because it can not be excluded that families currently lacking certain features did not have them in the past; this also means that the presence of morphological features cannot be taken as defining a subgroup. Peust notes that other factors that can obscure genetic relationships between languages include the poor state of present documentation and understanding of particular language families (historically with Egyptian, presently with Omotic). Gene Gragg likewise argues that more needs to be known about Omotic still, and that Afroasiatic linguists have still not found convincing isoglosses on which to base genetic distinctions.

One way of avoiding the problem of determining which features are original and which are inherited is to use a computational methodology such as lexicostatistics, with one of the earliest attempts being Fleming 1983. This is also the method used by Alexander Militarev and Sergei Starostin to create a family tree. Fleming (2006) was a more recent attempt by Fleming, with a different result from Militarev and Starostin. Hezekiah Bacovcin and David Wilson argue that this methodology is invalid for discerning linguistic sub-relationship. They note the method&#x27;s inability to detect various strong commonalities even between well-studied branches of AA.

==Classification history==
A relationship between Hebrew, Arabic, and Aramaic and the Berber languages was perceived as early as the 9th century CE by the Hebrew grammarian and physician Judah ibn Quraysh, who is regarded as a forerunner of Afroasiatic studies. The French orientalist Guillaume Postel had also pointed out similarities between Hebrew, Arabic, and Aramaic in 1538, and Hiob Ludolf noted similarities also to Geʽez and Amharic in 1701. This family was formally described and named &quot;Semitic&quot; by August Ludwig von Schlözer in 1781. In 1844, Theodor Benfey first described the relationship between Semitic and the Egyptian language and connected both to the Berber and the Cushitic languages (which he called &quot;Ethiopic&quot;). In the same year T.N. Newman suggested a relationship between Semitic and the Hausa language, an idea that was taken up by early scholars of Afroasiatic. In 1855, Ernst Renan named these languages, related to Semitic but not Semitic, &quot;Hamitic,&quot; in 1860 Carl Lottner proposed that they belonged to a single language family, and in 1876 Friedrich Müller first described them as a &quot;Hamito-Semitic&quot; language family. Müller assumed that there existed a distinct &quot;Hamitic&quot; branch of the family that consisted of Egyptian, Berber, and Cushitic. He did not include the Chadic languages, though contemporary Egyptologist Karl Richard Lepsius argued for the relation of Hausa to the Berber languages. Some scholars would continue to regard Hausa as related to the other Afroasiatic languages, but the idea was controversial: many scholars refused to admit that the largely unwritten, &quot;Negroid&quot; Chadic languages were in the same family as the &quot;Caucasian&quot; ancient civilizations of the Egyptians and Semites.
An important development in the history of Afroasiatic scholarship – and the history of African linguistics – was the creation of the &quot;Hamitic theory&quot; or &quot;Hamitic hypothesis&quot; by Lepsius, fellow Egyptologist Christian Bunsen, and linguist Christian Bleek. This theory connected the &quot;Hamites&quot;, the originators of Hamitic languages, with (supposedly culturally superior) &quot;Caucasians&quot;, who were assumed to have migrated into Africa and intermixed with indigenous &quot;Negroid&quot; Africans in ancient times. The &quot;Hamitic theory&quot; would serve as the basis for Carl Meinhof&#x27;s highly influential classification of African languages in his 1912 book &quot;&quot;. On one hand, the &quot;Hamitic&quot; classification was justified partially based on linguistic features: for example, Meinhof split the presently-understood Chadic family into &quot;Hamito-Chadic&quot;, and an unrelated non-Hamitic &quot;Chadic&quot; based on which languages possessed grammatical gender. On the other hand, the classification also relied on non-linguistic anthropological and culturally contingent features, such as skin color, hair type, and lifestyle. Ultimately, Meinhof&#x27;s classification of Hamitic proved to include languages from every presently-recognized language family within Africa.

The first scholar to question the existence of &quot;Hamitic languages&quot; was Marcel Cohen in 1924, with skepticism also expressed by A. Klingenheben and Dietrich Westermann during the 1920s and &#x27;30s. However, Meinhof&#x27;s &quot;Hamitic&quot; classification remained prevalent throughout the early 20th century until it was definitively disproven by Joseph Greenberg in the 1940s, based on racial and anthropological data. Instead, Greenberg proposed an Afroasiatic family consisting of five branches: Berber, Chadic, Cushitic, Egyptian, and Semitic. Reluctance among some scholars to recognize Chadic as a branch of Afroasiatic persisted as late as the 1980s. In 1969, Harold Fleming proposed that a group of languages classified by Greenberg as Cushitic were in fact their own independent &quot;Omotic&quot; branch—a proposal that has been widely, if not universally, accepted. These six branches now constitute an academic consensus on the genetic structure of the family.

Greenberg relied on his own method of mass comparison of vocabulary items rather than the comparative method of demonstrating regular sound correspondences to establish the family. An alternative classification, based on the pronominal and conjugation systems, was proposed by A.N. Tucker in 1967. As of 2023, widely accepted sound correspondences between the different branches have not yet been firmly established. Nevertheless, morphological traits attributable to the proto-language and the establishment of cognates throughout the family have confirmed its genetic validity.

==Origin==
===Timeline===
There is no consensus as to when Proto-Afroasiatic was spoken. The absolute latest date for when Proto-Afroasiatic could have been extant is , after which Egyptian and the Semitic languages are firmly attested. However, in all likelihood these languages began to diverge well before this hard boundary. The estimations offered by scholars as to when Proto-Afroasiatic was spoken vary widely, ranging from 18,000BCE to 8,000BCE. An estimate at the youngest end of this range still makes Afroasiatic the oldest proven language family. Contrasting proposals of an early emergence, Tom Güldemann has argued that less time may have been required for the divergence than is usually assumed, as it is possible for a language to rapidly restructure due to areal contact, with the evolution of Chadic (and likely also Omotic) serving as pertinent examples.

===Location===
Likewise, no consensus exists as to where proto-Afroasiatic originated. Scholars have proposed locations for the Afroasiatic homeland across Africa and West Asia. Roger Blench writes that the debate possesses &quot;a strong ideological flavor&quot;, with associations between an Asian origin and &quot;high civilization&quot;. An additional complicating factor is the lack of agreement on the subgroupings of Afroasiatic (see Further subdivisions) – this makes associating archaeological evidence with the spread of Afroasiatic particularly difficult. Nevertheless, there is a long-accepted link between the speakers of Proto-Southern Cushitic languages and the East African Savanna Pastoral Neolithic (5,000 years ago), and archaeological evidence associates the Proto-Cushitic speakers with economic transformations in the Sahara dating c. 8,500 years ago, as well as the speakers of the Proto-Zenati variety of the Berber languages with an expansion across the Maghreb in the 5th century CE.

An origin somewhere on the African continent has broad scholarly support, and is seen as being well-supported by the linguistic data. Most scholars more narrowly place the homeland near the geographic center of its present distribution, &quot;in the southeastern Sahara or adjacent Horn of Africa&quot;. The Afroasiatic languages spoken in Africa are not more closely related to each other than they are to Semitic, as one would expect if only Semitic had remained in a West Asian homeland while all other branches had spread from there. Likewise, all Semitic languages are fairly similar to each other, whereas the African branches of Afroasiatic are very diverse; this suggests the rapid spread of Semitic out of Africa. Proponents of an origin of Afroasiatic within Africa assume the proto-language to have been spoken by pre-Neolithic hunter-gatherers, arguing that there is no evidence of words in Proto-Afroasiatic related to agriculture or animal husbandry. Christopher Ehret, S.O. Y. Keita, and Paul Newman also argue that archaeology does not support a spread of migrating farmers into Africa, but rather a gradual incorporation of animal husbandry into indigenous foraging cultures. Ehret, in a separate publication, argued that the two principles in linguistic approaches for determining the origin of languages which are the principles of fewest moves and greatest diversity had put “beyond reasonable doubt” that the language family “had originated in the Horn of Africa”.

A significant minority of scholars supports an Asian origin of Afroasiatic, most of whom are specialists in Semitic or Egyptian studies. The main proponent of an Asian origin is the linguist Alexander Militarev, who argues that Proto-Afroasiatic was spoken by early agriculturalists in the Levant and subsequently spread to Africa. Militarev associates the speakers of Proto-Afroasiatic with the Levantine Post-Natufian Culture, arguing that the reconstructed lexicon of flora and fauna, as well as farming and pastoralist vocabulary indicates that Proto-AA must have been spoken in this area. Scholar Jared Diamond and archaeologist Peter Bellwood have taken up Militarev&#x27;s arguments as part of their general argument that the spread of linguistic macrofamilies (such as Indo-European, Bantu, and Austro-Asiatic) can be associated with the development of agriculture; they argue that there is clear archaeological support for farming spreading from the Levant into Africa via the Nile valley.

==Phonological characteristics==


Afroasiatic languages share a number of phonetic and phonological features.

===Syllable structure===
Egyptian, Cushitic, Berber, Omotic, and most languages in the Semitic branch require every syllable to begin with a consonant (with the exception of some grammatical prefixes). Igor Diakonoff argues that this constraint goes back to Proto-Afroasiatic. Some Chadic languages allow a syllable to begin with a vowel; however, in many Chadic languages verbs must begin with a consonant. In Cushitic and Chadic languages, a glottal stop or glottal fricative may be inserted to prevent a word from beginning with a vowel. Typically, syllables begin with only a single consonant. Diakonoff argues that proto-Afroasiatic did not have consonant clusters within a syllable.

With the exception of some Chadic languages, all Afroasiatic languages allow both open syllables (ending in a vowel) and closed syllables (ending in a consonant); many Chadic languages do not allow a syllable to end in a consonant. Most words end in a vowel in Omotic and Cushitic, making syllable-final consonant clusters rare. 

Syllable weight plays an important role in Afroasiatic, especially in Chadic; it can affect the form of affixes attached to a word.

===Consonant systems===
Several Afroasiatic languages have large consonant inventories, and it is likely that this is inherited from proto-Afroasiatic. All Afroasiatic languages contain stops and fricatives; some branches have additional types of consonants such as affricates and lateral consonants. Afroasiatic languages tend to have pharyngeal fricative consonants, with Egyptian, Semitic, Berber, and Cushitic sharing ħ and ʕ. In all Afroasiatic languages, consonants can be bilabial, alveolar, velar, and glottal, with additional places of articulation found in some branches or languages. Additionally, the glottal stop () usually exists as a phoneme, and there tends to be no phonemic contrast between [p] and [f] or [b] and [v]. In Cushitic, the Ethiopian Semitic language Tigrinya, and some Chadic languages, there is no underlying phoneme [p] at all.

Most, if not all branches of Afroasiatic distinguish between voiceless, voiced, and &quot;emphatic&quot; consonants. The emphatic consonants are typically formed deeper in the throat than the others; they can be realized variously as glottalized, pharyngealized, uvularized, ejective, and/or implosive consonants in the different branches. This distinction between three manners of articulation is not generally reconstructed for continuant obstruents (such as fricatives), which are generally reconstructed as being only voiceless in Proto-Afroasiatic.

A form of long-distance consonant assimilation known as consonant harmony is attested in Berber, Chadic, Cushitic, and Semitic: it usually affects features such as pharyngealization, palatalization, and labialization. Several Omotic languages have &quot;sibilant harmony&quot;, meaning that all sibilants (s, sh, z, ts, etc.) in a word must match.

===Consonant incompatibility===

Restrictions against the co-occurrence of certain, usually similar, consonants in verbal roots can be found in all Afroasiatic branches, though they are only weakly attested in Chadic and Omotic. The most widespread constraint is against two different labial consonants (other than &quot;w&quot;) occurring together in a root, a constraint which can be found in all branches but Omotic. Another widespread constraint is against two non-identical lateral obstruents, which can be found in Egyptian, Chadic, Semitic, and probably Cushitic. Such rules do not always apply for nouns, numerals, or denominal verbs, and do not affect prefixes or suffixes added to the root. Roots that may have contained sequences that were possible in Proto-Afroasiatic but are disallowed in the daughter languages are assumed to have undergone consonant dissimilation or assimilation.

A set of constraints, developed originally by Joseph Greenberg on the basis of Arabic, has been claimed to be typical for Afroasiatic languages. Greenberg divided Semitic consonants into four types: &quot;back consonants&quot; (glottal, pharyngeal, uvular, laryngeal, and velar consonants), &quot;front consonants&quot; (dental or alveolar consonants), liquid consonants, and labial consonants. He showed that, generally, any consonant from one of these groups could combine with consonants from any other group, but could not be used together with consonants from the same group. Additionally, he showed that Proto-Semitic restricted a sequence of two identical consonants in the first and second position of the triliteral root. These rules also have a number of exceptions:
# velar consonants can occur with pharyngeals or laryngeals;
# dental consonants can co-occur with sibilants; However, there are no Proto-Semitic verbal roots with &quot;ḍ&quot; and a sibilant, and roots with &quot;d&quot; and a sibilant are uncommon. In all attested cases of a dental and a sibilant, the sibilant occurs in first position and the dental in second.
Similar exceptions can be demonstrated for the other Afroasiatic branches that have these restrictions to their root formation. James P. Allen has demonstrated that slightly different rules apply to Egyptian: for instance, Egyptian allows two identical consonants in some roots, and disallows velars from occurring with pharyngeals.

===Vowel systems===
There is a large variety of vocalic systems in Afroasiatic, and attempts to reconstruct the vocalic system of Proto-Afroasiatic vary considerably.
All branches of Afroasiatic have a limited number of underlying vowels (between two and seven), but the number of phonetic vowels can be much larger. The quality of the underlying vowels varies considerably by language; the most common vowel throughout Afroasiatic is schwa. In the different languages, central vowels are often inserted to break up consonant clusters (a form of epenthesis). Various Semitic, Cushitic, Berber, and Chadic languages, including Arabic, Amharic, Berber, Somali, and East Dangla, also exhibit various types of vowel harmony.

===Tones===
The majority of Afroasiatic languages are tonal languages: phonemic tonality is found in Omotic, Chadic, and Cushitic languages, but absent in Berber and Semitic. There is no information on whether Egyptian had tones. In contemporary Omotic, Chadic, and Cushitic languages, tone is primarily a grammatical feature: it encodes various grammatical functions, only differentiating lexical roots in a few cases. In some Chadic and some Omotic languages every syllable has to have a tone, whereas in most Cushitic languages this is not the case. Some scholars postulate that Proto-Afroasiatic may have had tone, while others believe it arose later from a pitch accent.

==Similarities in grammar, syntax, and morphology==
At present, there is no generally accepted reconstruction of Proto-Afroasiatic grammar, syntax, or morphology, nor one for any of the sub-branches besides Egyptian. This means that it is difficult to know which features in Afroasiatic languages are retentions, and which are innovations. Moreover, all Afroasiatic languages have long been in contact with other language families and with each other, leading to the possibility of widespread borrowing both within Afroasiatic and from unrelated languages. There are nevertheless a number of commonly observed features in Afroasiatic morphology and derivation, including the use of suffixes, infixes, vowel lengthening and shortening as a morphological change, as well as the use of tone changes to indicate morphology. Further commonalities and differences are explored in more detail below.

===General features===
====Consonantal root structures====
A widely attested feature in AA languages is a consonantal structure into which various vocalic &quot;templates&quot; are placed. This structure is particularly visible in the verbs, and is particularly noticeable in Semitic. Besides for Semitic, vocalic templates are well attested for Cushitic and Berber, where, along with Chadic, it is less productive; it is absent in Omotic. For Egyptian, evidence for the root-and-template structure exists from Coptic. In Semitic, Egyptian, Berber, verbs have no inherent vowels at all; the vowels found in a given stem are dependent on the vocalic template. In Chadic, verb stems can include an inherent vowel as well.

Most Semitic verbs are triliteral (have three consonants), whereas most Chadic, Omotic, and Cushitic verbs are biliteral (having two consonants). The degree to which the Proto-AA verbal root was triliteral is debated. It may have originally been mostly biconsonantal, to which various affixes (such as verbal extensions) were then added and lexicalized. Although any root could theoretically be used to create a noun or a verb, there is evidence for the existence of distinct noun and verb roots, which behave in different ways.

As part of these templates, the alternation (apophony) between high vowels (e.g. i, u) and a low vowel (a) in verbal forms is usually described as one of the main characteristics of AA languages: this change codes a variety of different functions. It is unclear whether this system is a common AA trait; the Chadic examples, for instance, show signs of originally deriving from affixes, which could explain the origins of the alterations in other languages as well.

====Word order====
It remains unclear what word order Proto-Afroasiatic had. Berber, Egyptian, and most Semitic languages are verb-initial languages, whereas Cushitic, Omotic and some Semitic subgroups are verb-final languages. Proto-Chadic is reconstructed as having verb-initial word order, but most Chadic languages have subject-verb-object word order.

====Reduplication and gemination====
Afroasiatic Languages use the processes of reduplication and gemination (which often overlap in meaning) to derive nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs throughout the AA language family. Gemination in particular is one of the typical features of AA. Full or partial reduplication of the verb is often used to derive forms showing repeated action (pluractionality), though it is unclear if this is an inherited feature or has been widely borrowed.

===Nouns===
====Grammatical gender and number====
The assignment of nouns and pronouns to either masculine or feminine gender is present in all branches – but not all languages – of the Afroasiatic family. This sex-based gender system is widely agreed to derive from Proto-Afroasiatic. In most branches, gender is an inherent property of nouns. Additionally, even when nouns are not cognates, they tend to have the same gender throughout Afroasiatic (&quot;gender stability&quot;). In Egyptian, Semitic, and Berber, a feminine suffix -t is attested to mark feminine nouns; in some Cushitic and Chadic languages, a feminine -t suffix or prefix (lexicalized from a demonstrative) is used to mark definiteness. In addition to these uses, -t also functions as a diminutive, pejorative, and/or singulative marker in some languages.

Afroasiatic languages have a variety of ways of marking plurals; in some branches, nouns change gender from singular to plural (gender polarity), while in others, plural forms are ungendered. In addition to marking plurals via a number of affixes (with the suffixes -*uu/-*w and -*n(a) widely attested), several AA languages make use of internal vowel change (apophony) and/or insertion (epenthesis). These so-called &quot;internal-a&quot; or &quot;broken&quot; plurals are securely attested in Semitic, Berber, Cushitic, and Chadic, although it is unclear if the Chadic examples are an independent development. Another common method of forming plurals is reduplication.
====Noun cases and states====
Nouns cases are found in the Semitic, Berber, Cushitic, and Omotic branches. They are not found in Chadic languages, and there is no evidence for cases in Egyptian. A common pattern in AA languages with case is for the nominative to be marked by &quot;-u&quot; or &quot;-i&quot;, and the accusative to be marked by &quot;-a&quot;. However, the number and types of cases varies across AA and also within the individual branches. Some languages in AA have a marked nominative alignment, a feature which may date back to Proto-Afroasiatic. Zygmont Frajzyngier states that a general characteristic of case marking in AA languages is that it tends to mark roles such as genitive, dative, locative, etc. rather than the subject and object.

A second category, which partially overlaps with case, is the AA linguistic category of &quot;state&quot;. Linguists use the term &quot;state&quot; to refer to different things in different languages. In Cushitic and Semitic, nouns exist in the &quot;free state&quot; or the &quot;construct state&quot;. The construct state is a special, usually reduced form of a noun, which is used when the noun is possessed by another noun (Semitic) or is modified by an adjective or relative clause (Cushitic). Edward Lipiński refers to Semitic nouns as having four states: absolute (free/indeterminate), construct, determinate, and predicate. Coptic and Egyptian grammar also refers to nouns having a &quot;free&quot; (absolute) state, a &quot;construct state&quot;, and a &quot;pronominal state&quot;. The construct state is used when a noun becomes unstressed as the first element of a compound, whereas the pronominal state is used when the noun has a suffixed possessive pronoun. Berber instead contrasts between the &quot;free state&quot; and the &quot;annexed state&quot;, the latter of which is used for a variety of purposes, including for subjects placed after a verb and after certain prepositions.
===Modifiers and agreement===
There is no strict distinction between adjectives, nouns, and adverbs in Afroasiatic. All branches of Afroasiatic have a lexical category of adjectives except for Chadic; some Chadic languages do have adjectives, however. In Berber languages, adjectives are rare and are mostly replaced by nouns of quality and stative verbs. In different languages, adjectives (and other modifiers) must either precede or follow the noun. In most AA languages, numerals precede the noun.

In those languages that have adjectives, they can take gender and number markings, which, in some cases, agree with the gender and number of the noun they are modifying. However, in Omotic, adjectives do not agree with nouns: sometimes, they only take gender and number marking when they are used as nouns, in other cases, they take gender and number marking only when they follow the noun (the noun then receives no marking).

A widespread pattern of gender and number marking in Afroasiatic, found on demonstratives, articles, adjectives, and relative markers, is a consonant N for masculine, T for feminine, and N for plural. This can be found in Semitic, Egyptian, Beja, Berber, and Chadic. A system K (masculine), T (feminine), and H (plural) can be found in Cushitic, Chadic, with masculine K also appearing in Omotic. The feminine marker T is one of the most consistent aspects across the different branches of AA.

===Verb forms===
====Tenses, aspects, and moods (TAMs)====

There is no agreement about which tenses, aspects, or moods (TAMs) Proto-Afroasiatic might have had. Most grammars of AA posit a distinction between perfective and imperfective verbal aspects, which can be found in Cushitic, Berber, Semitic, most Chadic languages, and some Omotic languages. The Egyptian verbal system diverges greatly from that found in the other branches. Additionally, it is common in Afroasiatic languages for the present/imperfective form to be a derived (marked) form of the verb, whereas in most other languages and language families the present tense is the default form of the verb. Another common trait across the family is the use of a suppletive imperative for verbs of motion.

====&quot;Prefix conjugation&quot;====
Conjugation of verbs using prefixes that mark person, number, and gender can be found
in Semitic, Berber, and in Cushitic, where it is only found on a small set of frequent verbs. These prefixes are clearly cognate across the branches, although their use within the verbal systems of the individual languages varies. There is a general pattern in which n- is used for the first person plural, whereas t- is used for all forms of the second person regardless of plurality or gender, as well as feminine singular. Prefixes of ʔ- (glottal stop) for the first person singular and y- for the third person masculine can also be reconstructed. As there is no evidence for the &quot;prefix conjugation&quot; in Omotic, Chadic, or Egyptian, it is unclear whether this was a Proto-Afroasiatic feature that has been lost in those branches or is a shared innovation among Semitic, Berber, and Cushitic.

====&quot;Suffix conjugation&quot;====
Some AA branches have what is called a &quot;suffix conjugation&quot;, formed by adding pronominal suffixes to indicate person, gender, and number to a verbal adjective. In Akkadian, Egyptian, Berber, and Cushitic this forms a &quot;stative conjugation&quot;, used to express the state or result of an action; the same endings as in Akkadian and Egyptian are also present in the West Semitic perfective verb form. In Akkadian and Egyptian, the suffixes appear to be reduced forms of the independent pronouns (see Pronouns); the obvious correspondence between the endings in the two branches has been argued to show that Egyptian and Semitic are closely related. While some scholars posit an AA origin for this form, it is possible that the Berber and Cushitic forms are independent developments, as they show significant differences from the Egyptian and Semitic forms. The Cushitic forms in particular may be derived from morphology found in subordinate clauses.

===Common derivational affixes===
====M-prefix noun derivation====
A prefix in m- is the most widely attested affix in AA that is used to derive nouns, and is one of the features Joseph Greenberg used to diagnose membership in the family. It forms agent nouns, place nouns, and instrument nouns. In some branches, it can also derive abstract nouns and participles. Omotic, meanwhile, shows evidence for a non-productive prefix mV- associated with the feminine gender. Christopher Ehret has argued that this prefix is a later development that was not present in Proto-Afro-Asiatic, but rather derived from a PAA indefinite pronoun *m-. Such an etymology is rejected by A. Zaborski and Gábor Takács, the latter of whom argues for a PAA &quot;*ma-&quot; that unites all or some of the meanings in the modern languages.

====Verbal extensions====
Many AA languages use prefixes or suffixes (verbal extensions) to encode various pieces of information about the verb. Three derivational prefixes can be reconstructed for Proto-Afroasiatic: *s- &#x27;causative&#x27;, *t- &#x27;middle voice&#x27; or &#x27;reflexive&#x27;, and *n- &#x27;passive&#x27;; the prefixes appear with various related meanings in the individual daughter languages and branches. Christopher Ehret has proposed that Proto-Afroasiatic originally had as many as thirty-seven separate verbal extensions, many of which then became fossilized as third consonants. This theory has been criticized by some, such as Andrzej Zaborski and Alan Kaye, as being too many extensions to be realistic, though Zygmont Frajzyngier and Erin Shay note that some Chadic languages have as many as twelve extensions.
====&quot;Nisba&quot; derivation====
The so-called &quot;Nisba&quot; is a suffix used to derive adjectives from nouns and, in Egyptian, also from prepositions. It is found in Egyptian, Semitic, and possibly, in some relic forms, Berber. The suffix has the same basic form in Egyptian and Semitic, taking the form -i(y) in Semitic and being written -j in Egyptian. The Semitic and Cushitic genitive case in -i/-ii may be related to &quot;nisba&quot; adjective derivation.

Due to its presence in the oldest attested and best-known AA branches, nisba derivation is often thought of as a &quot;quintessentially Afroasiatic feature&quot;. Christopher Ehret argues for its presence in Proto-Afroasiatic and for its attestation in some form in all branches, with a shape &quot;-*ay&quot; in addition to -&quot;*iy&quot; in some cases.

==Vocabulary comparison==
===Pronouns===
The forms of the pronouns are very stable throughout Afroasiatic (excluding Omotic), and they have been used as one of the chief tools for determining whether a language belongs to the family. However, there is no consensus on what the reconstructed set of Afroasiatic pronouns might have looked like. A common characteristic of AA languages is the existence of a special set of &quot;independent&quot; pronouns, which are distinct from subject pronouns. They can occur together with subject pronouns but cannot fulfill an object function. Also common are dependent/affix pronouns (used for direct objects and to mark possession). For most branches, the first person pronouns contain a nasal consonant (n, m), whereas the third person displays a sibilant consonant (s, sh). Other commonalities are masculine and feminine forms used in both the second and third persons, except in Cushitic and Omotic. These pronouns tend to show a masculine &quot;u&quot; and a feminine &quot;i&quot;. The Omotic forms of the personal pronouns differ from the others, with only the plural forms in North Omotic appearing potentially to be cognate.

===Numerals===
Unlike in the Indo-European or Austronesian language families, numerals in AA languages cannot be traced to a proto-system. The Cushitic and Chadic numeral systems appear to have originally been base 5. The system in Berber, Egyptian, and Semitic, however, has independent words for the numbers 6–9. Thus, it is possible that the numerals in Egyptian, Berber, and Semitic are more closely related, whereas the Cushitic and Chadic numerals are more closely related to each other. Modern Chadic numeral systems are sometimes decimal, having separate names for the numbers 1–10, and sometimes base-5, deriving the numbers 6–9 from the numbers 1–5 in some way. Some families show more than one word for a numeral: Chadic, Semitic, and Berber each have two words for two, and Semitic has four words for one. Andrzej Zaborski further notes that the numbers &quot;one&quot;, &quot;two&quot;, and &quot;five&quot; are particularly susceptible to replacement by new words, with &quot;five&quot; often based on a word meaning &quot;hand&quot;.

Another factor making comparisons of AA numeral systems difficult is the possibility of borrowing. Only some Berber languages maintain the native Berber numeral system, with many using Arabic loans for higher numbers and some from any numeral beyond two. In some Berber languages, the roots for one and two are also borrowed from Arabic. Some South Cushitic numerals are borrowed from Nilotic languages, other Cushitic numerals have been borrowed from Ethiopian Semitic languages.

===Cognates===

Afroasiatic languages share a vocabulary of Proto-Afroasiatic origin to varying extents. Writing in 2004, John Huehnergard notes the great difficulty in establishing cognate sets across the family. Identifying cognates is difficult because the languages in question are often separated by thousands of years of development and many languages within the family have long been in contact with each other, raising the possibility of loanwords. Work is also hampered because of the poor state of documentation of many languages.

There are two etymological dictionaries of Afroasiatic, one by Christopher Ehret, and one by Vladimir Orel and Olga Stolbova, both from 1995. Both works provide highly divergent reconstructions and have been heavily criticized by other scholars. Andrzej Zaborski refers to Orel and Stolbova&#x27;s reconstructions as &quot;controversial&quot;, and Ehret&#x27;s as &quot;not acceptable to many scholars&quot;. Tom Güldemann argues that much comparative work in Afroasiatic suffers from not attempting first to reconstruct smaller units within the individual branches, but instead comparing words in the individual languages. Nevertheless, both dictionaries agree on some items and some proposed cognates are uncontroversial. Such cognates tend to rely on relatively simple sound correspondences.
:&quot;Abbreviations:&quot; PEC=&#x27;Proto-Eastern Cushtic&#x27;.

==See also==

* Afroasiatic phonetic notation
* Borean languages
* Languages of Africa
* Languages of Asia
* Nostratic languages
==Notes==
==Citations==
==Works cited==
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
*
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Afro-Asiatic at the Linguist List MultiTree Project: Genealogical trees attributed to Delafosse 1914, Greenberg 1950–1955, Greenberg 1963, Fleming 1976, Hodge 1976, Orel &amp; Stolbova 1995, Diakonoff 1996–1998, Ehret 1995–2000, Hayward 2000, Militarev 2005, Blench 2006, and Fleming 2006
* Afro-Asiatic and Semitic genealogical trees, presented by Alexander Militarev at his talk &quot;Genealogical classification of Afro-Asiatic languages according to the latest data&quot; at the conference on the 70th anniversary of V.M. Illich-Svitych, Moscow, 2004; short annotations of the talks given there 
* Root Extension And Root Formation In Semitic And Afrasian, by Alexander Militarev in &quot;Proceedings of the Barcelona Symposium on comparative Semitic&quot;, 19-20/11/2004. Aula Orientalis 23/1-2, 2005, pp. 83–129.
* Akkadian-Egyptian lexical matches, by Alexander Militarev in &quot;Papers on Semitic and Afroasiatic Linguistics in Honor of Gene B. Gragg.&quot; Ed. by Cynthia L. Miller. Studies in Ancient Oriental Civilization 60. Chicago: The Oriental Institute, 2007, p. 139–145.
* A comparison of Orel-Stolbova&#x27;s and Ehret&#x27;s Afro-Asiatic reconstructions
* &quot;Is Omotic Afro-Asiatic?&quot; by Rolf Theil (2006)
* Afro-Asiatic webpage of Roger Blench (with family tree).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="4" end="25" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afroasiatic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="41" end="53" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afro-Asiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="55" end="63" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afrasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="65" end="79" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Hamito-Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="84" end="98" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Semito-Hamitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="106" end="121" title="language family" label="language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="193" end="202" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="204" end="216" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="222" end="236" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="255" end="261" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="266" end="271" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="399" end="412" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="414" end="426" title="Sino-Tibetan languages" label="Sino-Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33838" start="432" end="443" title="Niger–Congo languages" label="Niger–Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="497" end="503" title="Berber languages" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q33184" start="505" end="511" title="Chadic languages" label="Chadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33248" start="513" end="521" title="Cushitic languages" label="Cushitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="523" end="531" title="Egyptian language" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33860" start="533" end="539" title="Omotic languages" label="Omotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="545" end="552" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="630" end="647" title="Africa" label="African continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="707" end="713" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="870" end="881" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="886" end="898" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33864" start="955" end="969" title="Oromo language" label="Oromo language"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="1014" end="1028" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa language"/>
<link wikidata="Q28244" start="1063" end="1070" title="Amharic" label="Amharic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="1114" end="1129" title="Somali language" label="Somali language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34124" start="1228" end="1245" title="Tigrinya language" label="Tigrinya language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8141" start="1250" end="1263" title="Modern Hebrew" label="Modern Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q33786" start="1278" end="1293" title="Sidama language" label="Sidama language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36943" start="1310" end="1327" title="Wolaitta language" label="Wolaitta language"/>
<link wikidata="Q38058796" start="1477" end="1497" title="Extinct language" label="died or gone extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="1544" end="1552" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="1554" end="1569" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Biblical Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q36734" start="1571" end="1581" title="Phoenician language" label="Phoenician"/>
<link wikidata="Q35941" start="1583" end="1590" title="Amorite language" label="Amorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q36928" start="1596" end="1604" title="Ugaritic" label="Ugaritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="1634" end="1654" title="historical linguistics" label="historical linguists"/>
<link wikidata="Q269125" start="1744" end="1761" title="Proto-Afroasiatic language" label="Proto-Afroasiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="2030" end="2036" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q115439" start="2480" end="2500" title="fourth millennium BC" label="fourth millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="2616" end="2626" title="comparative method" label="sound laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q252321" start="3162" end="3183" title="pharyngeal consonant" label="pharyngeal fricatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q211101" start="3410" end="3416" title="middle voice" label="middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737190" start="3423" end="3432" title="causative" label="causative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194697" start="3443" end="3450" title="passive voice" label="passive"/>
<link wikidata="Q85504" start="3947" end="3963" title="Friedrich Müller (linguist)" label="Friedrich Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="4197" end="4201" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="4221" end="4236" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033715" start="4244" end="4260" title="Generations of Noah" label="Table of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q200902" start="4310" end="4314" title="Shem" label="Shem"/>
<link wikidata="Q229702" start="4361" end="4364" title="Ham (son of Noah)" label="Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="4568" end="4572" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="4574" end="4583" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q28151255" start="4589" end="4597" title="Arameans" label="Arameans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="4631" end="4640" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q241790" start="4645" end="4653" title="Kingdom of Kush" label="Cushites"/>
<link wikidata="Q747547" start="4857" end="4875" title="Canaanite language" label="Canaanite language"/>
<link wikidata="Q128904" start="4887" end="4895" title="Elamites" label="Elamites"/>
<link wikidata="Q35470" start="4925" end="4939" title="Elamite language" label="their language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="5012" end="5029" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q61318" start="5065" end="5091" title="August Ludwig von Schlözer" label="August Ludwig von Schlözer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="5128" end="5153" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q157155" start="5201" end="5213" title="Ernest Renan" label="Ernest Renan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166876" start="5455" end="5473" title="Isidore of Seville" label="Isidore of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="6032" end="6044" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q309997" start="6111" end="6127" title="Joseph Greenberg" label="Joseph Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191194" start="6174" end="6193" title="Hamites" label="racial connotations"/>
<link wikidata="Q346165" start="6847" end="6864" title="Maurice Delafosse" label="Maurice Delafosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q447180" start="7185" end="7199" title="Igor Diakonoff" label="Igor Diakonoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="7528" end="7535" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="7720" end="7726" title="Berber languages" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q33184" start="7768" end="7774" title="Chadic languages" label="Chadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33248" start="7776" end="7784" title="Cushitic languages" label="Cushitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="7786" end="7794" title="Egyptian language" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="7800" end="7807" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33860" start="7839" end="7855" title="Omotic languages" label="Omotic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="8201" end="8211" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="8330" end="8338" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="8355" end="8362" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q35761" start="9001" end="9018" title="Numidian language" label="Numidian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823174" start="9077" end="9099" title="Libyco-Berber alphabet" label="Libyco-Berber alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35762" start="9193" end="9209" title="Guanche language" label="Guanche language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="9244" end="9258" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q575245" start="9703" end="9713" title="Chad Basin" label="Chad Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="9737" end="9742" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33864" start="10525" end="10530" title="Oromo language" label="Oromo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="10625" end="10631" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q27811" start="10633" end="10637" title="Afar language" label="Afar"/>
<link wikidata="Q56613" start="10639" end="10646" title="Hadiyya language" label="Hadiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q33786" start="10652" end="10659" title="Sidaama language" label="Sidaama"/>
<link wikidata="Q13366" start="10808" end="10816" title="Meroitic language" label="Meroitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268" start="10820" end="10830" title="Old Nubian" label="Old Nubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="11082" end="11090" title="Egyptian language" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q321083" start="11654" end="11668" title="Coptic alphabet" label="alphabetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="11737" end="11747" title="hieroglyph" label="hieroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="12199" end="12221" title="Coptic Orthodox Church" label="Coptic Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521556" start="12365" end="12379" title="Ganza language" label="Ganza language"/>
<link wikidata="Q513408" start="12510" end="12527" title="Nilotic languages" label="Nilotic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36943" start="12683" end="12691" title="Wolaitta language" label="Wolaitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q56323" start="12696" end="12711" title="Gamo-Gofa-Dawro language" label="Gamo-Gofa-Dawro"/>
<link wikidata="Q36344" start="14373" end="14388" title="Ongota language" label="Ongota language"/>
<link wikidata="Q855022" start="14592" end="14606" title="Robert Hetzron" label="Robert Hetzron"/>
<link wikidata="Q33025" start="14621" end="14625" title="Beja language" label="Beja"/>
<link wikidata="Q13366" start="14759" end="14776" title="Meroitic language" label="Meroitic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33448" start="14971" end="14987" title="Kujarge language" label="Kujarge language"/>
<link wikidata="Q969286" start="15268" end="15280" title="Marcel Cohen" label="Marcel Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q447180" start="16458" end="16472" title="Igor Diakonoff" label="Igor Diakonoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q201884" start="17313" end="17321" title="isogloss" label="isogloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q284290" start="17509" end="17525" title="lexicostatistics" label="lexicostatistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4293424" start="17613" end="17632" title="Alexander Militarev" label="Alexander Militarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q705907" start="17637" end="17653" title="Sergei Starostin" label="Sergei Starostin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898339" start="18211" end="18228" title="Judah ibn Kuraish" label="Judah ibn Quraysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q948156" start="18309" end="18325" title="Guillaume Postel" label="Guillaume Postel"/>
<link wikidata="Q66475" start="18409" end="18420" title="Hiob Ludolf" label="Hiob Ludolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q61318" start="18543" end="18569" title="August Ludwig von Schlözer" label="August Ludwig von Schlözer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76162" start="18588" end="18602" title="Theodor Benfey" label="Theodor Benfey"/>
<link wikidata="Q157155" start="18941" end="18952" title="Ernst Renan" label="Ernst Renan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85504" start="19123" end="19139" title="Friedrich Müller (linguist)" label="Friedrich Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q77231" start="19420" end="19440" title="Karl Richard Lepsius" label="Karl Richard Lepsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q338460" start="19688" end="19695" title="Negroid" label="Negroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129609" start="19756" end="19765" title="Caucasian race" label="Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191194" start="19964" end="19978" title="Hamites" label="Hamitic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q67409" start="20051" end="20067" title="Christian Bunsen" label="Christian Bunsen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20082" end="20097" title="Christian Bleek" label="Christian Bleek"/>
<link wikidata="Q66484" start="20430" end="20442" title="Carl Meinhof" label="Carl Meinhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q969286" start="21235" end="21247" title="Marcel Cohen" label="Marcel Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q309997" start="21514" end="21530" title="Joseph Greenberg" label="Joseph Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5660246" start="21834" end="21848" title="Harold C. Fleming" label="Harold Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503202" start="22179" end="22194" title="mass comparison" label="mass comparison"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="22231" end="22249" title="comparative method" label="comparative method"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="22703" end="22719" title="Genetic relationship (linguistics)" label="genetic validity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410327" start="23496" end="23509" title="language contact" label="areal contact"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24038" end="24058" title="#Further subdivisions" label="Further subdivisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q56525" start="24238" end="24265" title="Southern Cushitic languages" label="Southern Cushitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208239" start="24287" end="24313" title="Savanna Pastoral Neolithic" label="Savanna Pastoral Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q116773204" start="24376" end="24390" title="Proto-Cushitic" label="Proto-Cushitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293952" start="24502" end="24514" title="Zenati languages" label="Proto-Zenati"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="24576" end="24583" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="25447" end="25463" title="hunter-gatherers" label="hunter-gatherers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152713" start="25611" end="25622" title="Paul Newman (linguist)" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4293424" start="26286" end="26305" title="Alexander Militarev" label="Alexander Militarev"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="26385" end="26391" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q733489" start="26506" end="26522" title="Natufian Culture" label="Natufian Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q205772" start="26697" end="26710" title="Jared Diamond" label="Jared Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q472321" start="26729" end="26743" title="Peter Bellwood" label="Peter Bellwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q949344" start="26849" end="26862" title="macrofamily" label="macrofamilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q447180" start="27409" end="27423" title="Igor Diakonoff" label="Igor Diakonoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q474353" start="28228" end="28243" title="Syllable weight" label="Syllable weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q51597" start="28547" end="28552" title="stop consonant" label="stops"/>
<link wikidata="Q31427" start="28557" end="28566" title="fricative" label="fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q17582" start="28627" end="28636" title="affricate" label="affricate"/>
<link wikidata="Q223714" start="28642" end="28659" title="lateral consonant" label="lateral consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q252321" start="28697" end="28707" title="pharyngeal consonant" label="pharyngeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q31427" start="28708" end="28717" title="fricative" label="fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q920026" start="28783" end="28784" title="Voiceless pharyngeal fricative" label="ħ"/>
<link wikidata="Q49751" start="28789" end="28790" title="Voiced pharyngeal fricative" label="ʕ"/>
<link wikidata="Q146878" start="28840" end="28848" title="bilabial" label="bilabial"/>
<link wikidata="Q950672" start="28850" end="28858" title="alveolar" label="alveolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19408" start="28860" end="28865" title="velar" label="velar"/>
<link wikidata="Q234538" start="28871" end="28878" title="glottal consonant" label="glottal"/>
<link wikidata="Q178034" start="28974" end="28986" title="glottal stop" label="glottal stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q34124" start="29142" end="29150" title="Tigrinya language" label="Tigrinya"/>
<link wikidata="Q19773264" start="29284" end="29293" title="voiceless" label="voiceless"/>
<link wikidata="Q494510" start="29295" end="29301" title="voiced" label="voiced"/>
<link wikidata="Q920360" start="29313" end="29321" title="Emphatic consonant" label="emphatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026169" start="29457" end="29468" title="glottalic consonant" label="glottalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500482" start="29470" end="29484" title="Pharyngealization" label="pharyngealized"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312951" start="29486" end="29496" title="uvularization" label="uvularized"/>
<link wikidata="Q827454" start="29498" end="29506" title="ejective" label="ejective"/>
<link wikidata="Q849417" start="29515" end="29524" title="implosive" label="implosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472788" start="29653" end="29663" title="continuant" label="continuant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148563" start="29664" end="29673" title="obstruent" label="obstruent"/>
<link wikidata="Q148877" start="29812" end="29824" title="assimilation (linguistics)" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118383" start="29834" end="29851" title="consonant harmony" label="consonant harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808790" start="29961" end="29975" title="palatalization (phonetics)" label="palatalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147016" start="29981" end="29994" title="labialization" label="labialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q51600" start="30032" end="30040" title="sibilant" label="sibilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127209" start="30412" end="30428" title="labial consonant" label="labial consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q223714" start="30606" end="30613" title="lateral consonant" label="lateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148563" start="30614" end="30623" title="obstruent" label="obstruent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16830098" start="30753" end="30767" title="denominal verb" label="denominal verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q755669" start="30993" end="31006" title="dissimilation" label="dissimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q148877" start="31010" end="31022" title="assimilation (linguistics)" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q234538" start="31253" end="31260" title="glottal consonant" label="glottal"/>
<link wikidata="Q252321" start="31262" end="31272" title="pharyngeal consonant" label="pharyngeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q623772" start="31274" end="31280" title="uvular consonant" label="uvular"/>
<link wikidata="Q4254538" start="31282" end="31291" title="laryngeal consonant" label="laryngeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19408" start="31297" end="31312" title="velar consonant" label="velar consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q120443" start="31346" end="31352" title="dental consonant" label="dental"/>
<link wikidata="Q49749" start="31356" end="31374" title="alveolar consonant" label="alveolar consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q908751" start="31378" end="31394" title="liquid consonant" label="liquid consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127209" start="31401" end="31417" title="labial consonant" label="labial consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51600" start="31901" end="31909" title="sibilant" label="sibilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547701" start="32296" end="32310" title="James Peter Allen" label="James P. Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154123" start="32937" end="32942" title="schwa" label="schwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q878035" start="33048" end="33058" title="epenthesis" label="epenthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q147137" start="33208" end="33221" title="vowel harmony" label="vowel harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="33278" end="33292" title="tonal language" label="tonal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441804" start="33886" end="33898" title="pitch accent" label="pitch accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="34583" end="34589" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q201322" start="34593" end="34598" title="infix" label="infix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110362" start="34602" end="34614" title="vowel length" label="vowel length"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412778" start="34624" end="34634" title="Vowel reduction" label="shortening"/>
<link wikidata="Q266273" start="35539" end="35549" title="Semitic root" label="triliteral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35818" end="35835" title="#Verbal extensions" label="verbal extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q165369" start="36091" end="36099" title="apophony" label="apophony"/>
<link wikidata="Q257885" start="36556" end="36566" title="word order" label="word order"/>
<link wikidata="Q166097" start="36639" end="36661" title="Verb–subject–object word order" label="verb-initial languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="36719" end="36739" title="Subject–object–verb word order" label="verb-final languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q651641" start="36837" end="36867" title="subject-verb-object word order" label="subject-verb-object word order"/>
<link wikidata="Q221446" start="36950" end="36963" title="reduplication" label="reduplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q852201" start="36968" end="36978" title="gemination" label="gemination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001077" start="37255" end="37270" title="pluractionality" label="pluractionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q108709" start="38114" end="38124" title="diminutive" label="diminutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="38126" end="38136" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450795" start="38145" end="38156" title="singulative" label="singulative"/>
<link wikidata="Q165369" start="38544" end="38552" title="apophony" label="apophony"/>
<link wikidata="Q878035" start="38572" end="38582" title="epenthesis" label="epenthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098772" start="38601" end="38653" title="broken plural" label="&amp;quot;internal-a&amp;quot; or &amp;quot;broken&amp;quot; plurals"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="38885" end="38896" title="Grammatical case" label="Nouns cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q892132" start="39341" end="39368" title="marked nominative alignment" label="marked nominative alignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="40989" end="40998" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562262" start="41159" end="41172" title="stative verbs" label="stative verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751097" start="42338" end="42363" title="tense-aspect-mood" label="tenses, aspects, or moods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424306" start="42453" end="42463" title="perfective" label="perfective"/>
<link wikidata="Q371427" start="42468" end="42480" title="imperfective" label="imperfective"/>
<link wikidata="Q324982" start="42968" end="42978" title="suppletion" label="suppletive"/>
<link wikidata="Q178034" start="43579" end="43591" title="glottal stop" label="glottal stop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44495" end="44503" title="#Pronouns" label="Pronouns"/>
<link wikidata="Q309997" start="45126" end="45142" title="Joseph Greenberg" label="Joseph Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787727" start="45195" end="45205" title="agent noun" label="agent noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q728001" start="45915" end="45927" title="Derivation (linguistics)" label="derivational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737190" start="45991" end="46000" title="causative" label="causative"/>
<link wikidata="Q211101" start="46018" end="46030" title="middle voice" label="middle voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13475484" start="46046" end="46055" title="reflexive verb" label="reflexive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194697" start="46077" end="46084" title="Passive Voice" label="passive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46664" end="46669" title="Arabic nouns and adjectives#Nisba" label="Nisba"/>
<link wikidata="Q51593" start="48164" end="48179" title="nasal consonant" label="nasal consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51600" start="48224" end="48242" title="sibilant consonant" label="sibilant consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="48639" end="48652" title="Indo-European" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="48656" end="48668" title="Austronesian languages" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="49148" end="49155" title="decimal" label="decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q263994" start="49215" end="49221" title="quinary" label="base-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="49748" end="49757" title="loanword" label="borrowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q513408" start="50045" end="50062" title="Nilotic languages" label="Nilotic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q163629" start="50112" end="50129" title="Ethiopian Semitic" label="Ethiopian Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="51456" end="51476" title="sound correspondence" label="sound correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299011" start="51563" end="51592" title="Afroasiatic phonetic notation" label="Afroasiatic phonetic notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225764" start="51595" end="51611" title="Borean languages" label="Borean languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q207930" start="51614" end="51633" title="Languages of Africa" label="Languages of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624777" start="51636" end="51653" title="Languages of Asia" label="Languages of Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q276314" start="51656" end="51675" title="Nostratic languages" label="Nostratic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q127943" start="52362" end="52381" title="V.M. Illich-Svitych" label="V.M. Illich-Svitych"/>
<link wikidata="Q4088081" start="53100" end="53112" title="Roger Blench" label="Roger Blench"/>
</links>
</doc>
