<doc id="2508" wikidata="Q64418" url="?curid=2508" title="Artillery">
<text>Artillery are ranged weapons that launch munitions far beyond the range and power of infantry firearms. Early artillery development focused on the ability to breach defensive walls and fortifications during sieges, and led to heavy, fairly immobile siege engines. As technology improved, lighter, more mobile field artillery cannons developed for battlefield use. This development continues today; modern self-propelled artillery vehicles are highly mobile weapons of great versatility generally providing the largest share of an army&#x27;s total firepower.

Originally, the word &quot;artillery&quot; referred to any group of soldiers primarily armed with some form of manufactured weapon or armour. Since the introduction of gunpowder and cannon, &quot;artillery&quot; has largely meant cannon, and in contemporary usage, usually refers to shell-firing guns, howitzers, and mortars (collectively called &quot;barrel artillery&quot;, &quot;cannon artillery&quot; or &quot;gun artillery&quot;) and rocket artillery. In common speech, the word &quot;artillery&quot; is often used to refer to individual devices, along with their accessories and fittings, although these assemblages are more properly called &quot;equipment&quot;. However, there is no generally recognized generic term for a gun, howitzer, mortar, and so forth: the United States uses &quot;artillery piece&quot;, but most English-speaking armies use &quot;gun&quot; and &quot;mortar&quot;. The projectiles fired are typically either &quot;shot&quot; (if solid) or &quot;shell&quot; (if not solid). Historically, variants of solid shot including canister, chain shot and grapeshot were also used. &quot;Shell&quot; is a widely used generic term for a projectile, which is a component of munitions.

By association, artillery may also refer to the arm of service that customarily operates such engines. In some armies, the artillery arm has operated field, coastal, anti-aircraft, and anti-tank artillery; in others these have been separate arms, and with some nations coastal has been a naval or marine responsibility.

In the 20th century, target acquisition devices (such as radar) and techniques (such as sound ranging and flash spotting) emerged, primarily for artillery. These are usually utilized by one or more of the artillery arms. The widespread adoption of indirect fire in the early 20th century introduced the need for specialist data for field artillery, notably survey and meteorological, and in some armies, provision of these are the responsibility of the artillery arm. The majority of combat deaths in the Napoleonic Wars, World War I, and World War II were caused by artillery. In 1944, Joseph Stalin said in a speech that artillery was &quot;the god of war&quot;.

==Artillery piece==
Although not called by that name, siege engines performing the role recognizable as artillery have been employed in warfare since antiquity. The first known catapult was developed in Syracuse in 399 BC. Until the introduction of gunpowder into western warfare, artillery was dependent upon mechanical energy, which not only severely limited the kinetic energy of the projectiles, but also required the construction of very large engines to accumulate sufficient energy. A 1st-century BC Roman catapult launching stones achieved a kinetic energy of 16 kilojoules, compared to a mid-19th-century 12-pounder gun, which fired a round, with a kinetic energy of 240 kilojoules, or a 20th-century US battleship that fired a projectile from its main battery with an energy level surpassing 350 megajoules.

From the Middle Ages through most of the modern era, artillery pieces on land were moved by horse-drawn gun carriages. In the contemporary era, artillery pieces and their crew relied on wheeled or tracked vehicles as transportation. These land versions of artillery were dwarfed by railway guns; the largest of these large-calibre guns ever conceived – Project Babylon of the Supergun affair – was theoretically capable of putting a satellite into orbit. Artillery used by naval forces has also changed significantly, with missiles generally replacing guns in surface warfare.

Over the course of military history, projectiles were manufactured from a wide variety of materials, into a wide variety of shapes, using many different methods in which to target structural/defensive works and inflict enemy casualties. The engineering applications for ordnance delivery have likewise changed significantly over time, encompassing some of the most complex and advanced technologies in use today.

In some armies, the weapon of artillery is the projectile, not the equipment that fires it. The process of delivering fire onto the target is called gunnery. The actions involved in operating an artillery piece are collectively called &quot;serving the gun&quot; by the &quot;detachment&quot; or gun crew, constituting either direct or indirect artillery fire. The manner in which gunnery crews (or formations) are employed is called artillery support. At different periods in history, this may refer to weapons designed to be fired from ground-, sea-, and even air-based weapons platforms.

==Crew==
Some armed forces use the term &quot;gunners&quot; for the soldiers and sailors with the primary function of using artillery.

The gunners and their guns are usually grouped in teams called either &quot;crews&quot; or &quot;detachments&quot;. Several such crews and teams with other functions are combined into a unit of artillery, usually called a battery, although sometimes called a company. In gun detachments, each role is numbered, starting with &quot;1&quot; the Detachment Commander, and the highest number being the Coverer, the second-in-command. &quot;Gunner&quot; is also the lowest rank, and junior non-commissioned officers are &quot;Bombardiers&quot; in some artillery arms.

Batteries are roughly equivalent to a company in the infantry, and are combined into larger military organizations for administrative and operational purposes, either battalions or regiments, depending on the army. These may be grouped into brigades; the Russian army also groups some brigades into artillery divisions, and the People&#x27;s Liberation Army has artillery corps.

The term &quot;artillery&quot; also designates a combat arm of most military services when used organizationally to describe units and formations of the national armed forces that operate the weapons.

== Tactics ==

During military operations, field artillery has the role of providing support to other arms in combat or of attacking targets, particularly in-depth. Broadly, these effects fall into two categories, aiming either to suppress or neutralize the enemy, or to cause casualties, damage, and destruction. This is mostly achieved by delivering high-explosive munitions to suppress, or inflict casualties on the enemy from casing fragments and other debris and from blast, or by destroying enemy positions, equipment, and vehicles. Non-lethal munitions, notably smoke, can also suppress or neutralize the enemy by obscuring their view.

Fire may be directed by an artillery observer or another observer, including crewed and uncrewed aircraft, or called onto map coordinates.

Military doctrine has had a significant influence on the core engineering design considerations of artillery ordnance through its history, in seeking to achieve a balance between the delivered volume of fire with ordnance mobility. However, during the modern period, the consideration of protecting the gunners also arose due to the late-19th-century introduction of the new generation of infantry weapons using conoidal bullet, better known as the Minié ball, with a range almost as long as that of field artillery.

The gunners&#x27; increasing proximity to and participation in direct combat against other combat arms and attacks by aircraft made the introduction of a gun shield necessary. The problems of how to employ a fixed or horse-towed gun in mobile warfare necessitated the development of new methods of transporting the artillery into combat. Two distinct forms of artillery were developed: the towed gun, used primarily to attack or defend a fixed-line; and the self-propelled gun, intended to accompany a mobile force and to provide continuous fire support and/or suppression. These influences have guided the development of artillery ordnance, systems, organizations, and operations until the present, with artillery systems capable of providing support at ranges from as little as 100 m to the intercontinental ranges of ballistic missiles. The only combat in which artillery is unable to take part is close-quarters combat, with the possible exception of artillery reconnaissance teams.

==Etymology==
The word as used in the current context originated in the Middle Ages. One suggestion is that it comes from French &quot;atelier&quot;, meaning the place where manual work is done.

Another suggestion is that it originates from the 13th century and the Old French &quot;artillier&quot;, designating craftsmen and manufacturers of all materials and warfare equipments (spears, swords, armor, war machines); and, for the next 250 years, the sense of the word &quot;artillery&quot; covered all forms of military weapons. Hence, the naming of the Honourable Artillery Company, which was essentially an infantry unit until the 19th century.

Another suggestion is that it comes from the Italian &quot;arte de tirare&quot; (art of shooting), coined by one of the first theorists on the use of artillery, Niccolò Tartaglia. The term was used by Girolamo Ruscelli (died 1566) in his &quot;Precepts of Modern Militia&quot; published posthumously in 1572.

==History==
Mechanical systems used for throwing ammunition in ancient warfare, also known as &quot;engines of war&quot;, like the catapult, onager, trebuchet, and ballista, are also referred to by military historians as artillery.

===Medieval===
During medieval times, more types of artillery were developed, most notably the counterweight trebuchet. Traction trebuchets, using manpower to launch projectiles, have been used in ancient China since the 4th century as anti-personnel weapons. The much more powerful counterweight trebuchet was invented in the eastern Mediterranean region in the 12th century, with the earliest definite attestation in 1187.

===Invention of gunpowder===

Early Chinese artillery had vase-like shapes. This includes the &quot;long range awe inspiring&quot; cannon dated from 1350 and found in the 14th century Ming dynasty treatise &quot;Huolongjing&quot;. With the development of better metallurgy techniques, later cannons abandoned the vase shape of early Chinese artillery. This change can be seen in the bronze &quot;thousand ball thunder cannon&quot;, an early example of field artillery. These small, crude weapons diffused into the Middle East (the &quot;madfaa&quot;) and reached Europe in the 13th century, in a very limited manner.

In Asia, Mongols adopted the Chinese artillery and used it effectively in the great conquest. By the late 14th century, Chinese rebels used organized artillery and cavalry to push Mongols out.

As small smooth-bore barrels, these were initially cast in iron or bronze around a core, with the first drilled bore ordnance recorded in operation near Seville in 1247. They fired lead, iron, or stone balls, sometimes large arrows and on occasions simply handfuls of whatever scrap came to hand. During the Hundred Years&#x27; War, these weapons became more common, initially as the bombard and later the cannon. Cannons were always muzzle-loaders. While there were many early attempts at breech-loading designs, a lack of engineering knowledge rendered these even more dangerous to use than muzzle-loaders.

===Expansion of use===

In 1415, the Portuguese invaded the Mediterranean port town of Ceuta. While it is difficult to confirm the use of firearms in the siege of the city, it is known the Portuguese defended it thereafter with firearms, namely &quot;bombardas&quot;, &quot;colebratas&quot;, and &quot;falconetes&quot;. In 1419, Sultan Abu Sa&#x27;id led an army to reconquer the fallen city, and Marinids brought cannons and used them in the assault on Ceuta. Finally, hand-held firearms and riflemen appear in Morocco, in 1437, in an expedition against the people of Tangiers. It is clear these weapons had developed into several different forms, from small guns to large artillery pieces.

The artillery revolution in Europe caught on during the Hundred Years&#x27; War and changed the way that battles were fought. In the preceding decades, the English had even used a gunpowder-like weapon in military campaigns against the Scottish. However, at this time, the cannons used in battle were very small and not particularly powerful. Cannons were only useful for the defense of a castle, as demonstrated at Breteuil in 1356, when the besieged English used a cannon to destroy an attacking French assault tower. By the end of the 14th century, cannons were only powerful enough to knock in roofs, and could not penetrate castle walls.

However, a major change occurred between 1420 and 1430, when artillery became much more powerful and could now batter strongholds and fortresses quite efficiently. The English, French, and Burgundians all advanced in military technology, and as a result the traditional advantage that went to the defense in a siege was lost. Cannons during this period were elongated, and the recipe for gunpowder was improved to make it three times as powerful as before. These changes led to the increased power in the artillery weapons of the time.
Joan of Arc encountered gunpowder weaponry several times. When she led the French against the English at the Battle of Tourelles, in 1430, she faced heavy gunpowder fortifications, and yet her troops prevailed in that battle. In addition, she led assaults against the English-held towns of Jargeau, Meung, and Beaugency, all with the support of large artillery units. When she led the assault on Paris, Joan faced stiff artillery fire, especially from the suburb of St. Denis, which ultimately led to her defeat in this battle. In April 1430, she went to battle against the Burgundians, whose support was purchased by the English. At this time, the Burgundians had the strongest and largest gunpowder arsenal among the European powers, and yet the French, under Joan of Arc&#x27;s leadership, were able to beat back the Burgundians and defend themselves. As a result, most of the battles of the Hundred Years&#x27; War that Joan of Arc participated in were fought with gunpowder artillery.
The army of Mehmet the Conqueror, which conquered Constantinople in 1453, included both artillery and foot soldiers armed with gunpowder weapons. The Ottomans brought to the siege sixty-nine guns in fifteen separate batteries and trained them at the walls of the city. The barrage of Ottoman cannon fire lasted forty days, and they are estimated to have fired 19,320 times. Artillery also played a decisive role in the Battle of St. Jakob an der Birs of 1444. Early cannon were not always reliable; King James II of Scotland was killed by the accidental explosion of one of his own cannon, imported from Flanders, at the siege of Roxburgh Castle in 1460.

The able use of artillery supported to a large measure the expansion and defense of the Portuguese Empire, as it was a necessary tool that allowed the Portuguese to face overwhelming odds both on land and sea from Morocco to Asia. In great sieges and in sea battles, the Portuguese demonstrated a level of proficiency in the use of artillery after the beginning of the 16th century unequalled by contemporary European neighbours, in part due to the experience gained in intense fighting in Morocco, which served as a proving ground for artillery and its practical application, and made Portugal a forerunner in gunnery for decades. During the reign of King Manuel (1495–1521) at least 2017 cannon were sent to Morocco for garrison defense, with more than 3000 cannon estimated to have been required during that 26-year period. An especially noticeable division between siege guns and anti-personnel guns enhanced the use and effectiveness of Portuguese firearms above contemporary powers, making cannon the most essential element in the Portuguese arsenal.
The three major classes of Portuguese artillery were anti-personnel guns with a high borelength (including: &quot;rebrodequim&quot;, &quot;berço&quot;, &quot;falconete&quot;, &quot;falcão&quot;, &quot;sacre&quot;, &quot;áspide&quot;, &quot;cão&quot;, &quot;serpentina&quot; and &quot;passavolante&quot;); bastion guns which could batter fortifications (&quot;camelete&quot;, &quot;leão&quot;, &quot;pelicano&quot;, &quot;basilisco&quot;, &quot;águia&quot;, &quot;camelo&quot;, &quot;roqueira&quot;, &quot;urso&quot;); and howitzers that fired large stone cannonballs in an elevated arch, weighted up to 4000 pounds and could fire incendiary devices, such as a hollow iron ball filled with pitch and fuse, designed to be fired at close range and burst on contact. The most popular in Portuguese arsenals was the &quot;berço&quot;, a 5 cm, one pounder bronze breech-loading cannon that weighted 150 kg with an effective range of 600 meters.

A tactical innovation the Portuguese introduced in fort defense was the use of combinations of projectiles against massed assaults. Although canister shot had been developed in the early 15th century, the Portuguese were the first to employ it extensively, and Portuguese engineers invented a canister round which consisted of a thin lead case filled with iron pellets, that broke up at the muzzle and scattered its contents in a narrow pattern. An innovation which Portugal adopted in advance of other European powers was fuse-delayed action shells, and were commonly used in 1505. Although dangerous, their effectiveness meant a sixth of all rounds used by the Portuguese in Morocco were of the fused-shell variety.
The new Ming Dynasty established the &quot;Divine Engine Battalion&quot; (神机营), which specialized in various types of artillery. Light cannons and cannons with multiple volleys were developed. In a campaign to suppress a local minority rebellion near today&#x27;s Burmese border, &quot;the Ming army used a 3-line method of arquebuses/muskets to destroy an elephant formation&quot;.

When the Portuguese and Spanish arrived at Southeast Asia, they found that the local kingdoms were already using cannons. Portuguese and Spanish invaders were unpleasantly surprised and even outgunned on occasion. Duarte Barbosa ca. 1514 said that the inhabitants of Java were great masters in casting artillery and very good artillerymen. They made many one-pounder cannons (cetbang or rentaka), long muskets, &quot;spingarde&quot; (arquebus), &quot;schioppi&quot; (hand cannon), Greek fire, guns (cannons), and other fire-works. In all aspects the Javanese were considered excellent in casting artillery, and in the knowledge of using it. In 1513, the Javanese fleet led by Pati Unus sailed to attack Portuguese Malacca &quot;with much artillery made in Java, for the Javanese are skilled in founding and casting, and in all works in iron, over and above what they have in India&quot;. By the early 16th century, the Javanese had already started locally-producing large guns, which were dubbed &quot;sacred cannon[s]&quot; or &quot;holy cannon[s]&quot; and have survived up to the present day - though in limited numbers. These cannons varied between 180 and 260 pounders, weighing anywhere between 3–8 tons, measuring between 3–6 m.

Between 1593 and 1597, about 200,000 Korean and Chinese troops which fought against Japan in Korea actively used heavy artillery in both siege and field combat. Korean forces mounted artillery in ships as naval guns, providing an advantage against Japanese navy which used &quot;Kunikuzushi&quot; (国崩し – Japanese breech-loading swivel gun) and &quot;Ōzutsu&quot; (大筒 – large size Tanegashima) as their largest firearms.

===Smoothbores===
Bombards were of value mainly in sieges. A famous Turkish example used at the siege of Constantinople in 1453 weighed 19 tons, took 200 men and sixty oxen to emplace, and could fire just seven times a day. The Fall of Constantinople was perhaps &quot;the first event of supreme importance whose result was determined by the use of artillery&quot; when the huge bronze cannons of Mehmed II breached the city&#x27;s walls, ending the Byzantine Empire, according to Sir Charles Oman.

Bombards developed in Europe were massive smoothbore weapons distinguished by their lack of a field carriage, immobility once emplaced, highly individual design, and noted unreliability (in 1460 James II, King of Scots, was killed when one exploded at the siege of Roxburgh). Their large size precluded the barrels being cast and they were constructed out of metal staves or rods bound together with hoops like a barrel, giving their name to the gun barrel.

The use of the word &quot;cannon&quot; marks the introduction in the 15th century of a dedicated field carriage with axle, trail and animal-drawn limber—this produced mobile field pieces that could move and support an army in action, rather than being found only in the siege and static defenses. The reduction in the size of the barrel was due to improvements in both iron technology and gunpowder manufacture, while the development of trunnions—projections at the side of the cannon as an integral part of the cast—allowed the barrel to be fixed to a more movable base, and also made raising or lowering the barrel much easier.
The first land-based mobile weapon is usually credited to Jan Žižka, who deployed his oxen-hauled cannon during the Hussite Wars of Bohemia (1418–1424). However, cannons were still large and cumbersome. With the rise of musketry in the 16th century, cannon were largely (though not entirely) displaced from the battlefield—the cannon were too slow and cumbersome to be used and too easily lost to a rapid enemy advance.

The combining of shot and powder into a single unit, a cartridge, occurred in the 1620s with a simple fabric bag, and was quickly adopted by all nations. It speeded loading and made it safer, but unexpelled bag fragments were an additional fouling in the gun barrel and a new tool—a worm—was introduced to remove them. Gustavus Adolphus is identified as the general who made cannon an effective force on the battlefield—pushing the development of much lighter and smaller weapons and deploying them in far greater numbers than previously. The outcome of battles was still determined by the clash of infantry.

Shells, explosive-filled fused projectiles, were in use by the 15th century. The development of specialized pieces—shipboard artillery, howitzers and mortars—was also begun in this period. More esoteric designs, like the multi-barrel &quot;ribauldequin&quot; (known as &quot;organ guns&quot;), were also produced.

The 1650 book by Kazimierz Siemienowicz &quot;Artis Magnae Artilleriae pars prima&quot; was one of the most important contemporary publications on the subject of artillery. For over two centuries this work was used in Europe as a basic artillery manual.

One of the most significant effects of artillery during this period was however somewhat more indirect—by easily reducing to rubble any medieval-type fortification or city wall (some which had stood since Roman times), it abolished millennia of siege-warfare strategies and styles of fortification building. This led, among other things, to a frenzy of new bastion-style fortifications to be built all over Europe and in its colonies, but also had a strong integrating effect on emerging nation-states, as kings were able to use their newfound artillery superiority to force any local dukes or lords to submit to their will, setting the stage for the absolutist kingdoms to come.

Modern rocket artillery can trace its heritage back to the Mysorean rockets of Mysore. Their first recorded use was in 1780 during the battles of the Second, Third and Fourth Mysore Wars. The wars fought between the British East India Company and the Kingdom of Mysore in India made use of the rockets as a weapon. In the Battle of Pollilur, the Siege of Seringapatam (1792) and in Battle of Seringapatam in 1799, these rockets were used with considerable effect against the British. After the wars, several Mysore rockets were sent to England, but experiments with heavier payloads were unsuccessful. In 1804 William Congreve, considering the Mysorian rockets to have too short a range (less than 1,000 yards) developed rockets in numerous sizes with ranges up to 3,000 yards and eventually utilizing iron casing as the Congreve rocket which were used effectively during the Napoleonic Wars and the War of 1812.

===Napoleonic===

With the Napoleonic Wars, artillery experienced changes in both physical design and operation. Rather than being overseen by &quot;mechanics&quot;, artillery was viewed as its own service branch with the capability of dominating the battlefield. The success of the French artillery companies was at least in part due to the presence of specially trained artillery officers leading and coordinating during the chaos of battle. Napoleon, himself a former artillery officer, perfected the tactic of massed artillery batteries unleashed upon a critical point in his enemies&#x27; line as a prelude to a decisive infantry and cavalry assault.

Physically, cannons continued to become smaller and lighter. During the Seven Years War, King Frederick II of Prussia used these advances to deploy horse artillery that could move throughout the battlefield. Frederick also introduced the reversible iron ramrod, which was much more resistant to breakage than older wooden designs. The reversibility aspect also helped increase the rate of fire, since a soldier would no longer have to worry about what end of the ramrod they were using.

Jean-Baptiste de Gribeauval, a French artillery engineer, introduced the standardization of cannon design in the mid-18th century. He developed a 6-inch (150 mm) field howitzer whose gun barrel, carriage assembly and ammunition specifications were made uniform for all French cannons. The standardized interchangeable parts of these cannons down to the nuts, bolts and screws made their mass production and repair much easier. While the Gribeauval system made for more efficient production and assembly, the carriages used were heavy and the gunners were forced to march on foot (instead of riding on the limber and gun as in the British system). Each cannon was named for the weight of its projectiles, giving us variants such as 4, 8, and 12, indicating the weight in pounds. The projectiles themselves included solid balls or canister containing lead bullets or other material. These canister shots acted as massive shotguns, peppering the target with hundreds of projectiles at close range. The solid balls, known as round shot, was most effective when fired at shoulder-height across a flat, open area. The ball would tear through the ranks of the enemy or bounce along the ground breaking legs and ankles.

===Modern===

The development of modern artillery occurred in the mid to late 19th century as a result of the convergence of various improvements in the underlying technology. Advances in metallurgy allowed for the construction of breech-loading rifled guns that could fire at a much greater muzzle velocity.

After the British artillery was shown up in the Crimean War as having barely changed since the Napoleonic Wars, the industrialist William Armstrong was awarded a contract by the government to design a new piece of artillery. Production started in 1855 at the Elswick Ordnance Company and the Royal Arsenal at Woolwich, and the outcome was the revolutionary Armstrong Gun, which marked the birth of modern artillery. Three of its features particularly stand out.
First, the piece was rifled, which allowed for a much more accurate and powerful action. Although rifling had been tried on small arms since the 15th century, the necessary machinery to accurately rifle artillery was not available until the mid-19th century. Martin von Wahrendorff, and Joseph Whitworth independently produced rifled cannon in the 1840s, but it was Armstrong&#x27;s gun that was first to see widespread use during the Crimean War. The cast iron shell of the Armstrong gun was similar in shape to a Minié ball and had a thin lead coating which made it fractionally larger than the gun&#x27;s bore and which engaged with the gun&#x27;s rifling grooves to impart spin to the shell. This spin, together with the elimination of windage as a result of the tight fit, enabled the gun to achieve greater range and accuracy than existing smooth-bore muzzle-loaders with a smaller powder charge.
His gun was also a breech-loader. Although attempts at breech-loading mechanisms had been made since medieval times, the essential engineering problem was that the mechanism could not withstand the explosive charge. It was only with the advances in metallurgy and precision engineering capabilities during the Industrial Revolution that Armstrong was able to construct a viable solution. The gun combined all the properties that make up an effective artillery piece. The gun was mounted on a carriage in such a way as to return the gun to firing position after the recoil.

What made the gun really revolutionary lay in the technique of the construction of the gun barrel that allowed it to withstand much more powerful explosive forces. The &quot;built-up&quot; method involved assembling the barrel with wrought-iron (later mild steel was used) tubes of successively smaller diameter. The tube would then be heated to allow it to expand and fit over the previous tube. When it cooled the gun would contract although not back to its original size, which allowed an even pressure along the walls of the gun which was directed inward against the outward forces that the gun&#x27;s firing exerted on the barrel.

Another innovative feature, more usually associated with 20th-century guns, was what Armstrong called its &quot;grip&quot;, which was essentially a squeeze bore; the 6 inches of the bore at the muzzle end was of slightly smaller diameter, which centered the shell before it left the barrel and at the same time slightly swaged down its lead coating, reducing its diameter and slightly improving its ballistic qualities.
Armstrong&#x27;s system was adopted in 1858, initially for &quot;special service in the field&quot; and initially he produced only smaller artillery pieces, 6-pounder (2.5 in/64 mm) mountain or light field guns, 9-pounder (3 in/76 mm) guns for horse artillery, and 12-pounder (3 inches /76 mm) field guns.

The first cannon to contain all &#x27;modern&#x27; features is generally considered to be the French 75 of 1897. The gun used cased ammunition, was breech-loading, had modern sights, and a self-contained firing mechanism. It was the first field gun to include a hydro-pneumatic recoil mechanism, which kept the gun&#x27;s trail and wheels perfectly still during the firing sequence. Since it did not need to be re-aimed after each shot, the crew could fire as soon as the barrel returned to its resting position. In typical use, the French 75 could deliver fifteen rounds per minute on its target, either shrapnel or melinite high-explosive, up to about 5 miles (8,500 m) away. Its firing rate could even reach close to 30 rounds per minute, albeit only for a very short time and with a highly experienced crew. These were rates that contemporary bolt action rifles could not match.

====Indirect fire====

Indirect fire, the firing of a projectile without relying on direct line of sight between the gun and the target, possibly dates back to the 16th century. Early battlefield use of indirect fire may have occurred at Paltzig in July 1759, when the Russian artillery fired over the tops of trees, and at the Battle of Waterloo, where a battery of the Royal Horse Artillery fired shrapnel indirectly against advancing French troops.

In 1882, Russian Lieutenant Colonel KG Guk published &quot;Indirect Fire for Field Artillery&quot;, which provided a practical method of using aiming points for indirect fire by describing, &quot;all the essentials of aiming points, crest clearance, and corrections to fire by an observer&quot;.

A few years later, the Richtfläche (lining-plane) sight was invented in Germany and provided a means of indirect laying in azimuth, complementing the clinometers for indirect laying in elevation which already existed. Despite conservative opposition within the German army, indirect fire was adopted as doctrine by the 1890s. In the early 1900s, Goertz in Germany developed an optical sight for azimuth laying. It quickly replaced the lining-plane; in English, it became the &#x27;Dial Sight&#x27; (UK) or &#x27;Panoramic Telescope&#x27; (US).

The British halfheartedly experimented with indirect fire techniques since the 1890s, but with the onset of the Boer War, they were the first to apply the theory in practice in 1899, although they had to improvise without a lining-plane sight.

In the next 15 years leading up to World War I, the techniques of indirect fire became available for all types of artillery. Indirect fire was the defining characteristic of 20th-century artillery and led to undreamt of changes in the amount of artillery, its tactics, organisation, and techniques, most of which occurred during World War I.

An implication of indirect fire and improving guns was increasing range between gun and target, this increased the time of flight and the vertex of the trajectory. The result was decreasing accuracy (the increasing distance between the target and the mean point of impact of the shells aimed at it) caused by the increasing effects of non-standard conditions. Indirect firing data was based on standard conditions including a specific muzzle velocity, zero wind, air temperature and density, and propellant temperature. In practice, this standard combination of conditions almost never existed, they varied throughout the day and day to day, and the greater the time of flight, the greater the inaccuracy. An added complication was the need for survey to accurately fix the coordinates of the gun position and provide accurate orientation for the guns. Of course, targets had to be accurately located, but by 1916, air photo interpretation techniques enabled this, and ground survey techniques could sometimes be used.
In 1914, the methods of correcting firing data for the actual conditions were often convoluted, and the availability of data about actual conditions was rudimentary or non-existent, the assumption was that fire would always be ranged (adjusted). British heavy artillery worked energetically to progressively solve all these problems from late 1914 onwards, and by early 1918, had effective processes in place for both field and heavy artillery. These processes enabled &#x27;map-shooting&#x27;, later called &#x27;predicted fire&#x27;; it meant that effective fire could be delivered against an accurately located target without ranging. Nevertheless, the mean point of impact was still some tens of yards from the target-centre aiming point. It was not precision fire, but it was good enough for concentrations and barrages. These processes remain in use into the 21st century with refinements to calculations enabled by computers and improved data capture about non-standard conditions.

The British Major General Henry Hugh Tudor pioneered armour and artillery cooperation at the breakthrough Battle of Cambrai. The improvements in providing and using data for non-standard conditions (propellant temperature, muzzle velocity, wind, air temperature, and barometric pressure) were developed by the major combatants throughout the war and enabled effective predicted fire. The effectiveness of this was demonstrated by the British in 1917 (at Cambrai) and by Germany the following year (Operation Michael).

Major General J.B.A. Bailey, British Army (retired) wrote:
An estimated 75,000 French soldiers were casualties of friendly artillery fire in the four years of World War I.

===Precision-guidance===

Modern artillery is most obviously distinguished by its long range, firing an explosive shell or rocket and a mobile carriage for firing and transport. However, its most important characteristic is the use of indirect fire, whereby the firing equipment is aimed without seeing the target through its sights. Indirect fire emerged at the beginning of the 20th century and was greatly enhanced by the development of predicted fire methods in World War I. However, indirect fire was area fire; it was and is not suitable for destroying point targets; its primary purpose is area suppression. Nevertheless, by the late 1970s precision-guided munitions started to appear, notably the US 155 mm Copperhead and its Soviet 152 mm Krasnopol equivalent that had success in Indian service. These relied on laser designation to &#x27;illuminate&#x27; the target that the shell homed onto. However, in the early 21st century, the Global Positioning System (GPS) enabled relatively cheap and accurate guidance for shells and missiles, notably the US 155 mm Excalibur and the 227 mm GMLRS rocket. The introduction of these led to a new issue, the need for very accurate three dimensional target coordinates—the mensuration process.
Weapons covered by the term &#x27;modern artillery&#x27; include &quot;cannon&quot; artillery (such as howitzer, mortar, and field gun) and rocket artillery. Certain smaller-caliber mortars are more properly designated small arms rather than artillery, albeit indirect-fire small arms. This term also came to include coastal artillery which traditionally defended coastal areas against seaborne attack and controlled the passage of ships. With the advent of powered flight at the start of the 20th century, artillery also included ground-based anti-aircraft batteries.

The term &quot;artillery&quot; has traditionally not been used for projectiles with internal guidance systems, preferring the term &quot;missilery&quot;, though some modern artillery units employ surface-to-surface missiles. Advances in terminal guidance systems for small munitions has allowed large-caliber guided projectiles to be developed, blurring this distinction. &quot;See Long Range Precision Fires (LRPF), Joint terminal attack controller&quot;

==Ammunition==

One of the most important roles of logistics is the supply of munitions as a primary type of artillery consumable, their storage (ammunition dump, arsenal, magazine
) and the provision of fuzes, detonators and warheads at the point where artillery troops will assemble the charge, projectile, bomb or shell.

A round of artillery ammunition comprises four components:
# Fuze
# Projectile
# Propellant
# Primer

===Fuzes===

Fuzes are the devices that initiate an artillery projectile, either to detonate its High Explosive (HE) filling or eject its cargo (illuminating flare or smoke canisters being examples). The official military spelling is &quot;fuze&quot;. Broadly there are four main types:
* impact (including graze and delay)
* mechanical time including airburst
* proximity sensor including airburst
* programmable electronic detonation including airburst

Most artillery fuzes are nose fuzes. However, base fuzes have been used with armor-piercing shells and for squash head (High-Explosive Squash Head (HESH) or High Explosive, Plastic (HEP) anti-tank shells). At least one nuclear shell and its non-nuclear spotting version also used a multi-deck mechanical time fuze fitted into its base.

Impact fuzes were, and in some armies remain, the standard fuze for HE projectiles. Their default action is normally &#x27;superquick&#x27;, some have had a &#x27;graze&#x27; action which allows them to penetrate light cover and others have &#x27;delay&#x27;. Delay fuzes allow the shell to penetrate the ground before exploding. Armor or Concrete-Piercing (AP or CP) fuzes are specially hardened. During World War I and later, ricochet fire with delay or graze fuzed HE shells, fired with a flat angle of descent, was used to achieve airburst.

HE shells can be fitted with other fuzes. Airburst fuzes usually have a combined airburst and impact function. However, until the introduction of proximity fuzes, the airburst function was mostly used with cargo munitions—for example, shrapnel, illumination, and smoke. The larger calibers of anti-aircraft artillery are almost always used airburst. Airburst fuzes have to have the fuze length (running time) set on them. This is done just before firing using either a wrench or a fuze setter pre-set to the required fuze length.

Early airburst fuzes used igniferous timers which lasted into the second half of the 20th century. Mechanical time fuzes appeared in the early part of the century. These required a means of powering them. The Thiel mechanism used a spring and escapement (i.e. &#x27;clockwork&#x27;), Junghans used centrifugal force and gears, and Dixi used centrifugal force and balls. From about 1980, electronic time fuzes started replacing mechanical ones for use with cargo munitions.

Proximity fuzes have been of two types: photo-electric or radar. The former was not very successful and seems only to have been used with British anti-aircraft artillery &#x27;unrotated projectiles&#x27; (rockets) in World War II. Radar proximity fuzes were a big improvement over the mechanical (time) fuzes which they replaced. Mechanical time fuzes required an accurate calculation of their running time, which was affected by non-standard conditions. With HE (requiring a burst 20 to above the ground), if this was very slightly wrong the rounds would either hit the ground or burst too high. Accurate running time was less important with cargo munitions that burst much higher.

The first radar proximity fuzes (perhaps originally codenamed &#x27;VT&#x27; and later called Variable Time (VT)) were invented by the British and developed by the US and initially used against aircraft in World War II. Their ground use was delayed for fear of the enemy recovering &#x27;blinds&#x27; (artillery shells which failed to detonate) and copying the fuze. The first proximity fuzes were designed to detonate about above the ground. These air-bursts are much more lethal against personnel than ground bursts because they deliver a greater proportion of useful fragments and deliver them into terrain where a prone soldier would be protected from ground bursts.

However, proximity fuzes can suffer premature detonation because of the moisture in heavy rain clouds. This led to &#x27;Controlled Variable Time&#x27; (CVT) after World War II. These fuzes have a mechanical timer that switched on the radar about 5 seconds before expected impact, they also detonated on impact.

The proximity fuze emerged on the battlefields of Europe in late December 1944. They have become known as the U.S. Artillery&#x27;s &quot;Christmas present&quot;, and were much appreciated when they arrived during the Battle of the Bulge. They were also used to great effect in anti-aircraft projectiles in the Pacific against &quot;kamikaze&quot; as well as in Britain against V-1 flying bombs.

Electronic multi-function fuzes started to appear around 1980. Using solid-state electronics they were relatively cheap and reliable, and became the standard fitted fuze in operational ammunition stocks in some western armies. The early versions were often limited to proximity airburst, albeit with height of burst options, and impact. Some offered a go/no-go functional test through the fuze setter.

Later versions introduced induction fuze setting and testing instead of physically placing a fuze setter on the fuze. The latest, such as Junghan&#x27;s DM84U provide options giving, superquick, delay, a choice of proximity heights of burst, time and a choice of foliage penetration depths.

===Projectiles===
The projectile is the munition or &quot;bullet&quot; fired downrange. This may be an explosive device. Projectiles have traditionally been classified as &quot;shot&quot; or &quot;shell&quot;, the former being solid and the latter having some form of &quot;payload&quot;.

Shells can be divided into three configurations: bursting, base ejection or nose ejection. The latter is sometimes called the shrapnel configuration. The most modern is base ejection, which was introduced in World War I. Base and nose ejection are almost always used with airburst fuzes. Bursting shells use various types of fuze depending on the nature of the payload and the tactical need at the time.

Payloads have included:
* Bursting: high-explosive, white phosphorus, coloured marker, chemical, nuclear devices; high-explosive anti-tank and canister may be considered special types of bursting shell.
* Nose ejection: shrapnel, star, incendiary and flechette (a more modern version of shrapnel).
* Base ejection: Dual-Purpose Improved Conventional Munition bomblets, which arm themselves and function after a set number of rotations after having been ejected from the projectile (this produces unexploded sub-munitions, or &quot;duds&quot;, which remain dangerous), scatterable mines, illuminating, coloured flare, smoke, incendiary, propaganda, chaff (foil to jam radars) and modern exotics such as electronic payloads and sensor-fuzed munitions.

===Stabilization===
* Rifled: Artillery projectiles have traditionally been spin-stabilised, meaning that they spin in flight so that gyroscopic forces prevent them from tumbling. Spin is induced by gun barrels having rifling, which engages a soft metal band around the projectile, called a &quot;driving band&quot; (UK) or &quot;rotating band&quot; (U.S.). The driving band is usually made of copper, but synthetic materials have been used.
* Smoothbore/fin-stabilized: In modern artillery, smoothbore barrels have been used mostly by mortars. These projectiles use fins in the airflow at their rear to maintain correct orientation. The primary benefits over rifled barrels is reduced barrel wear, longer ranges that can be achieved (due to the reduced loss of energy to friction and gas escaping around the projectile via the rifling) and larger explosive cores for a given caliber artillery due to less metal needing to be used to form the case of the projectile because of less force applied to the shell from the non-rifled sides of the barrel of smooth bore guns.
* Rifled/fin-stabilized: A combination of the above can be used, where the barrel is rifled, but the projectile also has deployable fins for stabilization, guidance or gliding.

===Propellant===

Most forms of artillery require a propellant to propel the projectile to the target. Propellant is always a low explosive, which means it deflagrates, rather than detonating like high explosives. The shell is accelerated to a high velocity in a very short time by the rapid generation of gas from the burning propellant. This high pressure is achieved by burning the propellant in a contained area, either the chamber of a gun barrel or the combustion chamber of a rocket motor.

Until the late 19th century, the only available propellant was black powder. It had many disadvantages as a propellant; it has relatively low power, requiring large amounts of powder to fire projectiles, and created thick clouds of white smoke that would obscure the targets, betray the positions of guns, and make aiming impossible. In 1846, nitrocellulose (also known as guncotton) was discovered, and the high explosive nitroglycerin was discovered at nearly the same time. Nitrocellulose was significantly more powerful than black powder, and was smokeless. Early guncotton was unstable, however, and burned very fast and hot, leading to greatly increased barrel wear. Widespread introduction of smokeless powder would wait until the advent of the double-base powders, which combine nitrocellulose and nitroglycerin to produce powerful, smokeless, stable propellant.

Many other formulations were developed in the following decades, generally trying to find the optimum characteristics of a good artillery propellant – low temperature, high energy, non-corrosive, highly stable, cheap, and easy to manufacture in large quantities. Modern gun propellants are broadly divided into three classes: single-base propellants that are mainly or entirely nitrocellulose based, double-base propellants consisting of a combination of nitrocellulose and nitroglycerin, and triple base composed of a combination of nitrocellulose and nitroglycerin and nitroguanidine.

Artillery shells fired from a barrel can be assisted to greater range in three ways:
* Rocket-assisted projectiles enhance and sustain the projectile&#x27;s velocity by providing additional &#x27;push&#x27; from a small rocket motor that is part of the projectile&#x27;s base.
* Base bleed uses a small pyrotechnic charge at the base of the projectile to introduce sufficient combustion products into the low-pressure region behind the base of the projectile responsible for a large proportion of the drag.
* Ramjet-assisted, similar to rocket-assisted, but using a ramjet instead of a rocket motor; it is anticipated that a ramjet-assisted 120-mm mortar shell could reach a range of .

Propelling charges for barrel artillery can be provided either as cartridge bags or in metal cartridge cases. Generally, anti-aircraft artillery and smaller-caliber (up to 3&quot; or 76.2 mm) guns use metal cartridge cases that include the round and propellant, similar to a modern rifle cartridge. This simplifies loading and is necessary for very high rates of fire. Bagged propellant allows the amount of powder to be raised or lowered, depending on the range to the target. It also makes handling of larger shells easier. Cases and bags require totally different types of breech. A metal case holds an integral primer to initiate the propellant and provides the gas seal to prevent the gases leaking out of the breech; this is called obturation. With bagged charges, the breech itself provides obturation and holds the primer. In either case, the primer is usually percussion, but electrical is also used, and laser ignition is emerging. Modern 155 mm guns have a primer magazine fitted to their breech.
Artillery ammunition has four classifications according to use:
* Service: ammunition used in live fire training or for wartime use in a combat zone. Also known as &quot;warshot&quot; ammunition.
* Practice: Ammunition with a non- or minimally-explosive projectile that mimics the characteristics (range, accuracy) of live rounds for use under training conditions. Practice artillery ammunition often utilizes a colored-smoke-generating bursting charge for marking purposes in place of the normal high-explosive charge.
* Dummy: Ammunition with an inert warhead, inert primer, and no propellant; used for training or display.
* Blank: Ammunition with live primer, greatly reduced propellant charge (typically black powder), and no projectile; used for training, demonstration or ceremonial use.

==Field artillery system==

Because modern field artillery mostly uses indirect fire, the guns have to be part of a system that enables them to attack targets invisible to them, in accordance with the combined arms plan.

The main functions in the field artillery system are:
* Communications
* Command: authority to allocate resources;
* Target acquisition: detect, identify and deduce the location of targets;
* Control: authority to decide which targets to attack and allot fire units to the attack;
* Computation of firing data – to deliver fire from a fire unit onto its target;
* Fire units: guns, launchers or mortars grouped together;
* Specialist services: produce data to support the production of accurate firing data;
* Logistic services: to provide combat supplies, particularly ammunition, and equipment support.

All these calculations to produce a quadrant elevation (or range) and azimuth were done manually using instruments, tabulated, data of the moment, and approximations until battlefield computers started appearing in the 1960s and 1970s. While some early calculators copied the manual method (typically substituting polynomials for tabulated data), computers use a different approach. They simulate a shell&#x27;s trajectory by &#x27;flying&#x27; it in short steps and applying data about the conditions affecting the trajectory at each step. This simulation is repeated until it produces a quadrant elevation and azimuth that lands the shell within the required &#x27;closing&#x27; distance of the target coordinates.
NATO has a standard ballistic model for computer calculations and has expanded the scope of this into the NATO Armaments Ballistic Kernel (NABK) within the SG2 Shareable (Fire Control) Software Suite (S4).

===Logistics===
Supply of artillery ammunition has always been a major component of military logistics. Up until World War I some armies made artillery responsible for all forward ammunition supply because the load of small arms ammunition was trivial compared to artillery. Different armies use different approaches to ammunition supply, which can vary with the nature of operations. Differences include where the logistic service transfers artillery ammunition to artillery, the amount of ammunition carried in units and extent to which stocks are held at unit or battery level. A key difference is whether supply is &#x27;push&#x27; or &#x27;pull&#x27;. In the former the &#x27;pipeline&#x27; keeps pushing ammunition into formations or units at a defined rate. In the latter units fire as tactically necessary and replenish to maintain or reach their authorised holding (which can vary), so the logistic system has to be able to cope with surge and slack.

==Classification==

Artillery types can be categorised in several ways, for example by type or size of weapon or ordnance, by role or by organizational arrangements.

===Types of ordnance===
The types of cannon artillery are generally distinguished by the velocity at which they fire projectiles.
Types of artillery:

* Cannon: The oldest type of artillery with direct firing trajectory.
* Bombard: A type of a large calibre, muzzle-loading artillery piece, a cannon or mortar used during sieges to shoot round stone projectiles at the walls of enemy fortifications.
* Falconet was a type of light cannon developed in the late 15th century that fired a smaller shot than the similar falcon.
* Swivel gun is a type of small cannon mounted on a swiveling stand or fork which allows a very wide arc of movement. Camel mounted swivel guns called zamburak were used by the Gunpowder Empires as self-propelled artillery. 
* Volley gun is a gun with multiple single-shot barrels that volley fired simultaneously or sequentially in quick succession. Although capable of unleashing intense firepower, volley guns differ from modern machine guns in that they lack autoloading and automatic fire mechanisms 
* Siege artillery: Large-caliber artillery that have limited mobility with indirect firing trajectory, which was used to bombard targets at long distances. 
**Large-calibre artillery.
* Field artillery: Mobile weapons used to support armies in the field. Subcategories include:
** Infantry support guns: Directly support infantry units.
** Mountain guns: Lightweight guns that can be disassembled and transported through difficult terrain.
** Field guns: Capable of long-range direct fires.
** Howitzers: Capable of high-angle fire, they are most often employed for indirect-fire.
** Gun-howitzers: Capable of high or low-angle fire with a longer barrel.
** Mortars: Typically muzzle-loaded, short-barreled, high-trajectory weapons designed primarily for an indirect-fire role.
** Gun-mortars: Typically breech-loaded, capable of high or low-angle fire with a longer barrel.
** Tank guns: Large-caliber guns mounted on tanks to provide mobile direct fire.
** Anti-tank artillery: Guns, usually mobile, designed primarily for direct fire to destroy armored fighting vehicles with heavy armor.
**Anti-tank gun: Guns designed for direct fire to destroy tanks and other armored fighting vehicles.
** Anti-aircraft artillery: Guns, usually mobile, designed for attacking aircraft by land and/or at sea. Some guns were suitable for the dual roles of anti-aircraft and anti-tank warfare.
** Rocket artillery: Launches rockets or missiles, instead of shot or shell.
* Railway gun: Large-caliber weapons that are mounted on, transported by and fired from specially-designed railway wagons.
* Naval artillery: Guns mounted on warships to be used either against other naval vessels or to bombard coastal targets in support of ground forces. The crowning achievement of naval artillery was the battleship, but the advent of air power and missiles have rendered this type of artillery largely obsolete. They are typically longer-barreled, low-trajectory, high-velocity weapons designed primarily for a direct-fire role.
* Coastal artillery: Fixed-position weapons dedicated to defense of a particular location, usually a coast (for example, the Atlantic Wall in World War II) or harbor. Not needing to be mobile, coastal artillery used to be much larger than equivalent field artillery pieces, giving them longer range and more destructive power. Modern coastal artillery (for example, Russia&#x27;s &quot;Bereg&quot; system) is often self-propelled, (allowing it to avoid counter-battery fire) and fully integrated, meaning that each battery has all of the support systems that it requires (maintenance, targeting radar, etc.) organic to its unit.
* Aircraft artillery: Large-caliber guns mounted on attack aircraft, this is typically found on slow-flying gunships.
* Nuclear artillery: Artillery which fires nuclear shells.

Modern field artillery can also be split into two other subcategories: towed and self-propelled. As the name suggests, towed artillery has a prime mover, usually an artillery tractor or truck, to move the piece, crew, and ammunition around. Towed artillery is in some cases equipped with an APU for small displacements. Self-propelled artillery is permanently mounted on a carriage or vehicle with room for the crew and ammunition and is thus capable of moving quickly from one firing position to another, both to support the fluid nature of modern combat and to avoid counter-battery fire. It includes mortar carrier vehicles, many of which allow the mortar to be removed from the vehicle and be used dismounted, potentially in terrain in which the vehicle cannot navigate, or in order to avoid detection.

===Organizational types===
At the beginning of the modern artillery period, the late 19th century, many armies had three main types of artillery, in some case they were sub-branches within the artillery branch in others they were separate branches or corps. There were also other types excluding the armament fitted to warships:

* Horse artillery, first formed as regular units in the late 18th century, with the role of supporting cavalry, they were distinguished by the entire crew being mounted.
* Field or &quot;foot&quot; artillery, the main artillery arm of the field army, using either guns, howitzers, or mortars. In World War II this branch again started using rockets and later surface to surface missiles.
* Fortress or garrison artillery, operated a nation&#x27;s fixed defences using guns, howitzers or mortars, either on land or coastal frontiers. Some had deployable elements to provide heavy artillery to the field army. In some nations coast defence artillery was a naval responsibility.
* Mountain artillery, a few nations treated mountain artillery as a separate branch, in others it was a speciality in another artillery branch. They used light guns or howitzers, usually designed for pack animal transport and easily broken down into small easily handled loads
* Naval artillery, some nations carried pack artillery on some warships, these were used and manhandled by naval (or marine) landing parties. At times, part of a ship&#x27;s armament would be unshipped and mated to makeshift carriages and limbers for actions ashore, for example during the Second Boer War, during the First World War the guns from the stricken SMS &quot;Königsberg&quot; formed the main artillery strength of the German forces in East Africa.

After World War I many nations merged these different artillery branches, in some cases keeping some as sub-branches. Naval artillery disappeared apart from that belonging to marines. However, two new branches of artillery emerged during that war and its aftermath, both used specialised guns (and a few rockets) and used direct not indirect fire, in the 1950s and 1960s both started to make extensive use of missiles:
* Anti-tank artillery, also under various organisational arrangements but typically either field artillery or a specialist branch and additional elements integral to infantry, etc., units. However, in most armies field and anti-aircraft artillery also had at least a secondary anti-tank role. After World War II anti-tank in Western armies became mostly the responsibility of infantry and armoured branches and ceased to be an artillery matter, with some exceptions.
* Anti-aircraft artillery, under various organisational arrangements including being part of artillery, a separate corps, even a separate service or being split between army for the field and air force for home defence. In some cases infantry and the new armoured corps also operated their own integral light anti-aircraft artillery. Home defence anti-aircraft artillery often used fixed as well as mobile mountings. Some anti-aircraft guns could also be used as field or anti-tank artillery, providing they had suitable sights.

However, the general switch by artillery to indirect fire before and during World War I led to a reaction in some armies. The result was accompanying or infantry guns. These were usually small, short range guns, that could be easily man-handled and used mostly for direct fire but some could use indirect fire. Some were operated by the artillery branch but under command of the supported unit. In World War II they were joined by self-propelled assault guns, although other armies adopted infantry or close support tanks in armoured branch units for the same purpose, subsequently tanks generally took on the accompanying role.

===Equipment types===

The three main types of artillery &quot;gun&quot; are field guns, howitzers, and mortars. During the 20th century, guns and howitzers have steadily merged in artillery use, making a distinction between the terms somewhat meaningless. By the end of the 20th century, true guns with calibers larger than about 60 mm have become very rare in artillery use, the main users being tanks, ships, and a few residual anti-aircraft and coastal guns. The term &quot;cannon&quot; is a United States generic term that includes guns, howitzers, and mortars; it is not used in other English speaking armies.

The traditional definitions differentiated between guns and howitzers in terms of maximum elevation (well less than 45° as opposed to close to or greater than 45°), number of charges (one or more than one charge), and having higher or lower muzzle velocity, sometimes indicated by barrel length. These three criteria give eight possible combinations, of which guns and howitzers are but two. However, modern &quot;howitzers&quot; have higher velocities and longer barrels than the equivalent &quot;guns&quot; of the first half of the 20th century.

True guns are characterized by long range, having a maximum elevation significantly less than 45°, a high muzzle velocity and hence a relatively long barrel, smooth bore (no rifling) and a single charge. The latter often led to fixed ammunition where the projectile is locked to the cartridge case. There is no generally accepted minimum muzzle velocity or barrel length associated with a gun. 

Howitzers can fire at maximum elevations at least close to 45°; elevations up to about 70° are normal for modern howitzers. Howitzers also have a choice of charges, meaning that the same elevation angle of fire will achieve a different range depending on the charge used. They have rifled bores, lower muzzle velocities and shorter barrels than equivalent guns. All this means they can deliver fire with a steep angle of descent. Because of their multi-charge capability, their ammunition is mostly separate loading (the projectile and propellant are loaded separately).

That leaves six combinations of the three criteria, some of which have been termed gun howitzers. A term first used in the 1930s when howitzers with a relatively high maximum muzzle velocities were introduced, it never became widely accepted, most armies electing to widen the definition of &quot;gun&quot; or &quot;howitzer&quot;. By the 1960s, most equipment had maximum elevations up to about 70°, were multi-charge, had quite high maximum muzzle velocities and relatively long barrels.

Mortars are simpler. The modern mortar originated in World War I and there were several patterns. After that war, most mortars settled on the Stokes pattern, characterized by a short barrel, smooth bore, low muzzle velocity, elevation angle of firing generally greater than 45°, and a very simple and light mounting using a &quot;baseplate&quot; on the ground. The projectile with its integral propelling charge was dropped down the barrel from the muzzle to hit a fixed firing pin. Since that time, a few mortars have become rifled and adopted breech loading.

There are other recognized typifying characteristics for artillery. One such characteristic is the type of obturation used to seal the chamber and prevent gases escaping through the breech. This may use a metal cartridge case that also holds the propelling charge, a configuration called &quot;QF&quot; or &quot;quickfiring&quot; by some nations. The alternative does not use a metal cartridge case, the propellant being merely bagged or in combustible cases with the breech itself providing all the sealing. This is called &quot;BL&quot; or &quot;breech loading&quot; by some nations.

A second characteristic is the form of propulsion. Modern equipment can either be towed or self-propelled (SP). A towed gun fires from the ground and any inherent protection is limited to a gun shield. Towing by horse teams lasted throughout World War II in some armies, but others were fully mechanized with wheeled or tracked gun towing vehicles by the outbreak of that war. The size of a towing vehicle depends on the weight of the equipment and the amount of ammunition it has to carry.

A variation of towed is portee, where the vehicle carries the gun which is dismounted for firing. Mortars are often carried this way. A mortar is sometimes carried in an armored vehicle and can either fire from it or be dismounted to fire from the ground. Since the early 1960s it has been possible to carry lighter towed guns and most mortars by helicopter. Even before that, they were parachuted or landed by glider from the time of the first airborne trials in the USSR in the 1930s.

In SP equipment, the gun is an integral part of the vehicle that carries it. SPs first appeared during World War I, but did not really develop until World War II. They are mostly tracked vehicles, but wheeled SPs started to appear in the 1970s. Some SPs have no armor and carry few or no other weapons and ammunition. Armored SPs usually carry a useful ammunition load. Early armored SPs were mostly a &quot;casemate&quot; configuration, in essence an open top armored box offering only limited traverse. However, most modern armored SPs have a full enclosed armored turret, usually giving full traverse for the gun. Many SPs cannot fire without deploying stabilizers or spades, sometimes hydraulic. A few SPs are designed so that the recoil forces of the gun are transferred directly onto the ground through a baseplate. A few towed guns have been given limited self-propulsion by means of an auxiliary engine.

Two other forms of tactical propulsion were used in the first half of the 20th century: Railways or transporting the equipment by road, as two or three separate loads, with disassembly and re-assembly at the beginning and end of the journey. Railway artillery took two forms, railway mountings for heavy and super-heavy guns and howitzers and armored trains as &quot;fighting vehicles&quot; armed with light artillery in a direct fire role. Disassembled transport was also used with heavy and super heavy weapons and lasted into the 1950s.

===Caliber categories===
A third form of artillery typing is to classify it as &quot;light&quot;, &quot;medium&quot;, &quot;heavy&quot; and various other terms. It appears to have been introduced in World War I, which spawned a very wide array of artillery in all sorts of sizes so a simple categorical system was needed. Some armies defined these categories by bands of calibers. Different bands were used for different types of weapons—field guns, mortars, anti-aircraft guns and coastal guns.

==Modern operations==

List of countries in order of amount of artillery (only conventional barrel ordnance is given, in use with land forces):

Artillery is used in a variety of roles depending on its type and caliber. The general role of artillery is to provide &quot;fire support&quot;—&quot;the application of fire, coordinated with the manoeuvre of forces to destroy, &quot;neutralize&quot; or &quot;suppress&quot; the enemy&quot;. This NATO definition makes artillery a supporting arm although not all NATO armies agree with this logic. The &quot;italicised&quot; terms are NATO&#x27;s.

Unlike rockets, guns (or howitzers as some armies still call them) and mortars are suitable for delivering &quot;close supporting fire&quot;. However, they are all suitable for providing &quot;deep supporting fire&quot; although the limited range of many mortars tends to exclude them from the role. Their control arrangements and limited range also mean that mortars are most suited to &quot;direct supporting fire&quot;. Guns are used either for this or &quot;general supporting fire&quot; while rockets are mostly used for the latter. However, lighter rockets may be used for direct fire support. These rules of thumb apply to NATO armies.

Modern mortars, because of their lighter weight and simpler, more transportable design, are usually an integral part of infantry and, in some armies, armour units. This means they generally do not have to &quot;concentrate&quot; their fire so their shorter range is not a disadvantage. Some armies also consider infantry operated mortars to be more responsive than artillery, but this is a function of the control arrangements and not the case in all armies. However, mortars have always been used by artillery units and remain with them in many armies, including a few in NATO.

In NATO armies artillery is usually assigned a tactical mission that establishes its relationship and responsibilities to the formation or units it is assigned to. It seems that not all NATO nations use the terms and outside NATO others are probably used. The standard terms are: &quot;direct support&quot;, &quot;general support&quot;, &quot;general support reinforcing&quot; and &quot;reinforcing&quot;. These tactical missions are in the context of the command authority: &quot;operational command&quot;, &quot;operational control&quot;, &quot;tactical command&quot; or &quot;tactical control&quot;.

In NATO direct support generally means that the directly supporting artillery unit provides observers and liaison to the manoeuvre troops being supported, typically an artillery battalion or equivalent is assigned to a brigade and its batteries to the brigade&#x27;s battalions. However, some armies achieve this by placing the assigned artillery units under command of the directly supported formation. Nevertheless, the batteries&#x27; fire can be &quot;concentrated&quot; onto a single target, as can the fire of units in range and with the other tactical missions.

===Application of fire===

There are several dimensions to this subject. The first is the notion that fire may be against an &quot;opportunity&quot; target or may be &quot;arranged&quot;. If it is the latter it may be either &quot;on-call&quot; or &quot;scheduled&quot;. Arranged targets may be part of a &quot;fire plan&quot;. Fire may be either &quot;observed&quot; or &quot;unobserved&quot;, if the former it may be &quot;adjusted&quot;, if the latter then it has to be &quot;predicted&quot;. Observation of adjusted fire may be directly by a forward observer or indirectly via some other &quot;target acquisition&quot; system.

NATO also recognises several different types of fire support for tactical purposes:
* &quot;Counterbattery fire&quot;: delivered for the purpose of destroying or &quot;neutralizing&quot; the enemy&#x27;s fire support system.
* &quot;Counterpreparation fire&quot;: intensive prearranged fire delivered when the imminence of the enemy attack is discovered.
* &quot;Covering fire&quot;: used to protect troops when they are within range of enemy small arms.
* &quot;Defensive fire&quot;: delivered by supporting units to assist and protect a unit engaged in a defensive action.
* &quot;Final Protective Fire&quot;: an immediately available prearranged barrier of fire designed to impede enemy movement across defensive lines or areas.
* &quot;Harassing fire&quot;: a random number of shells are fired at random intervals, without any pattern to it that the enemy can predict. This process is designed to hinder enemy forces&#x27; movement, and, by the constantly imposed stress, threat of losses and inability of enemy forces to relax or sleep, lowers their morale.
* &quot;Interdiction fire&quot;: placed on an area or point to prevent the enemy from using the area or point.
* &quot;Preparation fire&quot;: delivered before an attack to weaken the enemy position.

These purposes have existed for most of the 20th century, although their definitions have evolved and will continue to do so, lack of &quot;suppression&quot; in &quot;counterbattery&quot; is an omission. Broadly they can be defined as either:
* &quot;Deep supporting fire&quot;: directed at objectives not in the immediate vicinity of own force, for neutralizing or destroying enemy reserves and weapons, and interfering with enemy command, supply, communications and observation; or
* &quot;Close supporting fire&quot;: placed on enemy troops, weapons or positions which, because of their proximity present the most immediate and serious threat to the supported unit.

Two other NATO terms also need definition:
* &quot;Neutralization fire&quot;: delivered to render a target temporarily ineffective or unusable; and
* &quot;Suppression fire&quot;: that degrades the performance of a target below the level needed to fulfill its mission. Suppression is usually only effective for the duration of the fire.

The tactical purposes also include various &quot;mission verbs&quot;, a rapidly expanding subject with the modern concept of &quot;effects based operations&quot;.

&quot;Targeting&quot; is the process of selecting target and matching the appropriate response to them taking account of operational requirements and capabilities. It requires consideration of the type of fire support required and the extent of coordination with the supported arm. It involves decisions about:
* what effects are required, for example, &quot;neutralization&quot; or &quot;suppression&quot;;
* the proximity of and risks to own troops or non-combatants;
* what types of munitions, including their fuzing, are to be used and in what quantities;
* when the targets should be attacked and possibly for how long;
* what methods should be used, for example, &quot;converged&quot; or &quot;distributed&quot;, whether adjustment is permissible or surprise essential, the need for special procedures such as precision or danger close
* how many fire units are needed and which ones they should be from those that are available (in range, with the required munitions type and quantity, not allotted to another target, have the most suitable line of fire if there is a risk to own troops or non-combatants);

The &quot;targeting&quot; process is the key aspect of tactical fire control. Depending on the circumstances and national procedures it may all be undertaken in one place or may be distributed. In armies practicing control from the front, most of the process may be undertaken by a forward observer or other target acquirer. This is particularly the case for a smaller target requiring only a few fire units. The extent to which the process is formal or informal and makes use of computer based systems, documented norms or experience and judgement also varies widely armies and other circumstances.

Surprise may be essential or irrelevant. It depends on what effects are required and whether or not the target is likely to move or quickly improve its protective posture. During World War II UK researchers concluded that for impact fuzed munitions the relative risk were as follows:
* men standing – 1
* men lying – 1/3
* men firing from trenches – 1/15–1/50
* men crouching in trenches – 1/25–1/100
Airburst munitions significantly increase the relative risk for lying men, etc. Historically most casualties occur in the first 10–15 seconds of fire, i.e. the time needed to react and improve protective posture, however, this is less relevant if airburst is used.

There are several ways of making best use of this brief window of maximum vulnerability:
* ordering the guns to fire together, either by executive order or by a &quot;fire at&quot; time. The disadvantage is that if the fire is &quot;concentrated&quot; from many dispersed &quot;fire units&quot; then there will be different times of flight and the first rounds will be spread in time. To some extent a large concentration offsets the problem because it may mean that only one round is required from each gun and most of these could arrive in the 15 second window.
* burst fire, a rate of fire to deliver three rounds from each gun within 10 or 15 seconds, this reduces the number of guns and hence fire units needed, which means they may be less dispersed and have less variation in their times of flight. Smaller caliber guns, such as 105 mm, have always been able to deliver three rounds in 15 seconds, larger calibers firing fixed rounds could also do it but it was not until the 1970s that a multi-charge 155 mm howitzer, FH-70 first gained the capability.
* multiple round simultaneous impact (MRSI), where a single weapon or multiple individual weapons fire multiple rounds at differing trajectories so that all rounds arrive on target at the same time.
* &quot;time on target&quot;, fire units fire at the time less their time of flight, this works well with prearranged scheduled fire but is less satisfactory for opportunity targets because it means delaying the delivery of fire by selecting a &#x27;safe&#x27; time that all or most fire units can achieve. It can be used with both the previous two methods.

===Counter-battery fire===

Modern counter-battery fire developed in World War I, with the objective of defeating the enemy&#x27;s artillery. Typically such fire was used to suppress enemy batteries when they were or were about to interfere with the activities of friendly forces (such as to prevent enemy defensive artillery fire against an impending attack) or to systematically destroy enemy guns. In World War I the latter required air observation. The first indirect counter-battery fire was in May 1900 by an observer in a balloon.

Enemy artillery can be detected in two ways, either by direct observation of the guns from the air or by ground observers (including specialist reconnaissance), or from their firing signatures. This includes radars tracking the shells in flight to determine their place of origin, sound ranging detecting guns firing and resecting their position from pairs of microphones or cross-observation of gun flashes using observation by human observers or opto-electronic devices, although the widespread adoption of &#x27;flashless&#x27; propellant limited the effectiveness of the latter.

Once hostile batteries have been detected they may be engaged immediately by friendly artillery or later at an optimum time, depending on the tactical situation and the counter-battery policy. Air strike is another option. In some situations the task is to locate all active enemy batteries for attack using a counter-battery fire at the appropriate moment in accordance with a plan developed by artillery intelligence staff. In other situations counter-battery fire may occur whenever a battery is located with sufficient accuracy.

Modern counter-battery target acquisition uses unmanned aircraft, counter-battery radar, ground reconnaissance and sound-ranging. Counter-battery fire may be adjusted by some of the systems, for example the operator of an unmanned aircraft can &#x27;follow&#x27; a battery if it moves. Defensive measures by batteries include frequently changing position or constructing defensive earthworks, the tunnels used by North Korea being an extreme example. Counter-measures include air defence against aircraft and attacking counter-battery radars physically and electronically.

===Field artillery team===

&#x27;Field Artillery Team&#x27; is a US term and the following description and terminology applies to the US, other armies are broadly similar but differ in significant details. Modern field artillery (post–World War I) has three distinct parts: the Forward Observer (FO), the Fire Direction Center (FDC) and the actual guns themselves. The forward observer observes the target using tools such as binoculars, laser rangefinders, designators and call back fire missions on his radio, or relays the data through a portable computer via an encrypted digital radio connection protected from jamming by computerized frequency hopping. A lesser known part of the team is the FAS or Field Artillery Survey team which sets up the &quot;Gun Line&quot; for the cannons. Today most artillery battalions use an &quot;Aiming Circle&quot; which allows for faster setup and more mobility. FAS teams are still used for checks and balances purposes and if a gun battery has issues with the &quot;Aiming Circle&quot; a FAS team will do it for them.

The FO can communicate directly with the battery FDC, of which there is one per each battery of 4–8 guns. Otherwise the several FOs communicate with a higher FDC such as at a Battalion level, and the higher FDC prioritizes the targets and allocates fires to individual batteries as needed to engage the targets that are spotted by the FOs or to perform preplanned fires.

The Battery FDC computes firing data—ammunition to be used, powder charge, fuse settings, the direction to the target, and the quadrant elevation to be fired at to reach the target, what gun will fire any rounds needed for adjusting on the target, and the number of rounds to be fired on the target by each gun once the target has been accurately located—to the guns. Traditionally this data is relayed via radio or wire communications as a warning order to the guns, followed by orders specifying the type of ammunition and fuse setting, direction, and the elevation needed to reach the target, and the method of adjustment or orders for fire for effect (FFE). However, in more advanced artillery units, this data is relayed through a digital radio link.

Other parts of the field artillery team include meteorological analysis to determine the temperature, humidity and pressure of the air and wind direction and speed at different altitudes. Also radar is used both for determining the location of enemy artillery and mortar batteries and to determine the precise actual strike points of rounds fired by battery and comparing that location with what was expected to compute a registration allowing future rounds to be fired with much greater accuracy.

=== Time on target ===

A technique called time on target (TOT) was developed by the British Army in North Africa at the end of 1941 and early 1942 particularly for counter-battery fire and other concentrations, it proved very popular. It relied on BBC time signals to enable officers to synchronize their watches to the second because this avoided the need to use military radio networks and the possibility of losing surprise, and the need for field telephone networks in the desert. With this technique the time of flight from each fire unit (battery or troop) to the target is taken from the range or firing tables, or the computer and each engaging fire unit subtracts its time of flight from the TOT to determine the time to fire. An executive order to fire is given to all guns in the fire unit at the correct moment to fire. When each fire unit fires their rounds at their individual firing time all the opening rounds will reach the target area almost simultaneously. This is especially effective when combined with techniques that allow fires for effect to be made without preliminary adjusting fires.

===Multiple round simultaneous impact===
Multiple round simultaneous impact (MRSI) is a modern version of the earlier time on target concept. MRSI is when a single gun fires multiple shells so all arrive at the same target simultaneously. This is possible because there is more than one trajectory for a round to fly to any given target. Typically one is below 45 degrees from horizontal and the other is above it, and by using different sized propellant charges with each shell, it is possible to utilize more than two trajectories. Because the higher trajectories cause the shells to arc higher into the air, they take longer to reach the target. If shells are fired on higher trajectories for initial volleys (starting with the shell with the most propellant and working down) and later volleys are fired on the lower trajectories, with the correct timing the shells will all arrive at the same target simultaneously. This is useful because many more shells can land on the target with no warning. With traditional methods of firing, the target area may have time (however long it takes to reload and re-fire the guns) to take cover between volleys. However, guns capable of burst fire can deliver multiple rounds in a few seconds if they use the same firing data for each, and if guns in more than one location are firing on one target they can use Time on Target procedures so that all their shells arrive at the same time and target.

MRSI has a few prerequisites. The first is guns with a high rate of fire. The second is the ability to use different sized propellant charges. Third is a fire control computer that has the ability to compute MRSI volleys and the capability to produce firing data, sent to each gun, and then presented to the gun commander in the correct order. The number of rounds that can be delivered in MRSI depends primarily on the range to the target and the rate of fire. To allow the most shells to reach the target, the target has to be in range of the lowest propellant charge.

Examples of guns with a rate of fire that makes them suitable for MRSI includes UK&#x27;s AS-90, South Africa&#x27;s Denel G6-52 (which can land six rounds simultaneously at targets at least away), Germany&#x27;s Panzerhaubitze 2000 (which can land five rounds simultaneously at targets at least away), Slovakia&#x27;s 155 mm SpGH ZUZANA 2, and K9 Thunder.

The Archer project (developed by BAE-Systems Bofors in Sweden) is a 155 mm howitzer on a wheeled chassis which is claimed to be able to deliver up to six shells on target simultaneously from the same gun. The 120 mm twin barrel AMOS mortar system, joint developed by Hägglunds (Sweden) and Patria (Finland), is capable of 7 + 7 shells MRSI. The United States Crusader program (now cancelled) was slated to have MRSI capability. It is unclear how many fire control computers have the necessary capabilities.

Two-round MRSI firings were a popular artillery demonstration in the 1960s, where well trained detachments could show off their skills for spectators.

===Air burst===

The destructiveness of artillery bombardments can be enhanced when some or all of the shells are set for airburst, meaning that they explode in the air above the target instead of upon impact. This can be accomplished either through time fuzes or proximity fuzes. Time fuzes use a precise timer to detonate the shell after a preset delay. This technique is tricky and slight variations in the functioning of the fuze can cause it to explode too high and be ineffective, or to strike the ground instead of exploding above it. Since December 1944 (Battle of the Bulge), proximity fuzed artillery shells have been available that take the guesswork out of this process. These employ a miniature, low powered radar transmitter in the fuze to detect the ground and explode them at a predetermined height above it. The return of the weak radar signal completes an electrical circuit in the fuze which explodes the shell. The proximity fuze itself was developed by the British to increase the effectiveness of anti-aircraft warfare.

This is a very effective tactic against infantry and light vehicles, because it scatters the fragmentation of the shell over a larger area and prevents it from being blocked by terrain or entrenchments that do not include some form of robust overhead cover. Combined with TOT or MRSI tactics that give no warning of the incoming rounds, these rounds are especially devastating because many enemy soldiers are likely to be caught in the open; even more so if the attack is launched against an assembly area or troops moving in the open rather than a unit in an entrenched tactical position.

==Use in monuments==

Numerous war memorials around the world incorporate an artillery piece that was used in the war or battle commemorated.

==See also==

* List of artillery
* Advanced Gun System
* Artillery museums
* Barrage (artillery)
* Beehive anti-personnel round
* Coilgun
* Combustion light-gas gun
* Cordite
* Fuze
* Gun laying
* Light-gas gun
* Paris Gun
* Railgun
* Shoot-and-scoot
* Shrapnel shell
* Suppressive fire
* Improvised artillery in the Syrian Civil War
==References==

===Notes===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* Naval Weapons of the World
* Cannon Artillery – The Voice of Freedom&#x27;s Thunder
* Modern Artillery 
* What sort of forensic information can be derived from the analysis of shell fragments 
* Evans, Nigel F. (2001–2007) &quot;British Artillery in World War 2&quot;
* Artillery Tactics and Combat during the Napoleonic Wars
* Artillery of Napoleon&#x27;s Imperial Guard
* French artillery and its ammunition. 14th to the end of the 19th century
* Historic films showing artillery in World War I at europeanfilmgateway.eu
* Video: Inside shrieking shrapnel. Hear the great sound of shrapnel&#x27;s – Finnish field artillery fire video year 2013
* Video: Forensic and archaeological interpretation of artillery shell fragments and shrapnel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="0" end="9" title="Artillery" label="Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="41" end="50" title="Ammunition" label="munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="85" end="93" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="94" end="102" title="firearms" label="firearms"/>
<link wikidata="Q57346" start="165" end="179" title="defensive wall" label="defensive wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="185" end="198" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="207" end="212" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="249" end="261" title="siege engine" label="siege engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402493" start="309" end="324" title="field artillery" label="field artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="325" end="331" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000908" start="405" end="429" title="self-propelled artillery" label="self-propelled artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="728" end="737" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="843" end="848" title="Shell (projectile)" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330892" start="856" end="859" title="Field gun" label="gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q180126" start="862" end="870" title="howitzer" label="howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="877" end="884" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q167682" start="999" end="1015" title="rocket artillery" label="rocket artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723884" start="1506" end="1510" title="round shot" label="shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427237" start="1612" end="1620" title="Canister shot" label="canister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939864" start="1622" end="1632" title="chain shot" label="chain shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075009" start="1637" end="1646" title="grapeshot" label="grapeshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="1753" end="1762" title="ammunition" label="munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q690109" start="1813" end="1827" title="Combat arms" label="arm of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330892" start="1915" end="1920" title="field gun" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358324" start="1922" end="1929" title="Coastal artillery" label="coastal"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="1931" end="1944" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="1950" end="1959" title="Anti-tank warfare" label="anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416829" start="2174" end="2187" title="sound ranging" label="sound ranging"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590430" start="2192" end="2206" title="flash spotting" label="flash spotting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097656" start="2334" end="2347" title="indirect fire" label="indirect fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="2443" end="2449" title="Surveying" label="survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="2591" end="2606" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2608" end="2619" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2625" end="2637" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="2673" end="2686" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184393" start="2929" end="2937" title="catapult" label="catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="2955" end="2963" title="Syracuse, Sicily" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="3001" end="3010" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3323" end="3333" title="Joule#Kilojoule" label="kilojoules"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548045" start="3366" end="3380" title="12-pounder gun" label="12-pounder gun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3558" end="3568" title="Joule#Megajoule" label="megajoules"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3580" end="3591" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="3612" end="3622" title="modern era" label="modern era"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="3624" end="3640" title="Cannon" label="artillery pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112950" start="3663" end="3674" title="Horse-drawn vehicle" label="horse-drawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163915" start="3675" end="3687" title="gun carriage" label="gun carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q186075" start="3697" end="3713" title="Contemporary history" label="contemporary era"/>
<link wikidata="Q752870" start="3757" end="3764" title="Motor vehicle" label="wheeled"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="3768" end="3783" title="tracked vehicle" label="tracked vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049358" start="3853" end="3864" title="railway gun" label="railway gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897627" start="3888" end="3906" title="large-calibre artillery" label="large-calibre guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708479" start="3924" end="3939" title="Project Babylon" label="Project Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q85804235" start="3947" end="3962" title="Supergun affair" label="Supergun affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083758" start="3994" end="4024" title="Space gun" label="putting a satellite into orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="4094" end="4101" title="missile" label="missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560882" start="4131" end="4146" title="surface warfare" label="surface warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685924" start="4322" end="4328" title="Targeting (warfare)" label="target"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056901" start="4374" end="4384" title="Casualty (person)" label="casualties"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4419" end="4427" title="Ammunition#Artillery" label="ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978115" start="5135" end="5151" title="weapons platform" label="weapons platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q240313" start="5513" end="5520" title="Artillery battery" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="5893" end="5900" title="Company (military unit)" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="5947" end="5968" title="military organization" label="military organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="6183" end="6212" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q209572" start="6303" end="6319" title="military service" label="military service"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="6360" end="6365" title="Military organization" label="units"/>
<link wikidata="Q15627509" start="6370" end="6380" title="Military organization" label="formations"/>
<link wikidata="Q645883" start="6459" end="6477" title="military operation" label="military operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402493" start="6480" end="6495" title="field artillery" label="field artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162621" start="6867" end="6900" title="Penetrating trauma" label="casing fragments and other debris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048989" start="6910" end="6915" title="blast injury" label="blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q97210751" start="7108" end="7126" title="artillery observer" label="artillery observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="7203" end="7218" title="Geographic coordinate system" label="map coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140224" start="7221" end="7238" title="Military doctrine" label="Military doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920267" start="7283" end="7301" title="Engineering design process" label="engineering design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881175" start="7633" end="7648" title="Cylindro-conoidal bullet" label="conoidal bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937271" start="7670" end="7680" title="Minié ball" label="Minié ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="8559" end="8576" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102423" start="8640" end="8661" title="Close combat" label="close-quarters combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="8799" end="8810" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072285" start="8862" end="8869" title="atelier" label="atelier"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="8994" end="9004" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9011" end="9020" title=":fr:Artillier" label="artillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q219514" start="9284" end="9312" title="Honourable Artillery Company" label="Honourable Artillery Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="9339" end="9347" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q201543" start="9539" end="9556" title="Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia" label="Niccolò Tartaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903986" start="9579" end="9596" title="Girolamo Ruscelli" label="Girolamo Ruscelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="9788" end="9802" title="engines of war" label="engines of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q184393" start="9819" end="9827" title="catapult" label="catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q19779" start="9829" end="9835" title="onager (siege weapon)" label="onager"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776" start="9837" end="9846" title="trebuchet" label="trebuchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q219433" start="9852" end="9860" title="ballista" label="ballista"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="10531" end="10543" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q988866" start="10559" end="10570" title="Huolongjing" label="Huolongjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402493" start="10799" end="10814" title="field artillery" label="field artillery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10884" end="10890" title="Inventions in medieval Islam#Military" label="madfaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="10974" end="10981" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092093" start="11043" end="11057" title="Mongol invasions" label="great conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="11467" end="11490" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q317939" start="11543" end="11550" title="Bombard (weapon)" label="bombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="11565" end="11571" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461850" start="11593" end="11606" title="muzzle-loader" label="muzzle-loader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933955" start="11649" end="11663" title="Breechloader" label="breech-loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="11856" end="11861" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="12338" end="12346" title="Tangiers" label="Tangiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="12518" end="12541" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="12851" end="12857" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q107536804" start="12878" end="12886" title="Siege of Breteuil" label="Breteuil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="13642" end="13653" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="14644" end="14664" title="Mehmet the Conqueror" label="Mehmet the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="14682" end="14696" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="14782" end="14790" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q240313" start="14848" end="14857" title="Artillery battery" label="batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q451853" start="15051" end="15082" title="Battle of St. Jakob an der Birs" label="Battle of St. Jakob an der Birs"/>
<link wikidata="Q272864" start="15136" end="15156" title="James II of Scotland" label="James II of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="15376" end="15393" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="15502" end="15509" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q191231" start="15940" end="15951" title="Manuel I of Portugal" label="King Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="18011" end="18023" title="Ming Dynasty" label="Ming Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487519" start="18774" end="18781" title="Lantaka" label="rentaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q179537" start="18868" end="18878" title="Greek fire" label="Greek fire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19041" end="19055" title="Djong (ship)#European age of discovery" label="Javanese fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988343" start="19090" end="19108" title="Portuguese Malacca" label="Portuguese Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="19223" end="19227" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="19262" end="19267" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q49209" start="19306" end="19314" title="Javanese people" label="Javanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q576338" start="19693" end="19722" title="Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598)" label="fought against Japan in Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142756" start="19817" end="19825" title="Panokseon" label="in ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q511450" start="19829" end="19838" title="naval gun" label="naval gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11246676" start="19937" end="19962" title="breech-loading swivel gun" label="breech-loading swivel gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q358057" start="20004" end="20015" title="Tanegashima (Japanese matchlock)" label="Tanegashima"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="20096" end="20101" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="20141" end="20164" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="siege of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="20442" end="20451" title="Mehmed II" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="20495" end="20511" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q29031" start="20530" end="20542" title="Charles Oman" label="Charles Oman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064392" start="20587" end="20597" title="smoothbore" label="smoothbore"/>
<link wikidata="Q272864" start="20740" end="20748" title="James II of Scotland" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q487192" start="20991" end="21001" title="gun barrel" label="gun barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q354271" start="21441" end="21449" title="trunnion" label="trunnion"/>
<link wikidata="Q215968" start="21692" end="21701" title="Jan Žižka" label="Jan Žižka"/>
<link wikidata="Q478301" start="21750" end="21762" title="Hussite Wars" label="Hussite Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036840" start="22338" end="22342" title="Worm (artillery)" label="worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q52938" start="22374" end="22391" title="Gustavus Adolphus" label="Gustavus Adolphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="22815" end="22822" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366139" start="22905" end="22917" title="ribauldequin" label="ribauldequin"/>
<link wikidata="Q976045" start="22997" end="23019" title="Kazimierz Siemienowicz" label="Kazimierz Siemienowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q81851" start="23592" end="23599" title="bastion" label="bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q167682" start="23923" end="23939" title="rocket artillery" label="rocket artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948727" start="23975" end="23991" title="Mysorean rockets" label="Mysorean rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q266923" start="23995" end="24001" title="Kingdom of Mysore" label="Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q233663" start="24066" end="24072" title="Second Anglo-Mysore War" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q617350" start="24074" end="24079" title="Third Mysore War" label="Third"/>
<link wikidata="Q617782" start="24084" end="24101" title="Fourth Mysore War" label="Fourth Mysore War"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="24132" end="24158" title="British East India Company" label="British East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q266923" start="24167" end="24184" title="Kingdom of Mysore" label="Kingdom of Mysore"/>
<link wikidata="Q853968" start="24188" end="24193" title="Hindustan" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q568613" start="24238" end="24256" title="Battle of Pollilur (1780)" label="Battle of Pollilur"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934060" start="24262" end="24290" title="Siege of Seringapatam (1792)" label="Siege of Seringapatam (1792)"/>
<link wikidata="Q815204" start="24298" end="24320" title="Battle of Seringapatam" label="Battle of Seringapatam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344031" start="24737" end="24752" title="Congreve rocket" label="Congreve rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="24792" end="24807" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="24816" end="24827" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="25274" end="25282" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q698862" start="25975" end="26002" title="Jean-Baptiste Vaquette de Gribeauval" label="Jean-Baptiste de Gribeauval"/>
<link wikidata="Q366656" start="26580" end="26586" title="Limbers and caissons" label="limber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723884" start="26996" end="27006" title="round shot" label="round shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933955" start="27419" end="27433" title="breech-loading weapon" label="breech-loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q228268" start="27434" end="27440" title="rifling" label="rifled"/>
<link wikidata="Q920165" start="27480" end="27495" title="muzzle velocity" label="muzzle velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="27546" end="27557" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="27593" end="27608" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q335115" start="27628" end="27645" title="William Armstrong, 1st Baron Armstrong" label="William Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333973" start="27757" end="27781" title="Elswick Ordnance Company" label="Elswick Ordnance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170996" start="27790" end="27803" title="Royal Arsenal" label="Royal Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006232" start="27807" end="27815" title="Woolwich" label="Woolwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q689133" start="27855" end="27868" title="Armstrong Gun" label="Armstrong Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066380" start="28219" end="28241" title="Martin von Wahrendorff" label="Martin von Wahrendorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q712307" start="28247" end="28263" title="Joseph Whitworth" label="Joseph Whitworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="28412" end="28421" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937271" start="28475" end="28485" title="Minié ball" label="Minié ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330873" start="28568" end="28572" title="Gauge (firearms)" label="bore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28700" end="28707" title="British ordnance terms#Windage" label="windage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="29112" end="29122" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11604665" start="29127" end="29148" title="precision engineering" label="precision engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="29173" end="29194" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q749601" start="29428" end="29434" title="recoil" label="recoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153916" start="29611" end="29619" title="built-up gun" label="built-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="29669" end="29681" title="wrought-iron" label="wrought-iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="29689" end="29699" title="mild steel" label="mild steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489874" start="30394" end="30399" title="swage" label="swage"/>
<link wikidata="Q672365" start="30738" end="30753" title="horse artillery" label="horse artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275938" start="30759" end="30798" title="RBL 12 pounder 8 cwt Armstrong gun" label="12-pounder (3 inches /76 mm) field guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q958738" start="30895" end="30904" title="Canon de 75 modèle 1897" label="French 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330892" start="31040" end="31049" title="field gun" label="field gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753038" start="31063" end="31095" title="Hydraulic recoil mechanism" label="hydro-pneumatic recoil mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q750604" start="31406" end="31414" title="Shrapnel shell" label="shrapnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189298" start="31418" end="31426" title="Picric acid" label="melinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="31427" end="31441" title="high-explosive" label="high-explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q870863" start="31648" end="31659" title="bolt action rifle" label="bolt action"/>
<link wikidata="Q124072" start="31660" end="31665" title="rifle" label="rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q473706" start="31923" end="31930" title="Battle of Kay" label="Paltzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="32013" end="32031" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445962" start="32056" end="32077" title="Royal Horse Artillery" label="Royal Horse Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697166" start="32281" end="32293" title="aiming point" label="aiming point"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="32696" end="32707" title="German Army (German Empire)" label="German army"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="33092" end="33100" title="Boer War" label="Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="33260" end="33271" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q287709" start="35589" end="35602" title="Major general (United Kingdom)" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q324655" start="35603" end="35619" title="Henry Hugh Tudor" label="Henry Hugh Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q654374" start="35683" end="35700" title="Battle of Cambrai (1917)" label="Battle of Cambrai"/>
<link wikidata="Q152008" start="36075" end="36092" title="Operation Michael" label="Operation Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="36295" end="36301" title="modern era" label="Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="36373" end="36382" title="explosive" label="explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="36383" end="36388" title="shell (projectile)" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037215" start="36392" end="36398" title="rocket (weapon)" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239646" start="36709" end="36723" title="predicted fire" label="predicted fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786729" start="37017" end="37026" title="Krasnopol (weapon)" label="Krasnopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="37212" end="37243" title="Global Positioning System" label="Global Positioning System (GPS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="37583" end="37589" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180126" start="37615" end="37623" title="howitzer" label="howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="37625" end="37631" title="mortar (weapon)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330892" start="37637" end="37646" title="field gun" label="field gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q167682" start="37652" end="37668" title="rocket artillery" label="rocket artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358324" start="37829" end="37846" title="coastal artillery" label="coastal artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="38056" end="38079" title="anti-aircraft battery" label="anti-aircraft batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707071" start="38175" end="38190" title="guidance system" label="guidance system"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="38297" end="38304" title="missile" label="missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446878" start="38464" end="38497" title="Long Range Precision Fires (LRPF)" label="Long Range Precision Fires (LRPF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269562" start="38499" end="38531" title="Joint terminal attack controller" label="Joint terminal attack controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="38617" end="38625" title="munition" label="munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938838" start="38685" end="38700" title="ammunition dump" label="ammunition dump"/>
<link wikidata="Q81669" start="38702" end="38709" title="arsenal" label="arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q110051611" start="38711" end="38719" title="Magazine (artillery)" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="38925" end="38929" title="Fuze" label="Fuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q49393" start="38932" end="38942" title="Projectile" label="Projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="38945" end="38955" title="Propellant" label="Propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243398" start="38958" end="38964" title="Primer (firearms)" label="Primer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="38979" end="38984" title="Fuze (munitions)" label="Fuzes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39063" end="39082" title="Explosive#High" label="High Explosive (HE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115667" start="39255" end="39261" title="Impact (mechanics)" label="impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253473" start="39283" end="39288" title="Delay composition" label="delay"/>
<link wikidata="Q517596" start="39292" end="39302" title="Mechanism (engineering)" label="mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="39303" end="39307" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698303" start="39318" end="39326" title="Air burst" label="airburst"/>
<link wikidata="Q796765" start="39329" end="39345" title="proximity sensor" label="proximity sensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698303" start="39356" end="39364" title="Air burst" label="airburst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374194" start="39367" end="39379" title="Programmer (hardware)" label="programmable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="39380" end="39390" title="Electronics" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q786054" start="39391" end="39401" title="detonation" label="detonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698303" start="39412" end="39420" title="Air burst" label="airburst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034063" start="39542" end="39575" title="High-explosive squash head" label="High-Explosive Squash Head (HESH)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034063" start="39579" end="39608" title="High-explosive squash head" label="High Explosive, Plastic (HEP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q333133" start="40451" end="40465" title="proximity fuze" label="proximity fuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="40598" end="40611" title="anti-aircraft" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q178733" start="41134" end="41151" title="centrifugal force" label="centrifugal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="41456" end="41479" title="anti-aircraft artillery" label="anti-aircraft artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q333133" start="42004" end="42025" title="Proximity fuze" label="radar proximity fuzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="43197" end="43216" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q133194" start="43312" end="43320" title="kamikaze" label="kamikaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="43357" end="43372" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1 flying bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q457515" start="44818" end="44834" title="white phosphorus" label="white phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60124" start="44880" end="44904" title="high-explosive anti-tank" label="high-explosive anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310133" start="45081" end="45124" title="Dual-Purpose Improved Conventional Munition" label="Dual-Purpose Improved Conventional Munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q483400" start="45651" end="45661" title="gyroscopic" label="gyroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q228268" start="45735" end="45742" title="rifling" label="rifling"/>
<link wikidata="Q253898" start="45814" end="45826" title="driving band" label="driving band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064392" start="46009" end="46019" title="smoothbore" label="smoothbore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="46053" end="46060" title="mortar (weapon)" label="mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="46817" end="46827" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182714" start="46921" end="46932" title="Deflagration" label="deflagrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q786054" start="46946" end="46956" title="detonation" label="detonating"/>
<link wikidata="Q335225" start="47248" end="47260" title="rocket motor" label="rocket motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="47326" end="47338" title="black powder" label="black powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q143874" start="47606" end="47620" title="nitrocellulose" label="nitrocellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q162867" start="47686" end="47699" title="nitroglycerin" label="nitroglycerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q126657" start="48706" end="48720" title="nitroguanidine" label="nitroguanidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q841739" start="48810" end="48836" title="Rocket-assisted projectile" label="Rocket-assisted projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q809816" start="49002" end="49012" title="Base bleed" label="Base bleed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488092" start="49224" end="49228" title="Form drag" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806581" start="50324" end="50338" title="laser ignition" label="laser ignition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113550" start="50512" end="50530" title="live fire exercise" label="live fire training"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402493" start="51257" end="51272" title="field artillery" label="field artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097656" start="51285" end="51298" title="indirect fire" label="indirect fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="52356" end="52366" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7390041" start="52915" end="52963" title="SG2 Shareable (Fire Control) Software Suite (S4)" label="SG2 Shareable (Fire Control) Software Suite (S4)"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="54247" end="54253" title="Cannon" label="Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q317939" start="54317" end="54324" title="Bombard (weapon)" label="Bombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054134" start="54496" end="54504" title="Falconet (cannon)" label="Falconet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723884" start="54588" end="54592" title="Round shot" label="shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256431" start="54620" end="54630" title="Swivel gun" label="Swivel gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920615" start="54769" end="54777" title="zamburak" label="zamburak"/>
<link wikidata="Q94641841" start="54795" end="54812" title="Gunpowder Empires" label="Gunpowder Empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q730016" start="54845" end="54855" title="Volley gun" label="Volley gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940364" start="54904" end="54915" title="volley fire" label="volley fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="55050" end="55061" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55081" end="55092" title="Action (firearms)#Autoloading operation" label="autoloading"/>
<link wikidata="Q9180311" start="55097" end="55111" title="automatic fire" label="automatic fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639474" start="55126" end="55141" title="Siege artillery" label="Siege artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897627" start="55283" end="55306" title="Large-calibre artillery" label="Large-calibre artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402493" start="55310" end="55325" title="Field artillery" label="Field artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141166" start="55405" end="55425" title="Infantry support gun" label="Infantry support gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497061" start="55464" end="55476" title="Mountain gun" label="Mountain gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330892" start="55567" end="55576" title="Field gun" label="Field gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097241" start="55601" end="55612" title="direct fire" label="direct fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q180126" start="55618" end="55626" title="Howitzer" label="Howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097656" start="55690" end="55703" title="indirect-fire" label="indirect-fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047409" start="55708" end="55720" title="Gun-howitzer" label="Gun-howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="55782" end="55788" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="Mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="55905" end="55915" title="Gun-mortar" label="Gun-mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241267" start="56002" end="56010" title="Tank gun" label="Tank gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="56043" end="56047" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="56083" end="56102" title="Anti-tank artillery" label="Anti-tank artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="56172" end="56196" title="armored fighting vehicle" label="armored fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937453" start="56209" end="56214" title="vehicle armor" label="armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370129" start="56218" end="56231" title="Anti-tank gun" label="Anti-tank gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="56320" end="56343" title="Anti-aircraft artillery" label="Anti-aircraft artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="56390" end="56398" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q167682" start="56508" end="56524" title="Rocket artillery" label="Rocket artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037215" start="56535" end="56541" title="rocket (weapon)" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="56546" end="56553" title="missile" label="missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049358" start="56584" end="56595" title="Railway gun" label="Railway gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q208502" start="56689" end="56702" title="railway wagon" label="railway wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q511450" start="56707" end="56722" title="Naval artillery" label="Naval artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="56740" end="56747" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="56906" end="56916" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358324" start="57133" end="57150" title="Coastal artillery" label="Coastal artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q57370" start="57256" end="57269" title="Atlantic Wall" label="Atlantic Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4084186" start="57511" end="57528" title="130 mm coastal defense gun A-222" label="&amp;quot;Bereg&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q712918" start="57584" end="57604" title="counter-battery fire" label="counter-battery fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367441" start="57762" end="57780" title="Aircraft artillery" label="Aircraft artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="57812" end="57827" title="attack aircraft" label="attack aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316223" start="57868" end="57875" title="gunship" label="gunship"/>
<link wikidata="Q602517" start="57880" end="57897" title="Nuclear artillery" label="Nuclear artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="57921" end="57935" title="Nuclear weapon" label="nuclear shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000908" start="58019" end="58033" title="Self-propelled artillery" label="self-propelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402493" start="58057" end="58072" title="Field artillery" label="towed artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016578" start="58103" end="58120" title="artillery tractor" label="artillery tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q908333" start="58229" end="58232" title="Auxiliary power unit" label="APU"/>
<link wikidata="Q672365" start="59078" end="59093" title="Horse artillery" label="Horse artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402493" start="59248" end="59283" title="Field artillery" label="Field or &amp;quot;foot&amp;quot; artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q167682" start="59417" end="59424" title="rocket artillery" label="rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358324" start="59700" end="59723" title="Coastal artillery" label="coast defence artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497061" start="59754" end="59772" title="mountain gun" label="Mountain artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q511450" start="60031" end="60046" title="Naval artillery" label="Naval artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="60319" end="60334" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q705582" start="60390" end="60416" title="SMS Königsberg (1905)" label="SMS &amp;quot;Königsberg&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="60459" end="60465" title="German Empire" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="60911" end="60930" title="Anti-tank artillery" label="Anti-tank artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="61378" end="61401" title="Anti-aircraft artillery" label="Anti-aircraft artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330892" start="62613" end="62622" title="field gun" label="field gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q180126" start="62625" end="62634" title="howitzers" label="howitzers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="62640" end="62647" title="mortar (weapon)" label="mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q180126" start="64753" end="64766" title="gun howitzers" label="gun howitzers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="65161" end="65168" title="mortar (weapon)" label="Mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049358" start="68445" end="68462" title="Railway gun" label="Railway artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="70486" end="70493" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="70599" end="70607" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="70629" end="70635" title="Armoured fighting vehicle" label="armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239646" start="72712" end="72721" title="predicted fire" label="predicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q712918" start="72957" end="72976" title="Counterbattery fire" label="Counterbattery fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091350" start="73605" end="73619" title="Harassing fire" label="Harassing fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388247" start="78710" end="78715" title="FH-70" label="FH-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="79372" end="79383" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q712903" start="81026" end="81047" title="counter-battery radar" label="counter-battery radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q97210751" start="81813" end="81834" title="forward observer" label="Forward Observer (FO)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446976" start="81840" end="81867" title="fire direction center" label="Fire Direction Center (FDC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q102626" start="81961" end="81971" title="binoculars" label="binoculars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426632" start="81973" end="81990" title="laser rangefinder" label="laser rangefinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q240313" start="82681" end="82688" title="Artillery battery" label="battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434573" start="85455" end="85469" title="time on target" label="time on target"/>
<link wikidata="Q297193" start="87440" end="87445" title="AS-90" label="AS-90"/>
<link wikidata="Q391924" start="87467" end="87475" title="Denel G6" label="Denel G6"/>
<link wikidata="Q156968" start="87563" end="87582" title="Panzerhaubitze 2000" label="Panzerhaubitze 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179201" start="87669" end="87689" title="155mm SpGH ZUZANA" label="155 mm SpGH ZUZANA 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q488232" start="87695" end="87705" title="K9 Thunder" label="K9 Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q713001" start="87712" end="87726" title="Archer Artillery System" label="Archer project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361557" start="87936" end="87940" title="AMOS" label="AMOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834519" start="87975" end="87984" title="BAE Systems Hägglunds" label="Hägglunds"/>
<link wikidata="Q613116" start="87998" end="88004" title="Patria (company)" label="Patria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597534" start="88067" end="88075" title="XM2001 Crusader" label="Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="88623" end="88628" title="Fuze (explosives)" label="fuzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q333133" start="88632" end="88646" title="proximity fuze" label="proximity fuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="88931" end="88950" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="89089" end="89094" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="89387" end="89408" title="anti-aircraft warfare" label="anti-aircraft warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q110877588" start="89504" end="89517" title="fragmentation (weaponry)" label="fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q575759" start="90033" end="90045" title="war memorial" label="war memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272708" start="90161" end="90178" title="List of artillery" label="List of artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q379582" start="90181" end="90200" title="Advanced Gun System" label="Advanced Gun System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801148" start="90203" end="90220" title="Artillery museums" label="Artillery museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q304860" start="90223" end="90242" title="Barrage (artillery)" label="Barrage (artillery)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879790" start="90245" end="90273" title="Beehive anti-personnel round" label="Beehive anti-personnel round"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053583" start="90276" end="90283" title="Coilgun" label="Coilgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950350" start="90286" end="90310" title="Combustion light-gas gun" label="Combustion light-gas gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q905964" start="90313" end="90320" title="Cordite" label="Cordite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="90323" end="90327" title="Fuze" label="Fuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131496" start="90330" end="90340" title="Gun laying" label="Gun laying"/>
<link wikidata="Q658123" start="90343" end="90356" title="Light-gas gun" label="Light-gas gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q753063" start="90359" end="90368" title="Paris Gun" label="Paris Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q875724" start="90371" end="90378" title="Railgun" label="Railgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500477" start="90381" end="90396" title="Shoot-and-scoot" label="Shoot-and-scoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q750604" start="90399" end="90413" title="Shrapnel shell" label="Shrapnel shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164253" start="90416" end="90432" title="Suppressive fire" label="Suppressive fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639715" start="90435" end="90479" title="Improvised artillery in the Syrian Civil War" label="Improvised artillery in the Syrian Civil War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2510" wikidata="Q154936" url="?curid=2510" title="Arnulf of Carinthia">
<text>Arnulf of Carinthia ( – 8 December 899) was the duke of Carinthia who overthrew his uncle Emperor Charles the Fat to become the Carolingian king of East Francia from 887, the disputed king of Italy from 894, and the disputed emperor from 22 February 896 until his death at Ratisbon, Bavaria.

==Early life==
===Illegitimacy and early life===
Arnulf was the illegitimate son of Carloman of Bavaria and Liutswind, who may have been the sister of Ernst, Count of the Bavarian Nordgau Margraviate (now in the area of the Upper Palatinate), or perhaps the burgrave of Passau, according to other sources. After Arnulf&#x27;s birth, Carloman married before 861, a daughter of that same Count Ernst, who died after 8 August 879. As it is mainly West-Franconian historiography that speaks of Arnulf&#x27;s illegitimacy, it is quite possible that the two women are actually the same person, Liutswind, and that Carloman married Arnulf&#x27;s mother, thus legitimizing his son.

Arnulf was granted the rule over the Duchy of Carinthia, a Frankish vassal state and successor of the ancient Principality of Carantania by his father, after Carloman reconciled with his own father, King Louis the German, and was made king in the Duchy of Bavaria.

Arnulf spent his childhood in &quot;Mosaburch&quot; or Mosapurc, which is widely believed to be Moosburg in Carinthia. Moosburg was a few miles away from one of the imperial residences, the Carolingian Kaiserpfalz at Karnburg, which had been the residence of the Carantanian princes. Arnulf kept his seat here, and from later events it may be inferred that the Carantanians, from an early time, treated him as their own duke. Later, after he had been crowned King of East Francia, Arnulf turned his old territory of Carinthia into the March of Carinthia, a part of the Duchy of Bavaria.

===Regional ruler===
After Carloman was incapacitated by a stroke in 879, Louis the Younger inherited Bavaria, Charles the Fat was given the Kingdom of Italy, and Arnulf was confirmed in Carinthia by an agreement with Carloman. However, Bavaria was more or less ruled by Arnulf during the summer and autumn of 879 while his father arranged his succession. He was also granted &quot;Pannonia,&quot; in the words of the &quot;Annales Fuldenses&quot;, or &quot;Carantanum,&quot; in the words of Regino of Prüm. The division of the realm was confirmed in 880 after Carloman&#x27;s death.

When Engelschalk II of Pannonia in 882 rebelled against Margrave Aribo and ignited the Wilhelminer War, Arnulf supported him and accepted his and his brother&#x27;s homage. This ruined Arnulf&#x27;s relationship with his uncle, Emperor Charles the Fat, and put him at war with Svatopluk of Moravia. Pannonia was invaded, but Arnulf refused to give up the young Wilhelminers. Arnulf did not make peace with Svatopluk until late 885, by which time the Moravian ruler was loyal to the emperor. Some scholars see this war as destroying Arnulf&#x27;s hopes of succeeding Charles the Fat.

==King of East Francia==

Arnulf took the leading role in the deposition of Charles the Fat. With the support of the Frankish nobles, Arnulf called a Diet at Tribur and deposed Charles in November 887, under threat of military action. Charles peacefully agreed to this involuntary retirement, but not without first chastising his nephew for his treachery and asking for a few royal villas in Swabia on which to live out his final months, which Arnulf granted him. Arnulf, having distinguished himself in the war against the Slavs, was then elected king by the nobles of East Francia (only the eastern realm, though Charles had ruled the whole of the Frankish Empire). West Francia, the Kingdom of Burgundy, and the Kingdom of Italy elected their own kings from the Carolingian family.

Like many rulers of the period, Arnulf was heavily involved in ecclesiastical disputes. In 895, at the Diet of Tribur, he presided over a dispute between the episcopal sees of Bremen, Hamburg, and Cologne over jurisdictional authority, which saw Bremen and Hamburg remain a combined see, independent of the see of Cologne.

Arnulf was more a fighter than a negotiator. In 890, he was successfully battling Slavs in Pannonia. In early/mid-891, Vikings invaded Lotharingia and crushed an East Frankish army at Maastricht. Terms such as &quot;Vikings&quot;, &quot;Danes&quot;, &quot;Northmen&quot; and &quot;Norwegians&quot; have been used loosely and interchangeably to describe these invaders. In September 891, Arnulf repelled the Vikings and essentially ended their attacks on that front. The &quot;Annales Fuldenses&quot; report that there were so many dead Northmen that their bodies blocked the run of the river. After this victory, Arnulf built a castle on an island in the Dijle river.

===Intervention in West Francia===
Arnulf took advantage of the problems in West Francia after the death of Charles the Fat to secure the territory of Lotharingia, which he converted into a kingdom for his son Zwentibold. In 889, Arnulf supported the claim of Louis the Blind to the kingdom of Provence, after receiving a personal appeal from Louis&#x27; mother, Ermengard, who came to see Arnulf at Forchheim in May 889.

Recognising the superiority of Arnulf&#x27;s position in 888, king Odo of France formally accepted the suzerainty of Arnulf. In 893, Arnulf switched his support from Odo to Charles the Simple after being persuaded by Fulk, Archbishop of Reims, that it was in his best interests. Arnulf then took advantage of the following fighting between Odo and Charles in 894, harrying some territories of West Francia. At one point, Charles the Simple was forced to flee to Arnulf and ask for his protection. His intervention soon forced Pope Formosus to get involved, as he was worried that a divided and war weary West Francia would be easy prey for the Vikings.

In 895, Arnulf summoned both Charles and Odo to his residence at Worms. Charles&#x27;s advisers convinced him not to go, and he sent a representative in his place. Odo, on the other hand, personally attended, together with a large retinue, bearing many gifts for Arnulf. Angered by the non-appearance of Charles, he welcomed Odo at the Diet of Worms in May 895 and again supported Odo&#x27;s claim to the throne of West Francia. In the same assembly he crowned his illegitimate son Zwentibold as the king of Lotharingia.

===Wars with Moravia===
As early as 880, Arnulf had designs on Great Moravia and had the Frankish bishop Wiching of Nitra interfere with the missionary activities of the Eastern Orthodox priest Methodius, with the aim of preventing any potential for creating a unified Moravian state. Arnulf had formal relations with the ruler of the Moravian Kingdom, Svatopluk, using them to learn the latter&#x27;s military and political secrets. Later, these tactics were used to occupy the territory of the Greater Moravian state.

Arnulf failed to conquer the whole of Great Moravia in wars of 892, 893, and 899. Yet Arnulf did achieve some successes, in particular in 895, when the Duchy of Bohemia broke away from Great Moravia and became his vassal state. An accord was reached between him and Duke of Bohemia Borivoj I. Bohemia was thus freed from the dangers of Frankish invasion. In 893 or 894 Great Moravia probably lost a part of its territory—present-day western Hungary—to him. As a reward, Wiching became Arnulf&#x27;s chancellor in 892. In his attempts to conquer Moravia, in 899 Arnulf reached out to Magyars who had settled in the Carpathian Basin, and with their help he imposed a measure of control over Moravia.

==King of Italy and Holy Roman Emperor==

In Italy Guy III of Spoleto and Berengar of Friuli fought over the Iron Crown of Lombardy. Berengar had been crowned king in 887, but Guy was then crowned in 889. While Pope Stephen V supported Guy, even crowning him Roman Emperor in 891, Arnulf threw his support behind Berengar.

In 893, the new Pope Formosus, not trusting the newly crowned co-emperors Guy and his son Lambert, sent an embassy to Omuntesberch, where Arnulf was meeting with Svatopluk, to request that Arnulf come and liberate Italy, where he would be crowned emperor in Rome. Arnulf met the &quot;Primores&quot; of the Kingdom of Italy, dismissed them with gifts and promised to assist the pope. Arnulf then sent Zwentibold with a Bavarian army to join Berengar. They defeated Guy but were bought off and left in autumn.

When Pope Formosus again asked Arnulf to invade, the duke personally led an army across the Alps, early in 894. In January 894, Bergamo fell, and Count Ambrose, Guy&#x27;s representative in the city, was hanged from a tree by the city&#x27;s gates. Conquering all of the territory north of the Po River, Arnulf forced the surrender of Milan and then drove Guy out of Pavia, where he was crowned King of Italy. Arnulf went no further before Guy died suddenly in late autumn, and a fever incapacitated his troops. His march northward through the Alps was interrupted by Rudolph I of Burgundy, and it was only with great difficulty that Arnulf crossed the mountain range. In retaliation, Arnulf ordered Zwentibold to ravage Rudolph&#x27;s kingdom. In the meantime, Lambert and his mother Ageltrude travelled to Rome to receive papal confirmation of his imperial succession, but when Pope Formosus, still desiring to crown Arnulf, refused, he was imprisoned in Castel Sant&#x27;Angelo.
In September 895, a new papal embassy arrived in Regensburg beseeching Arnulf&#x27;s aid. In October, Arnulf undertook his second campaign into Italy. He crossed the Alps quickly and again took Pavia, but then he continued slowly, garnering support among the nobility of Tuscany. Maginulf, Count of Milan, and Walfred of Friuli joined him. Eventually even Adalbert II of Tuscany abandoned Lambert. Finding Rome locked against him and held by Ageltrude, Arnulf had to take the city by force on 21 February 896, freeing the pope. Arnulf was then greeted at the Ponte Milvio by the Roman Senate who escorted him into the Leonine City, where he was received by Pope Formosus on the steps of the Santi Apostoli.

On 22 February 896, Formosus led the king into the church of St. Peter, anointed and crowned him as emperor, and saluted him as &quot;Augustus&quot;. Arnulf then proceeded to the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls, where he received the homage of the Roman people, who swore &quot;never to hand over the city to Lambert or his mother Ageltrude&quot;. Arnulf then proceeded to exile to Bavaria two leading senators, Constantine and Stephen, who had helped Ageltrude to seize Rome.

Leaving one of his vassals, Farold, to hold Rome, two weeks later Arnulf marched on Spoleto, where Ageltrude had fled to join Lambert. However at this point, Arnulf had a stroke, forcing him to call off the campaign and return to Bavaria. Rumours of the time made Arnulf&#x27;s condition to be a result of poisoning at the hand of Ageltrude.

Arnulf retained power in Italy only as long as he was personally there. On his way north, he stopped at Pavia where he crowned his illegitimate son Ratold as sub-king of Italy, after which he left Ratold in Milan in an attempt to preserve his hold on Italy. That same year Pope Formosus died, leaving Lambert once again in power, and both he and Berengar proceeded to kill any officials who had been appointed by Arnulf, forcing Ratold to flee from Milan to Bavaria. For the rest of his life Arnulf exercised very little control in Italy, and his agents in Rome did not prevent the accession of Pope Stephen VI in 896. The pope initially gave his support to Arnulf but eventually became a supporter of Lambert.

==Final years==
In addition to after effects of the stroke, Arnulf contracted morbus pediculosis (infestation of pubic lice on his eyelid), which prevented him from effectively dealing with the problems besetting his reign. Italy was lost, raiders from Moravia and Magyars were continually harassing his lands, and Lotharingia was in revolt against Zwentibold. He was also plagued by escalating violence and power struggles among the lower Frankish nobility.

On 8 December 899 Arnulf died at Ratisbon, in present-day Bavaria. He is entombed in St. Emmeram&#x27;s Basilica at Regensburg, which is now known as Schloss Thurn und Taxis, the palace of the princes of Thurn und Taxis. He was succeeded as the king of East Francia by his only legitimate son from Ota, Louis the Child. After Louis&#x27; death in 911 at age 17 or 18, the East Frankish branch of the Carolingian dynasty ceased to exist. Arnulf had had the nobility recognize the rights of his illegitimate sons, Zwentibold and Ratold, as his successors. Zwentibold continued to rule Lotharingia until his murder in 900.

== See also ==

*Family tree of German monarchs
*List of Frankish kings

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Duckett, Eleanor (1968). &quot;Death and Life in the Tenth Century&quot;. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
* Comyn, Robert. &quot;History of the Western Empire, from its Restoration by Charlemagne to the Accession of Charles V, Vol. I&quot;. 1851
* Bryce, James, &quot;The Holy Roman Empire&quot;, MacMillan. 1913
* Mann, Horace, K. &quot;The Lives of the Popes in the Early Middle Ages, Vol III: The Popes During the Carolingian Empire, 858–891&quot;. 1925
* Mann, Horace, K. &quot;The Lives of the Popes in the Early Middle Ages, Vol IV: The Popes in the Days of Feudal Anarchy, 891–999&quot;. 1925</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q154936" start="0" end="19" title="Arnulf of Carinthia" label="Arnulf of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="48" end="65" title="duke of Carinthia" label="duke of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q150712" start="98" end="113" title="Charles the Fat" label="Charles the Fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q133602" start="128" end="139" title="Carolingian" label="Carolingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q153080" start="148" end="160" title="East Francia" label="East Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="184" end="197" title="king of Italy" label="king of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="225" end="232" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978" start="273" end="281" title="Ratisbon" label="Ratisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="283" end="290" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q157084" start="377" end="396" title="Carloman of Bavaria" label="Carloman of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q897179" start="473" end="492" title="Margraviate of the Nordgau" label="Nordgau Margraviate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10555" start="517" end="533" title="Upper Palatinate" label="Upper Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4190" start="563" end="569" title="Passau" label="Passau"/>
<link wikidata="Q46370" start="737" end="752" title="West Francia" label="West-Franconian"/>
<link wikidata="Q702224" start="1005" end="1023" title="Duchy of Carinthia" label="Duchy of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="1027" end="1035" title="Franks" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q501754" start="1078" end="1104" title="Principality of Carantania" label="Principality of Carantania"/>
<link wikidata="Q152463" start="1172" end="1188" title="Louis the German" label="Louis the German"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="1215" end="1231" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Duchy of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q662412" start="1330" end="1338" title="Moosburg, Austria" label="Moosburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796442" start="1436" end="1447" title="Kaiserpfalz" label="Kaiserpfalz"/>
<link wikidata="Q218632" start="1451" end="1459" title="Zollfeld" label="Karnburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353544" start="1769" end="1787" title="March of Carinthia" label="March of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="1803" end="1819" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Duchy of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q160190" start="1896" end="1913" title="Louis the Younger" label="Louis the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q150712" start="1933" end="1948" title="Charles the Fat" label="Charles the Fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q838931" start="1963" end="1979" title="Kingdom of Italy (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q942436" start="2204" end="2212" title="March of Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q564374" start="2246" end="2263" title="Annales Fuldenses" label="Annales Fuldenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q455874" start="2314" end="2328" title="Regino of Prüm" label="Regino of Prüm"/>
<link wikidata="Q324152" start="2412" end="2426" title="Engelschalk II" label="Engelschalk II"/>
<link wikidata="Q657240" start="2472" end="2477" title="Aribo of Austria" label="Aribo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111313" start="2494" end="2509" title="Wilhelminer War" label="Wilhelminer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q437589" start="2684" end="2704" title="Svatopluk I of Moravia" label="Svatopluk of Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282872" start="3141" end="3145" title="diet (assembly)" label="Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q634084" start="3149" end="3155" title="Trebur" label="Tribur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812551" start="3383" end="3389" title="Swabia" label="Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="3515" end="3520" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q153080" start="3561" end="3573" title="East Francia" label="East Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="3641" end="3656" title="Frankish Empire" label="Frankish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q46370" start="3659" end="3671" title="West Francia" label="West Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q530670" start="3677" end="3696" title="Kingdom of Burgundy" label="Kingdom of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3840" end="3854" title="ecclesiastical" label="ecclesiastical"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="3935" end="3948" title="episcopal see" label="episcopal see"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="3953" end="3959" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="3961" end="3968" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="3974" end="3981" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q837128" start="4023" end="4041" title="Prince-Archbishopric of Bremen" label="Bremen and Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11805" start="4084" end="4098" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cologne" label="see of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="4220" end="4227" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673921" start="4236" end="4247" title="Lotharingia" label="Lotharingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309" start="4285" end="4295" title="Maastricht" label="Maastricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531443" start="4495" end="4515" title="Battle of Leuven (891)" label="repelled the Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q564374" start="4577" end="4594" title="Annales Fuldenses" label="Annales Fuldenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q934226" start="4756" end="4761" title="Dyle (river)" label="Dijle"/>
<link wikidata="Q243872" start="4980" end="4990" title="Zwentibold" label="Zwentibold"/>
<link wikidata="Q310435" start="5030" end="5045" title="Louis the Blind" label="Louis the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q33242" start="5053" end="5072" title="kingdom of Provence" label="kingdom of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q273602" start="5133" end="5142" title="Ermengard of Italy" label="Ermengard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16116" start="5170" end="5179" title="Forchheim" label="Forchheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q208086" start="5260" end="5273" title="Odo of France" label="Odo of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q187519" start="5366" end="5384" title="Charles the Simple" label="Charles the Simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q512325" start="5410" end="5435" title="Fulk, Archbishop of Reims" label="Fulk, Archbishop of Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q170499" start="5719" end="5732" title="Pope Formosus" label="Pope Formosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852" start="5912" end="5917" title="Worms, Germany" label="Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q193152" start="6432" end="6445" title="Great Moravia" label="Great Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q319786" start="6474" end="6481" title="Wiching" label="Wiching"/>
<link wikidata="Q26397" start="6485" end="6490" title="Nitra" label="Nitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="6539" end="6555" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q239925" start="6563" end="6572" title="Cyril and Methodius" label="Methodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q437589" start="6722" end="6731" title="Svatopluk I of Moravia" label="Svatopluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162698" start="7042" end="7058" title="Duchy of Bohemia" label="Duchy of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q360116" start="7172" end="7181" title="Borivoj I" label="Borivoj I"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="7331" end="7338" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="7473" end="7480" title="Magyars" label="Magyars"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="7504" end="7520" title="Carpathian Basin" label="Carpathian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q309930" start="7640" end="7658" title="Guy III of Spoleto" label="Guy III of Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q274606" start="7663" end="7681" title="Berengar of Friuli" label="Berengar of Friuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q545902" start="7698" end="7708" title="Iron Crown" label="Iron Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q245030" start="7800" end="7814" title="Pope Stephen V" label="Pope Stephen V"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="7848" end="7861" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q170499" start="7929" end="7942" title="Pope Formosus" label="Pope Formosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q354823" start="8003" end="8010" title="Lambert of Italy" label="Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8031" end="8043" title="Omuntesberch" label="Omuntesberch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="8515" end="8519" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q628" start="8551" end="8558" title="Bergamo" label="Bergamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q643" start="8717" end="8725" title="Po River" label="Po River"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="8758" end="8763" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="8790" end="8795" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="8818" end="8831" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q437435" start="8991" end="9012" title="Rudolph I of Burgundy" label="Rudolph I of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q515982" start="9208" end="9217" title="Ageltrude" label="Ageltrude"/>
<link wikidata="Q486382" start="9380" end="9403" title="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo" label="Castel Sant&amp;#x27;Angelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978" start="9454" end="9464" title="Regensburg" label="Regensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="9676" end="9683" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253914" start="9685" end="9709" title="Maginulf, Count of Milan" label="Maginulf, Count of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q739397" start="9715" end="9732" title="Walfred of Friuli" label="Walfred of Friuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q347496" start="9761" end="9783" title="Adalbert II of Tuscany" label="Adalbert II of Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127325" start="9964" end="9976" title="Ponte Milvio" label="Ponte Milvio"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="9984" end="9996" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q370350" start="10023" end="10035" title="Leonine City" label="Leonine City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515300" start="10096" end="10110" title="Santi Apostoli, Rome" label="Santi Apostoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q211804" start="10247" end="10255" title="Augustus (title)" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q231699" start="10292" end="10332" title="Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls" label="Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q20571" start="10684" end="10691" title="Spoleto" label="Spoleto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764987" start="11091" end="11097" title="Ratold of Italy" label="Ratold"/>
<link wikidata="Q238947" start="11538" end="11553" title="Pope Stephen VI" label="Pope Stephen VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381802" start="11733" end="11751" title="Pediculosis pubis" label="morbus pediculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978" start="12148" end="12156" title="Ratisbon" label="Ratisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="12173" end="12180" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q260633" start="12200" end="12227" title="Saint Emmeram&amp;#x27;s Abbey" label="St. Emmeram&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116135" start="12319" end="12334" title="Thurn und Taxis" label="Thurn und Taxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q265436" start="12413" end="12416" title="Ota (wife of Arnulf of Carinthia)" label="Ota"/>
<link wikidata="Q157099" start="12418" end="12433" title="Louis the Child" label="Louis the Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q133602" start="12515" end="12534" title="Carolingian dynasty" label="Carolingian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433410" start="12753" end="12783" title="Family tree of German monarchs" label="Family tree of German monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q283321" start="12785" end="12807" title="List of Frankish kings" label="List of Frankish kings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2511" wikidata="Q152783" url="?curid=2511" title="Alexanderplatz">
<text>| demolition_date = 
| designer = 
| known_for = 
| status = 
| website = 
| browse =
| embedded =


 (, &quot;Alexander Square&quot;) is a large public square and transport hub in the central Mitte district of Berlin. The square is named after the Russian Tsar Alexander I, which also denotes the larger neighbourhood stretching from in the north-east to and the in the south-west.

 is reputedly the most visited area of Berlin, beating Friedrichstrasse and City West. It is a popular starting point for tourists, with many attractions including the (TV tower), the Nikolai Quarter and the (&#x27;Red City Hall&#x27;) situated nearby. is still one of Berlin&#x27;s major commercial areas, housing various shopping malls, department stores and other large retail locations.

==History==


===Early history to the 18th century===
A hospital stood at the location of present-day since the 13th century. Named (St. George), the hospital gave its name to the nearby (George Gate) of the Berlin city wall. Outside the city walls, this area was largely undeveloped until around 1400, when the first settlers began building thatched cottages. As a gallows was located close by, the area earned the nickname the (&#x27;Devil&#x27;s Pleasure Garden&#x27;).

The George Gate became the most important of Berlin&#x27;s city gates during the 16th century, being the main entry point for goods arriving along the roads to the north and north-east of the city, for example from , and , and the big Hanseatic cities on the Baltic Sea.

After the Thirty Years&#x27; War, the city wall was strengthened. From 1658 to 1683, a citywide fortress was constructed to plans by the Linz master builder, . The new fortress contained 13 bastions connected by ramparts and was preceded by a moat measuring up to wide. Within the new fortress, many of the historic city wall gates were closed. For example, the southeastern Gate was closed but the Georgian Gate remained open, making the Georgian Gate an even more important entrance to the city.

In 1681, the trade of cattle and pig fattening was banned within the city. Frederick William, the Great Elector, granted cheaper plots of land, waiving the basic interest rate, in the area in front of the Georgian Gate. Settlements grew rapidly and a weekly cattle market was established on the square in front of the Gate.

The area developed into a suburb – the – which continued to flourish into the late 17th century. Unlike the southwestern suburbs (, ) which were strictly and geometrically planned, the suburbs in the northeast (, and the ) proliferated without plan. Despite a building ban imposed in 1691, more than 600 houses existed in the area by 1700.

At that time, the George Gate was a rectangular gatehouse with a tower. Next to the tower stood a remaining tower from the original medieval city walls. The upper floors of the gatehouse served as the city jail. A drawbridge spanned the moat and the gate was locked at nightfall by the garrison using heavy oak planks.

A highway ran through the cattle market to the northeast towards . To the right stood the George chapel, an orphanage and a hospital that was donated by the Elector Sophie Dorothea in 1672. Next to the chapel stood a dilapidated medieval plague house which was demolished in 1716. Behind it was a rifleman&#x27;s field and an inn, later named the .

By the end of the 17th century, 600 to 700 families lived in this area. They included butchers, cattle herders, shepherds and dairy farmers. The George chapel was upgraded to the George church and received its own preacher.

=== (1701–1805) ===

After his coronation in on 6 May 1701 the Prussian King Frederick I entered Berlin through the George Gate. This led to the gate being renamed the King&#x27;s Gate, and the surrounding area became known in official documents as (King&#x27;s Gate Square). The suburb was renamed (or &#x27;royal suburbs&#x27; short).

In 1734, the Berlin Customs Wall, which initially consisted of a ring of palisade fences, was reinforced and grew to encompass the old city and its suburbs, including . This resulted in the King&#x27;s Gate losing importance as an entry point for goods into the city. The gate was finally demolished in 1746.

By the end of the 18th century, the basic structure of the royal suburbs of the had been developed. It consisted of irregular-shaped blocks of buildings running along the historic highways which once carried goods in various directions out of the gate. At this time, the area contained large factories (silk and wool), such as the (one of Berlin&#x27;s first cloth factories, located in a former barn) and a workhouse established in 1758 for beggars and homeless people, where the inmates worked a man-powered treadmill to turn a mill.

Soon, military facilities came to dominate the area, such as the 1799–1800 military parade grounds designed by David Gilly. At this time, the residents of the were mostly craftsmen, petty-bourgeois, retired soldiers and manufacturing workers. The southern part of the later was separated from traffic by trees and served as a parade ground, whereas the northern half remained a market. Beginning in the mid-18th century, the most important wool market in Germany was held in .

Between 1752 and 1755, the writer lived in a house on Alexanderplatz. In 1771, a new stone bridge (the ) was built over the moat and in 1777 a colonnade-lined row of shops () was constructed by architect . Between 1783 and 1784, seven three-storey buildings were erected around the square by , including the famous , where lived as a permanent tenant and stayed in the days before his suicide.

=== (1805–1900) ===
On 25 October 1805 the Russian Tsar Alexander I was welcomed to the city on the parade grounds in front of the old King&#x27;s Gate. To mark this occasion, on 2 November, King Frederick William III ordered the square to be renamed :
In the southeast of the square, the cloth factory buildings were converted into the Theater by at a cost of 120,000 Taler. The foundation stone was laid on 31 August 1823 and the opening ceremony occurred on 4 August 1824. Sales were poor, forcing the theatre to close on 3 June 1851. Thereafter, the building was used for wool storage, then as a tenement building, and finally as an inn called until the building&#x27;s demolition in 1932.

During these years, was populated by fish wives, water carriers, sand sellers, rag-and-bone men, knife sharpeners and day laborers.

Because of its importance as a transport hub, horse-drawn buses ran every 15 minutes between and in 1847.

During the March Revolution of 1848, large-scale street fighting occurred on the streets of , where revolutionaries used barricades to block the route from to the city.

Novelist and poet , who worked in the vicinity in a nearby pharmacy, participated in the construction of barricades and later described how he used materials from the Theater to barricade .

The continued to grow throughout the 19th century, with three-storey developments already existing at the beginning of the century and fourth storeys being constructed from the middle of the century. By the end of the century, most of the buildings were already five storeys high. The large factories and military facilities gave way to housing developments (mainly rental housing for the factory workers who had just moved into the city) and trading houses.

At the beginning of the 1870s, the Berlin administration had the former moat filled to build the Berlin city railway, which was opened in 1882 along with (&#x27; Railway Station&#x27;).

In 1883–1884, the Grand Hotel, a neo-Renaissance building with 185 rooms and shops beneath was constructed. From 1886 to 1890, built the police headquarters, a huge brick building whose tower on the northern corner dominated the building. In 1890, a district court at was also established.

In 1886, the local authorities built a central market hall west of the rail tracks, which replaced the weekly market on the in 1896. During the end of the 19th century, the emerging private traffic and the first horse bus lines dominated the northern part of the square, the southern part (the former parade ground) remained quiet, having green space elements added by garden director in 1889. The northwest of the square contained a second, smaller green space where, in 1895, the copper Berolina statue by sculptor was erected.

=== Between Empire and the Nazi era (1900–1940) ===
At the beginning of the 20th century, experienced its heyday. In 1901, founded the first German cabaret, the , in the former (&#x27;Secession stage&#x27;) at , initially under the name . It was announced as &quot; as upscale entertainment with artistic ambitions. Emperor-loyal and market-oriented stands the uncritical amusement in the foreground.&quot;

The merchants , and opened large department stores on : (1904–1911), (1910–1911) and (1911). marketed itself as a department store for the Berlin people, whereas modelled itself as a department store for the world.

In October 1905, the first section of the department store opened to the public. It was designed by architects and, who had already won second prize in the competition for the construction of the building. The department store underwent further construction phases and, in 1911, had a commercial space of and the longest department store façade in the world at in length.

For the construction of the department store, by architects and , the were removed in 1910 and now stand in the Park in .

In October 1908, the (&#x27;the teacher&#x27;s house&#x27;) was opened next to the at . It was designed by and Henry Gross. The building belonged to the (&#x27;teachers’ association&#x27;), who rented space on the ground floor of the building out to a pastry shop and restaurant to raise funds for the association. The building housed the teachers&#x27; library which survived two world wars, and today is integrated into the library for educational historical research. The rear of the property contained the association&#x27;s administrative building, a hotel for members and an exhibition hall. Notable events that took place in the hall include the funeral services for and on 2 February 1919 and, on 4 December 1920, the (Unification Party Congress) of the Communist Party and the USPD.

The First Ordinary Congress of the Communist Workers&#x27; Party of Germany was held in the nearby restaurant, 1–4 August 1920.

&#x27;s position as a main transport and traffic hub continued to fuel its development. In addition to the three underground lines, long-distance trains and trains ran along the &#x27;s viaduct arches. Omnibuses, horse-drawn from 1877 and, after 1898, also electric-powered trams, ran out of in all directions in a star shape. The subway station was designed by Alfred Grenander and followed the colour-coded order of subway stations, which began with green at and ran through to dark red.

In the Golden Twenties, was the epitome of the lively, pulsating cosmopolitan city of Berlin, rivalled in the city only by . Many of the buildings and rail bridges surrounding the platz bore large billboards that illuminated the night. The Berlin cigarette company Manoli had a famous billboard at the time which contained a ring of neon tubes that constantly circled a black ball. The proverbial &quot; of those years was characterized as &quot;. Writer wrote a poem referencing the advert, and the composer Rudolf Nelson made the legendary with the dancer Lucie Berber. The writer named his novel, , after the square, and filmed parts of his 1927 film (&quot;Berlin: The Symphony of the Big City&quot;) at .

=== Destruction of (1940–1945) ===

One of Berlin&#x27;s largest air-raid shelters during the Second World War was situated under . It was built between 1941 and 1943 for the by .

The war reached in early April 1945. The Berolina statue had already been removed in 1944 and probably melted down for use in arms production. During the Battle of Berlin, Red Army artillery bombarded the area around . The battles of the last days of the war destroyed considerable parts of the historic , as well as many of the buildings around .

The had entrenched itself within the tunnels of the underground system. Hours before fighting ended in Berlin on 2 May 1945, troops of the SS detonated explosives inside the north–south tunnel under the Canal to slow the advance of the Red Army towards Berlin&#x27;s city centre. The entire tunnel flooded, as well as large sections of the network via connecting passages at the underground station. Many of those seeking shelter in the tunnels were killed. Of the then of subway tunnel, around were flooded with more than one million cubic meters () of water.

===Demolition and reconstruction (1945–1964)===
Before a planned reconstruction of the entire could take place, all the war ruins needed to be demolished and cleared away. A popular black market emerged within the ruined area, which the police raided several times a day.

One structure demolished after World War II was the &#x27;Rote Burg&#x27;, a red brick building with round arches, previously used as police and Gestapo headquarters. The huge construction project began in 1886 and was completed in 1890; it was one of Berlin&#x27;s largest buildings. The &#x27;castle&#x27; suffered extensive damage during 1944-45 and was demolished in 1957. The site on the southwest corner of Alexanderplatz remained largely unused as a carpark until the Alexa shopping centre opened in 2007.

Reconstruction planning for post-war Berlin gave priority to the dedicated space to accommodate the rapidly growing motor traffic in inner-city thoroughfares. This idea of a traffic-oriented city was already based on considerations and plans by and from the 1930s.

===East Germany===

 has been subject to redevelopment several times in its history, most recently during the 1960s, when it was turned into a pedestrian zone and enlarged as part of the German Democratic Republic&#x27;s redevelopment of the city centre. It is surrounded by several notable structures including the (&#x27;TV Tower&#x27;).

During the Peaceful Revolution of 1989, the demonstration on 4 November 1989 was the largest demonstration in the history of the German Democratic Republic. Protests starting 15 October and peaked on 4 November with an estimated 200,000 participants who called on the government of the ruling Socialist Unity Party of Germany to step down and demanded a free press, the opening of the borders and their right to travel. Speakers were , , , , , and . The protests continued and culminated in the unexpected Fall of the Berlin Wall on 9 November 1989. 

===After German reunification (1989)===

Ever since German reunification, has undergone a gradual process of change with many of the surrounding buildings being renovated. After the political turnaround in the wake of the fall of the Berlin Wall, socialist urban planning and architecture of the 1970s no longer corresponded to the current ideas of an inner-city square. Investors demanded planning security for their construction projects. After initial discussions with the public, the goal quickly arose to reinstate &#x27;s tram network for better connections to surrounding city quarters. In 1993, an urban planning ideas competition for architects took place to redesign the square and its surrounding area.

In the first phase, there were 16 submissions, five of which were selected for the second phase of the competition. These five architects had to adapt their plans to detailed requirements. For example, the return of the Alex&#x27;s trams was planned, with the implementation to be made in several stages.

The winner, who was determined on 17 September 1993, was the Berlin architect . &#x27;s plan was based on Behrens’ design, provided a horseshoe-shaped area of seven- to eight-storey buildings and high towers with 42 floors. The and the – both listed buildings – would form the southwestern boundary. Second place went to the design by and . The proposal of the architecture firm Kny &amp; Weber, which was strongly based on the horseshoe shape of Wagner, finally won the third place. The design by was chosen on 7 June 1994 by the Berlin Senate as a basis for the further transformation of .

In 1993, architect &#x27;s master plan for a major redevelopment including the construction of several skyscrapers was published.

In 1995, completed the renovation of the . In 1998, the first tram returned to , and in 1999, the town planning contracts for the implementation of and &#x27;s plans were signed by the landowners and the investors.

===21st century===

On 2 April 2000, the Senate finally fixed the development plan for . The purchase contracts between investors and the Senate Department for Urban Development were signed on 23 May 2002, thus laying the foundations for the development.

The CUBIX multiplex cinema (CineStar Cubix am Alexanderplatz, styled CUBIX), which opened in November 2000, joined the team of Berlin International Film Festival cinemas in 2007, and the festival shows films on three of its screens.

Renovation of the department store began in 2004, led by Berlin professor of architecture, and his son . The building was enlarged by about and has since operated under the name .

Beginning with the reconstruction of the department store in 2004, and the biggest underground railway station of Berlin, some buildings were redesigned and new structures built on the square&#x27;s south-eastern side. Sidewalks were expanded to shrink one of the avenues, a new underground garage was built, and commuter tunnels meant to keep pedestrians off the streets were removed. Between 2005 and 2006, was renovated and later became a branch of the clothing chain, C&amp;A.

In 2005, the began work to extend the tram line from to (Alex II). This route was originally to be opened in 2000 but was postponed several times. After further delays caused by the 2006 FIFA World Cup, the route opened on 30 May 2007.

In February 2006, the redesign of the walk-in plaza began. The redevelopment plans were provided by the architecture firm Gerkan, Marg and Partners and the Hamburg-based company . The final plans emerged from a design competition launched by the state of Berlin in 2004. However, the paving work was temporarily interrupted a few months after the start of construction by the 2006 FIFA World Cup and all excavation pits had to be provisionally asphalted over. The construction work could only be completed at the end of 2007.

The renovation of , the largest Berlin underground station, had been ongoing since the mid-1990s and was finally completed in October 2008.

The was given a pavement of yellow granite, bordered by grey mosaic paving around the buildings. Wall AG modernized the 1920s-era underground toilets at a cost of 750,000 euros. The total redesign cost amounted to around 8.7 million euros.

On 12 September 2007 the Alexa shopping centre opened. It is located in the immediate vicinity of the , on the site of the old Berlin police headquarters. With a sales area, it is one of the largest shopping centres in Berlin.

In May 2007, the Texas property development company Hines began building a six-story commercial building named . The building was built on a plot of , which, according to the plans, closes the square to the east and thus reduces the area of the Platz. The building was opened on 25 March 2009.

At the beginning of 2007, the construction company created an underground garage with three levels below the , located between the hotel tower and the building, which cost 25 million euros to build and provides space for around 700 cars. The opening took place on 26 November 2010. At the same time, the Senate narrowed from almost wide to wide (), thus reducing it to three lanes in each direction.

Behind the station, next to the CUBIX cinema in the immediate vicinity of the TV tower, the high residential and commercial building, Alea 101, was built between 2012 and 2014.

 it was assessed that due to a lack of demand the skyscrapers planned in 1993 were unlikely to be constructed.

In January 2014, a 39-story residential tower designed by Frank Gehry was announced, but this project was put on hold in 2018.
The area is the largest area for crime in Berlin. As of October 2017, was classified a (&quot;crime-contaminated location&quot;) by the (General Safety and Planning Laws).

==Today and future plans==
Despite the reconstruction of the tram line crossing, it has retained its socialist character, including the much-graffitied , a popular venue.

 is reputedly the most visited area of Berlin, beating Friedrichstrasse and City West. It is a popular starting point for tourists, with many attractions including the (TV tower), the Nikolai Quarter and the (&#x27;Red City Hall&#x27;) situated nearby. is still one of Berlin&#x27;s major commercial areas, housing various shopping malls, department stores and other large retail locations.

Many historic buildings are located in the vicinity of . The traditional seat of city government, the , or &#x27;Red City Hall&#x27;, is located nearby, as was the former East German parliament building, the . The was demolished from 2006–2008 to make room for a full reconstruction of the Baroque Berlin Palace, or .

 is also the name of the S-Bahn and U-Bahn stations there. It is one of Berlin&#x27;s largest and most important transportation hubs, being a meeting place of three subway () lines, three lines, and many tram and bus lines, as well as regional trains.

It also accommodates the Park Inn Berlin and the World Time Clock, a continually rotating installation that shows the time throughout the globe, the House of Travel, and &#x27;s (House of Teachers)&#x27;.

Long-term plans exist for the demolition of the high former (now the Hotel Park-Inn), with the site to be replaced by three skyscrapers. If and when this plan will be implemented is unclear, especially since the hotel tower received a new façade as recently as in 2005, and the occupancy rates of the hotel are very good. However, the plans could give way in the next few years to a suggested high new block conversion. The previous main tenant of the development, Saturn, moved into the building in March 2009. In 2014, Primark opened a branch inside the hotel building.

The majority of the planned high skyscrapers will probably never be built. The state of Berlin has announced that it will not enforce the corresponding urban development contracts against the market. Of the 13 planned skyscrapers, 10 remained as of 2008, after modifications to the plans – eight of which had construction rights. Some investors in the Alexa shopping centre announced several times since 2007 that they would sell their respective shares in the plot to an investor interested in building a high-rise building.

The first concrete plans for the construction of a high-rise were made by Hines, the investor behind die mitte. In 2009, the construction of a high tower to be built behind die mitte was announced. On 12 September 2011, a slightly modified development plan was presented, which provided for a residential tower housing 400 apartments. In early 2013, the development plan was opened to the public.

In autumn 2015, the Berlin Senate organized two forums in which interested citizens could express their opinions on the proposed changes to the . Architects, city planners and Senate officials held open discussions. On that occasion, however, it was reiterated that the plans for high-rise developments were not up for debate. According to the master plan of the architect , up to eleven huge buildings will continue to be built, which will house a mixture of shops and apartments.

== Roads and public transport ==

During the post-war reconstruction of the 1960s, was completely pedestrianized. Since then, trams were reintroduced to the area in 1998.

station provides connections, access to the U2, U5 and U8 subway lines, regional train lines for DB Regio and ODEG services and, on weekends, the (HBX). Several tram and bus lines also service the area.

The following main roads connect to :
* Northwest: (federal highways B 2 and B 5)
* Northeast: (B 2 and B 5)
* Southeast: (B 1)
* Southwest (in front of the station, in the pedestrian zone): 

Several arterial roads lead radially from to the outskirts of Berlin. These include (clockwise from north to south-east):
* / – – (to Bundesstraße 96a)
* – intersection – (main road 109 to the triangle at the )
* / – (B 2) – (intersection ) – (B 2 via to the junction at )

 (B 1 and B 5) – – / – (B 1 and B 5 to junction at )

== Structures ==

=== World Clock ===

The World Clock (‹See Tfd›German: Weltzeituhr), is a large turret-style world clock located. By reading the markings on its metal rotunda, the current time for 148 major cities from around the world can be determined. Since its erection by the German Democratic Republic in 1969, it has been a tourist attraction and meeting place.

=== Berolina ===

Berolina is the female personification of Berlin and the allegorical female figure symbolizing the city. One of the best-known portraits of Berolina is the statue that once stood in Alexanderplatz.

=== Fountain of Friendship ===
The Fountain of Friendship () was erected in 1970 during the redesign of and inaugurated on October 7. It was created by and his group of artists. Its water basin has a diameter of 23 meters, it is 6.20 meters high and is built from embossed copper, glass, ceramics and enamel. The water spurts from the highest point and then flows down in spirals over 17 shells, which each have a diameter between one and four meters. After German reunification, it was completely renovated in a metal art workshop during the reconstruction of the .

=== Other ===
Apart from , is the only existing square in front of one of the medieval gates of Berlin&#x27;s city well.

==Image gallery==
==Further reading==
* Weszkalnys, Gisa (2010). &quot;Berlin, Alexanderplatz: Transforming Place in a Unified Germany&quot;. Berghahn Books.
* &quot;Alexanderplatz: Plenty of Space for Free Speech&quot;. In: Sites of Unity (Haus der Geschichte), 2022.

==External links==

* Alexanderplatz – Overview of the changes

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q152783" start="101" end="101" title="Alexanderplatz" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q174782" start="146" end="159" title="town square" label="public square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013767" start="193" end="198" title="Mitte (locality)" label="Mitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="211" end="217" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618625" start="249" end="261" title="Emperor of All Russia" label="Russian Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="262" end="273" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q316893" start="439" end="455" title="Friedrichstraße" label="Friedrichstrasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q320676" start="460" end="469" title="City West" label="City West"/>
<link wikidata="Q703927" start="568" end="583" title="Nikolaiviertel" label="Nikolai Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="707" end="720" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q216107" start="723" end="739" title="department store" label="department store"/>
<link wikidata="Q57346" start="984" end="1000" title="Defensive wall" label="Berlin city wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="1118" end="1135" title="thatching" label="thatched cottages"/>
<link wikidata="Q243778" start="1142" end="1149" title="gallows" label="gallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="1485" end="1501" title="Hanseatic Cities" label="Hanseatic cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="1509" end="1519" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="1532" end="1554" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q871843" start="1618" end="1626" title="Berlin Fortress" label="fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q41329" start="1659" end="1663" title="Linz" label="Linz"/>
<link wikidata="Q152727" start="2096" end="2132" title="Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg" label="Frederick William, the Great Elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2819" end="2827" title="middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q65933" start="3172" end="3187" title="Dorothea of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg" label="Sophie Dorothea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171457" start="3245" end="3257" title="plague house" label="plague house"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="3645" end="3652" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151826" start="3659" end="3670" title="Frederick I of Prussia" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3750" end="3766" title="King&amp;#x27;s Gate (Berlin)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q532578" start="3933" end="3952" title="Berlin Customs Wall" label="Berlin Customs Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q90685" start="3993" end="4001" title="palisade" label="palisade"/>
<link wikidata="Q445970" start="4878" end="4889" title="David Gilly" label="David Gilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="5630" end="5637" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="5691" end="5707" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Tsar Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q37134" start="5836" end="5857" title="Frederick William III of Prussia" label="Frederick William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q162528" start="6009" end="6014" title="Thaler" label="Taler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455155" start="6372" end="6382" title="fishwife" label="fish wives"/>
<link wikidata="Q965417" start="6384" end="6397" title="water carrier" label="water carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674312" start="6414" end="6430" title="rag-and-bone man" label="rag-and-bone men"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671453" start="6432" end="6448" title="knife sharpening" label="knife sharpeners"/>
<link wikidata="Q897359" start="6453" end="6462" title="day labor" label="day labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699" start="6586" end="6602" title="German revolutions of 1848–49" label="March Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q750164" start="8086" end="8101" title="horsebus" label="horse bus lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q574396" start="8363" end="8371" title="Berolina" label="Berolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q216107" start="8996" end="9012" title="department store" label="department store"/>
<link wikidata="Q873409" start="9140" end="9143" title="Cremer and Wolffenstein" label="and"/>
<link wikidata="Q233591" start="10287" end="10302" title="Communist party" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q310296" start="10311" end="10315" title="USPD" label="USPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q617603" start="10353" end="10393" title="Communist Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Germany" label="Communist Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q696523" start="10809" end="10825" title="Alfred Grenander" label="Alfred Grenander"/>
<link wikidata="Q702442" start="10945" end="10960" title="Golden Twenties" label="Golden Twenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q214558" start="11447" end="11460" title="Rudolf Nelson" label="Rudolf Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11496" end="11508" title="Lucie Berber" label="Lucie Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q389959" start="11714" end="11731" title="air raid shelter" label="air-raid shelters"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11743" end="11759" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q574396" start="11871" end="11879" title="Berolina" label="Berolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="11984" end="12000" title="Battle of Berlin" label="Battle of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="12002" end="12010" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="12318" end="12320" title="Schutzstaffel" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q671428" start="12382" end="12387" title="Landwehr Canal" label="Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="12477" end="12482" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="13981" end="14007" title="East Germany" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q682258" start="14146" end="14165" title="Peaceful Revolution" label="Peaceful Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q328548" start="14179" end="14192" title="Alexanderplatz demonstration" label="demonstration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="14264" end="14290" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="14292" end="14299" title="Protest" label="Protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q49750" start="14428" end="14460" title="Socialist Unity Party of Germany" label="Socialist Unity Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q69163529" start="14641" end="14664" title="Fall of the Berlin Wall" label="Fall of the Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="14739" end="14759" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258752" start="14934" end="14958" title="urban planning in communist countries" label="socialist urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q540130" start="16239" end="16252" title="Berlin Senate" label="Berlin Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153108" start="16914" end="16923" title="multiplex (movie theater)" label="multiplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q321889" start="16932" end="16940" title="CineStar" label="CineStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q130871" start="17031" end="17065" title="Berlin International Film Festival" label="Berlin International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q701338" start="17791" end="17798" title="C&amp;amp;A" label="C&amp;amp;A"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="17983" end="18002" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q566384" start="18160" end="18185" title="Gerkan, Marg and Partners" label="Gerkan, Marg and Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619384" start="19227" end="19232" title="Hines Interests Limited Partnership" label="Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q180374" start="20219" end="20230" title="Frank Gehry" label="Frank Gehry"/>
<link wikidata="Q99668" start="20522" end="20526" title="Berlin Straßenbahn" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="20602" end="20610" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q316893" start="20688" end="20704" title="Friedrichstraße" label="Friedrichstrasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q320676" start="20709" end="20718" title="City West" label="City West"/>
<link wikidata="Q703927" start="20817" end="20832" title="Nikolaiviertel" label="Nikolai Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="20956" end="20969" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q216107" start="20972" end="20988" title="department store" label="department store"/>
<link wikidata="Q170119" start="21323" end="21336" title="Berlin Palace" label="Berlin Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q698497" start="21369" end="21375" title="Berlin Alexanderplatz railway station" label="S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q698497" start="21380" end="21386" title="Alexanderplatz (Berlin U-Bahn)" label="U-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q701571" start="21622" end="21637" title="Park Inn Berlin" label="Park Inn Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186173" start="21646" end="21662" title="World Clock (Alexanderplatz)" label="World Time Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q831995" start="21746" end="21761" title="House of Travel" label="House of Travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q137023" start="22324" end="22331" title="Primark" label="Primark"/>
<link wikidata="Q99668" start="23910" end="23915" title="trams in Berlin" label="trams"/>
<link wikidata="Q698497" start="23956" end="23963" title="Berlin Alexanderplatz station" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q99697" start="24000" end="24002" title="U2 (Berlin U-Bahn)" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q99711" start="24004" end="24006" title="U5 (Berlin U-Bahn)" label="U5"/>
<link wikidata="Q99729" start="24011" end="24013" title="U8 (Berlin U-Bahn)" label="U8"/>
<link wikidata="Q68646" start="24014" end="24020" title="Berlin U-Bahn" label="subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q14626453" start="24028" end="24042" title="regional rail" label="regional train"/>
<link wikidata="Q18853" start="24053" end="24061" title="DB Regio" label="DB Regio"/>
<link wikidata="Q145188" start="24066" end="24070" title="Ostdeutsche Eisenbahn" label="ODEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q99676" start="24126" end="24135" title="bus transport in Berlin" label="bus lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q561431" start="24212" end="24228" title="Bundesstraße" label="federal highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q34441" start="24229" end="24232" title="Bundesstraße 2" label="B 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q34452" start="24237" end="24240" title="Bundesstraße 5" label="B 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q34438" start="24283" end="24286" title="Bundesstraße 1" label="B 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304276" start="24361" end="24374" title="arterial road" label="arterial road"/>
<link wikidata="Q52751" start="24487" end="24502" title="Bundesstraße 96" label="Bundesstraße 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="25113" end="25119" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="25128" end="25139" title="Allegory" label="allegorical"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="25543" end="25549" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="25551" end="25556" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="25558" end="25565" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39194659" start="25571" end="25577" title="enamelled glass" label="enamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="25728" end="25748" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q315021" start="26201" end="26220" title="Haus der Geschichte" label="Haus der Geschichte"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2512" wikidata="Q188822" url="?curid=2512" title="Asian Development Bank">
<text>The Asian Development Bank (ADB) is a regional development bank to promote social and economic development in Asia. The bank is headquartered in Metro Manila, Philippines and maintains 31 field offices around the world

The bank was established on 19 December 1966 and admits the members of the UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP, formerly the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East or ECAFE), and non-regional developed countries. Starting with 31 members at its establishment, by 2019 ADB had 69 members.

The ADB was modeled closely on the World Bank and has a similar weighted voting system, where votes are distributed in proportion with members&#x27; capital subscriptions. ADB releases an annual report that summarizes its operations, budget, and other materials for review by the public. The ADB-Japan Scholarship Program (ADB-JSP) enrolls about 300 students annually in academic institutions located in 10 countries within the Region. After completing their study programs, scholars are expected to contribute to the economic and social development of their home countries. ADB holds the status of an official United Nations Observer.

As of 31 December 2020, Japan and the United States each holds the largest proportion of shares at 15.571%. China holds 6.429%, India holds 6.317%, and Australia holds 5.773%.

==Organization==
The highest policy-making body of the bank is the Board of Governors, composed of one representative from each member state. The Board of Governors, in turn, elect among themselves the twelve members of the board of directors and their deputies. Eight of the twelve members come from regional (Asia-Pacific) members while the others come from non-regional members.

The Board of Governors also elect the bank&#x27;s president, who is the chairperson of the board of directors and manages ADB. The president has a term of office lasting five years, and may be re-elected. Traditionally, and because Japan is one of the largest shareholders of the bank, the president has always been Japanese.

The current president is Masatsugu Asakawa. He succeeded Takehiko Nakao on 17 January 2020, who succeeded Haruhiko Kuroda in 2013. In 2024, Asakawa announced his resignation effective on 23 February 2025.

The headquarters of the bank is at 6 ADB Avenue, Mandaluyong, Metro Manila, Philippines, and it has 42 field offices in Asia and the Pacific and representative offices in Washington, Frankfurt, Tokyo and Sydney. The bank employs about 3,000 people, representing 60 of its 68 members.

===List of presidents===

==History==

===1960s===
As early as 1956, Japan Finance Minister Hisato Ichimada had suggested to United States Secretary of State John Foster Dulles that development projects in Southeast Asia could be supported by a new financial institution for the region. A year later, Japanese Prime Minister Nobusuke Kishi announced that Japan intended to sponsor the establishment of a regional development fund with resources largely from Japan and other industrial countries. But the US did not warm to the plan and the concept was shelved. See full account in &quot;Banking the Future of Asia and the Pacific: 50 Years of the Asian Development Bank&quot;, July 2017.

The idea came up again late in 1962 when Kaoru Ohashi, an economist from a research institute in Tokyo, visited Takeshi Watanabe, then a private financial consultant in Tokyo, and proposed a study group to form a development bank for the Asian region. The group met regularly in 1963, examining various scenarios for setting up a new institution and drew on Watanabe&#x27;s experiences with the World Bank. However, the idea received a cool reception from the World Bank itself and the study group became discouraged.

In parallel, the concept was formally proposed at a trade conference organized by the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE) in 1963 by a young Thai economist, Paul Sithi-Amnuai. (ESCAP, United Nations Publication March 2007, &quot;The first parliament of Asia&quot; pp. 65). Despite an initial mixed reaction, support for the establishment of a new bank soon grew.

An expert group was convened to study the idea, with Japan invited to contribute to the group. When Watanabe was recommended, the two streams proposing a new bank—from ECAFE and Japan—came together. Initially, the US was on the fence, not opposing the idea but not ready to commit financial support. But a new bank for Asia was soon seen to fit in with a broader program of assistance to Asia planned by United States President Lyndon B. Johnson in the wake of the escalating U.S. military support for the government of South Vietnam.

As a key player in the concept, Japan hoped that the ADB offices would be in Tokyo. However, eight other cities had also expressed an interest: Bangkok, Colombo, Kabul, Kuala Lumpur, Manila, Phnom Penh, Singapore, and Tehran. To decide, the 18 prospective regional members of the new bank held three rounds of votes at a ministerial conference in Manila in November/December 1965. In the first round on 30 November, Tokyo failed to win a majority, so a second ballot was held the next day at noon. Although Japan was in the lead, it was still inconclusive, so a final vote was held after lunch. In the third poll, Tokyo gained eight votes to Manila&#x27;s nine, with one abstention. Therefore, Manila was declared the host of the new development bank; the Japanese were mystified and deeply disappointed. Watanabe later wrote in his personal history of ADB: &quot;I felt as if the child I had so carefully reared had been taken away to a distant country.&quot; (Asian Development Bank publication, &quot;Towards a New Asia&quot;, 1977, p. 16)

On 3 December 1965, Philippine President Diosdado Macapagal lays the foundation stone of the Asian Development Bank.

As intensive work took place during 1966 to prepare for the opening of the new bank in Manila, high on the agenda was choice of president. Japanese Prime Minister Eisaku Satō asked Watanabe to be a candidate. Although he initially declined, pressure came from other countries and Watanabe agreed. In the absence of any other candidates, Watanabe was elected first President of the Asian Development Bank at its Inaugural Meeting on 24 November 1966.

By the end of 1972, Japan had contributed $173.7 million (22.6% of the total) to the ordinary capital resources and $122.6 million (59.6% of the total) to the special funds. In contrast, the United States contributed only $1.25 million to the special fund.

After its creation in the 1960s, ADB focused much of its assistance on food production and rural development. At the time, Asia was one of the poorest regions in the world.

Early loans went largely to Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, South Korea and the Philippines; these countries accounted for 78.48% of the total ADB loans between 1967 and 1972. Moreover, Japan received tangible benefits, 41.67% of the total procurements between 1967 and 1976. Japan tied its special funds contributions to its preferred sectors and regions and procurements of its goods and services, as reflected in its $100 million donation for the Agricultural Special Fund in April 1968.

Watanabe served as the first ADB president to 1972.

===1970s–1980s===
In the 1970s, ADB&#x27;s assistance to developing countries in Asia expanded into education and health, and then to infrastructure and industry. The gradual emergence of Asian economies in the latter part of the decade spurred demand for better infrastructure to support economic growth. ADB focused on improving roads and providing electricity. When the world suffered its first oil price shock, ADB shifted more of its assistance to support energy projects, especially those promoting the development of domestic energy sources in member countries.

Following considerable pressure from the Reagan Administration in the 1980s, ADB reluctantly began working with the private sector in an attempt to increase the impact of its development assistance to poor countries in Asia and the Pacific. In the wake of the second oil crisis, ADB expanded its assistance to energy projects. In 1982, ADB opened its first field office, in Bangladesh, and later in the decade, it expanded its work with non-government organizations (NGOs).

Japanese presidents Inoue Shiro (1972–76) and Yoshida Taroichi (1976–81) took the spotlight in the 1970s. Fujioka Masao, the fourth president (1981–90), adopted an assertive leadership style, launching an ambitious plan to expand the ADB into a high-impact development agency.

On 18 November 1972, the Bank inaugurated its headquarters along Roxas Boulevard in Pasay City, Philippines. On 31 May 1991, ADB moved its offices to Ortigas Center in Pasig City, with the Department of Foreign Affairs (Philippines) taking over its old Pasay premises.

===1990s===
In the 1990s, ADB began promoting regional cooperation by helping the countries on the Mekong River to trade and work together. The decade also saw an expansion of ADB&#x27;s membership with the addition of several Central Asian countries following the end of the Cold War.

In mid-1997, ADB responded to the financial crisis that hit the region with projects designed to strengthen financial sectors and create social safety nets for the poor. During the crisis, ADB approved its largest single loan – a $4 billion emergency loan to South Korea. In 1999, ADB adopted poverty reduction as its overarching goal.

===2000s===

The early 2000s saw a dramatic expansion of private sector finance. While the institution had such operations since the 1980s (under pressure from the Reagan Administration) the early attempts were highly unsuccessful with low lending volumes, considerable losses and financial scandals associated with an entity named AFIC. However, beginning in 2002, the ADB undertook a dramatic expansion of private sector lending under a new team. Over the course of the next six years, the Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD) grew by a factor of 41 times the 2001 levels of new financings and earnings for the ADB. This culminated with the Board&#x27;s formal recognition of these achievements in March 2008, when the board of directors formally adopted the Long Term strategic Framework (LTSF). That document formally stated that assistance to private sector development was the lead priority of the ADB and that it should constitute 50% of the bank&#x27;s lending by 2020.

In 2003, the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) epidemic hit the region and ADB responded with programs to help the countries in the region work together to address infectious diseases, including avian influenza and HIV/AIDS. ADB also responded to a multitude of natural disasters in the region, committing more than $850 million for recovery in areas of India, Indonesia, Maldives, and Sri Lanka which were impacted by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami. In addition, $1 billion in loans and grants was provided to the victims of the October 2005 earthquake in Pakistan.

In December 2005, China donated $20 million to the ADB for a regional poverty alleviation fund; China&#x27;s first such fund set up at an international institution.

In 2009, ADB&#x27;s Board of Governors agreed to triple ADB&#x27;s capital base from $55 billion to $165 billion, giving it much-needed resources to respond to the global economic crisis. The 200% increase is the largest in ADB&#x27;s history, and was the first since 1994.

===2010s===
Asia moved beyond the economic crisis and by 2010 had emerged as a new engine of global economic growth though it remained home to two-thirds of the world&#x27;s poor. In addition, the increasing prosperity of many people in the region created a widening income gap that left many people behind. ADB responded to this with loans and grants that encouraged economic growth.

In early 2012, the ADB began to re-engage with Myanmar in response to reforms initiated by the government. In April 2014, ADB opened an office in Myanmar and resumed making loans and grants to the country.

In 2017, ADB combined the lending operations of its Asian Development Fund (ADF) with its ordinary capital resources (OCR). The result was to expand the OCR balance sheet to permit increasing annual lending and grants to $20 billion by 2020 – 50% more than the previous level.

In 2020, ADB gave a $2 million grant from the Asia Pacific Disaster Response Fund, to support the Armenian government in the fight against the spread of COVID-19 pandemic. In the same year, the ADB committed a $20 million loan to Electric Networks of Armenia, that will ensure electricity for the citizens during the pandemic, as well as approved $500,000 in regional technical assistance to procure personal protective equipment and other medical supplies.

==Objectives and activities==

===Aim===
The ADB defines itself as a social development organization that is dedicated to reducing poverty in Asia and the Pacific through inclusive economic growth, environmentally sustainable growth, and regional integration. This is carried out through investments – in the form of loans, grants and information sharing – in infrastructure, health care services, financial and public administration systems, helping countries prepare for the impact of climate change or better manage their natural resources, as well as other areas.

===Focus areas===
Eighty percent of ADB&#x27;s lending is concentrated public sector lending in five operational areas.
* Education – Most developing countries in Asia and the Pacific have earned high marks for a dramatic rise in primary education enrollment rates in the last three decades, but daunting challenges remain, threatening economic and social growth.
* Environment, Climate Change, and Disaster Risk Management – Environmental sustainability is a prerequisite for economic growth and poverty reduction in Asia and the Pacific.
* Finance Sector Development – The financial system is the lifeline of a country&#x27;s economy. It creates prosperity that can be shared throughout society and benefit the poorest and most vulnerable people. Financial sector and capital market development, including microfinance, small and medium-sized enterprises, and regulatory reforms, is vital to decreasing poverty in Asia and the Pacific. This has been a key priority of the Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD) since 2002. One of the most active sub-sectors of finance is the PSOD&#x27;s support for trade finance. Each year the PSOD finances billions of dollars in letters of credit across all of Asia and the rest of the world.
* Infrastructure, including transport and communications, energy, water supply and sanitation, and urban development.
* Regional Cooperation and Integration – Regional cooperation and integration (RCI) was introduced by President Kuroda when he joined the ADB in 2004. It was seen as a long-standing priority of the Japanese government as a process by which national economies become more regionally connected. It plays a critical role in accelerating economic growth, reducing poverty and economic disparity, raising productivity and employment, and strengthening institutions.
* Private Sector Lending – This priority was introduced into the ADB&#x27;s activities at the insistence of the Reagan Administration. However, that effort was never a true priority until the administration of President Tadeo Chino who in turn brought in a seasoned American banker – Robert Bestani. From then on, the Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD) grew at a very rapid pace, growing from the smallest financing unit of the ADB to the largest in terms of financing volume. As noted earlier, this culminated in the Long Term strategic Framework (LTSF) which was adopted by the Board in March 2008.

==Financings==
The ADB offers &quot;hard&quot; loans on commercial terms primarily to middle income countries in Asia and &quot;soft&quot; loans with lower interest rates to poorer countries in the region. Based on a new policy, both types of loans will be sourced starting January 2017 from the bank&#x27;s ordinary capital resources (OCR), which functions as its general operational fund.

The ADB&#x27;s Private Sector Department (PSOD) can and does offer a broader range of financings beyond commercial loans. They also have the capability to provide guarantees, equity and mezzanine finance (a combination of debt and equity).

In 2017, ADB lent $19.1 billion of which $3.2 billion went to private enterprises, as part of its &quot;non-sovereign&quot; operations. ADB&#x27;s operations in 2017, including grants and co-financing, totaled $28.9 billion.

ADB obtains its funding by issuing bonds on the world&#x27;s capital markets. It also relies on the contributions of member countries, retained earnings from lending operations, and the repayment of loans.

==Private sector investments==
ADB provides direct financial assistance, in the form of debt, equity and mezzanine finance to private sector companies, for projects that have clear social benefits beyond the financial rate of return. ADB&#x27;s participation is usually limited but it leverages a large amount of funds from commercial sources to finance these projects by holding no more than 25% of any given transaction.

==Co-financing==
ADB partners with other development organizations on some projects to increase the amount of funding available. In 2014, $9.2 billion—or nearly half—of ADB&#x27;s $22.9 billion in operations were financed by other organizations. According to Jason Rush, Principal Communication Specialist, the Bank communicates with many other multilateral organizations.

==Funds and resources==
More than 50 financing partnership facilities, trust funds, and other funds – totaling several billion each year – are administered by ADB and put toward projects that promote social and economic development in Asia and the Pacific. ADB has raised Rupees 5 billion or around Rupees 5 billion from its issuance of 5-year offshore Indian rupee (INR) linked bonds.

On 26 February 2020, ADB raises $118 million from rupee-linked bonds and supporting the development of India International Exchange in India, as it also contributes to an established yield curve which stretches from 2021 through 2030 with $1 billion of outstanding bonds.

=== 2022 Annual Report ===
The 2022 Annual Report details ADB&#x27;s efforts in aiding its developing member countries to overcome the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic, tackle new challenges like the Russian invasion of Ukraine and a severe food crisis, while also addressing climate change with significant financial commitments, including $6.7 billion for climate initiatives and a $14 billion package for food security. The ADB committed a total of $20.5 billion in various forms of assistance, including private sector financing, and fostered regional cooperation, with a focus on gender equality, education, healthcare, and unlocking additional resources through innovative financial mechanisms. The report also notes organizational reforms for increased efficacy, the adoption of a hybrid work model following the full reopening of its headquarters.

==Access to information==
ADB has an information disclosure policy that presumes all information that is produced by the institution should be disclosed to the public unless there is a specific reason to keep it confidential. The policy calls for accountability and transparency in operations and the timely response to requests for information and documents. ADB does not disclose information that jeopardizes personal privacy, safety and security, certain financial and commercial information, as well as other exceptions.

==Notable projects and technical assistance==
* Afghanistan: Hairatan to Mazar-e-Sharif Railway Project
* Armenia: Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project
* Bhutan: Green Power Development Project
* India: Rural Roads Sector II Investment Program; Agartala Municipal Infrastructure Development Project
* Indonesia: Vocational Education Strengthening Project
* Laos: Northern and Central Regions Water Supply and Sanitation Sector Project
* Mongolia: Food and Nutrition Social Welfare Program and Project
* Philippines: North–South Commuter Railway Extension Project (Malolos–Clark Railway Project and South Commuter Railway Project), jointly funded with Japan International Cooperation Agency; Bataan–Cavite Interlink Bridge, jointly funded by Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank; Laguna Lakeshore Road Network, jointly funded by Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and Export-Import Bank of Korea-Economic Development Cooperation Fund
* Solomon Islands: Pacific Private Sector Development Initiative

==Criticism==
Since the ADB&#x27;s early days, critics have charged that the two major donors, Japan and the United States, have had extensive influence over lending, policy and staffing decisions.

Oxfam Australia has criticized the Asian Development Bank for insensitivity to local communities. &quot;Operating at a global and international level, these banks can undermine people&#x27;s human rights through projects that have detrimental outcomes for poor and marginalized communities.&quot; The bank also received criticism from the United Nations Environmental Program, stating in a report that &quot;much of the growth has bypassed more than 70 percent of its rural population, many of whom are directly dependent on natural resources for livelihoods and incomes.&quot;

There had been criticism that ADB&#x27;s large scale projects cause social and environmental damage due to lack of oversight. One of the most controversial ADB-related projects is Thailand&#x27;s Mae Moh coal-fired power station. Environmental and human rights activists say ADB&#x27;s environmental safeguards policy as well as policies for indigenous peoples and involuntary resettlement, while usually up to international standards on paper, are often ignored in practice, are too vague or weak to be effective, or are simply not enforced by bank officials.

The bank has been criticized over its role and relevance in the food crisis. The ADB has been accused by civil society of ignoring warnings leading up the crisis and also contributing to it by pushing loan conditions that many say unfairly pressure governments to deregulate and privatize agriculture, leading to problems such as the rice supply shortage in Southeast Asia.

Indeed, whereas the Private Sector Operations Department (PSOD) closed out that year with financings of $2.4 billion, the ADB has significantly dropped below that level in the years since and is clearly not on the path to achieving its stated goal of 50% of financings to the private sector by 2020. Critics also point out that the PSOD is the only department that actually makes money for the ADB. Hence, with the vast majority of loans going to concessionary (sub-market) loans to the public sector, the ADB is facing considerable financial difficulty and continuous operating losses.

==Countries with the largest subscribed capital and voting rights==
The following table are amounts for 20 largest countries by subscribed capital and voting power at the Asian Development Bank as of December 2021.

==Members==
ADB has 68 members (as of 23 March 2019): 49 members from the Asian and Pacific Region, and 19 members from Other Regions. The year listed after a member&#x27;s name indicates the year of their membership. When a country no longer remains a member, the Bank shall arrange for the repurchase of such country&#x27;s shares by the Bank as a part of the settlement of accounts with such country in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 43.

==See also==

* African Development Bank
* Asian Clearing Union
* Asian Development Bank Institute (ADBI)
* Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB)
* Asia Cooperation Dialogue
* Asia Council
* CAF – Development Bank of Latin America and the Caribbean
* Caribbean Development Bank
* Eurasian Development Bank
* Inter-American Development Bank
* International Monetary Fund
* South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation
* World Bank

==References==
==Further reading==

* Huang, P.W. 1975. &quot;The Asian Development Bank: Diplomacy and Development in Asia.&quot; New York, NY: Vantage Press.
* Krishnamurti, R. 1977. &quot;ADB: The Seeding Days.&quot; Manila: Asian Development Bank.
* McCawley, Peter. 2017. &quot;Banking on the Future of Asia and the Pacific: 50 Years of the Asian Development Bank.&quot; Manila: Asian Development Bank, (print), (e-ISBN), (Japanese language edition).
* McCawley, Peter. 2020. &quot;Indonesia and the Asian Development Bank: Fifty Years of Partnership&quot; Manila: Asian Development Bank, (print), (e-book). DOI: Indonesia and the Asian Development Bank: Fifty Years of Partnership
* Watanabe, Takeshi. 1977 (reprinted 2010). &quot;Towards a New Asia&quot;. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
* Wihtol, Robert. 1988. &quot;The Asian Development Bank and Rural Development: Policy and Practice.&quot; Hampshire, UK: Macmillan Press.
* Wilson, Dick. 1997. &quot;A Bank for Half the World: The Story of the Asian Development Bank, 1966–1986.&quot; Manila: Asian Development Bank.
* Yasutomo, D.T. 1983. &quot;Japan and the Asian Development Bank.&quot; New York, NY: Praeger.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="4" end="26" title="Asian Development Bank" label="Asian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q188822" start="28" end="31" title="Asian Development Bank" label="ADB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345691" start="38" end="63" title="Multilateral development bank" label="regional development bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="86" end="106" title="economic development" label="economic development"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580" start="145" end="157" title="Metro Manila" label="Metro Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="159" end="170" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142901" start="295" end="353" title="United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific" label="UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="451" end="470" title="Developed country" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="583" end="593" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q73667919" start="2097" end="2114" title="Masatsugu Asakawa" label="Masatsugu Asakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384551" start="2129" end="2143" title="Takehiko Nakao" label="Takehiko Nakao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244721" start="2178" end="2193" title="Haruhiko Kuroda" label="Haruhiko Kuroda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9085" start="2327" end="2338" title="Mandaluyong" label="Mandaluyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q13580" start="2340" end="2352" title="Metro Manila" label="Metro Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="2354" end="2365" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2449" end="2459" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="2482" end="2488" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385490" start="2655" end="2670" title="Hisato Ichimada" label="Hisato Ichimada"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="2688" end="2720" title="United States Secretary of State" label="United States Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="2721" end="2739" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q315572" start="2888" end="2902" title="Nobusuke Kishi" label="Nobusuke Kishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384952" start="3364" end="3380" title="Takeshi Watanabe (bureaucrat)" label="Takeshi Watanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="3647" end="3657" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="4581" end="4598" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="4673" end="4686" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="4833" end="4840" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="4842" end="4849" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="4851" end="4856" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="4872" end="4878" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="4880" end="4890" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3616" start="4907" end="4913" title="Tehran" label="Tehran"/>
<link wikidata="Q312539" start="5774" end="5792" title="Diosdado Macapagal" label="Diosdado Macapagal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179871" start="6014" end="6025" title="Eisaku Satō" label="Eisaku Satō"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="6762" end="6771" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="6773" end="6781" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="6783" end="6791" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="6793" end="6804" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="6813" end="6824" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q297279" start="7676" end="7685" title="price of oil" label="oil price"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="8222" end="8232" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q646686" start="8666" end="8681" title="Roxas Boulevard" label="Roxas Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17189" start="8685" end="8695" title="Pasay City" label="Pasay City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105027" start="8751" end="8765" title="Ortigas Center" label="Ortigas Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624" start="8769" end="8779" title="Pasig City" label="Pasig City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545663" start="8790" end="8833" title="Department of Foreign Affairs (Philippines)" label="Department of Foreign Affairs (Philippines)"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="10494" end="10527" title="severe acute respiratory syndrome" label="severe acute respiratory syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q43987" start="10683" end="10698" title="avian influenza" label="avian influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q826" start="10860" end="10868" title="Maldives" label="Maldives"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="10911" end="10951" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="11400" end="11422" title="Financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="global economic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915542" start="11778" end="11788" title="income gap" label="income gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="11944" end="11951" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="12043" end="12050" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="12535" end="12552" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510761" start="12910" end="12928" title="Social change" label="social development"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="13055" end="13073" title="sustainable growth" label="sustainable growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q462668" start="13079" end="13099" title="regional integration" label="regional integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="13328" end="13342" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743137" start="13353" end="13383" title="natural resource management" label="manage their natural resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="13836" end="13864" title="Environmental sustainability" label="Environmental sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q205205" start="15965" end="15981" title="Soft loan" label="soft&amp;quot; loans"/>
<link wikidata="Q28419378" start="18191" end="18219" title="India International Exchange" label="India International Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="18513" end="18530" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="18563" end="18590" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="18604" end="18615" title="Famine" label="food crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="18639" end="18653" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="18948" end="18963" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="18976" end="18986" title="Health care" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="19794" end="19805" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="19852" end="19859" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="19906" end="19912" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="20053" end="20062" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="20109" end="20113" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="20189" end="20197" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="20255" end="20266" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074061" start="20268" end="20296" title="North–South Commuter Railway" label="North–South Commuter Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q958590" start="20403" end="20441" title="Japan International Cooperation Agency" label="Japan International Cooperation Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q97354966" start="20443" end="20473" title="Bataan–Cavite Interlink Bridge" label="Bataan–Cavite Interlink Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109843" start="20493" end="20529" title="Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank" label="Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="20689" end="20704" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q267941" start="20952" end="20957" title="Oxfam" label="Oxfam"/>
<link wikidata="Q182016" start="21291" end="21327" title="United Nations Environmental Program" label="United Nations Environmental Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="21711" end="21719" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558431" start="21735" end="21759" title="coal-fired power station" label="coal-fired power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="21873" end="21891" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="21896" end="21920" title="involuntary resettlement" label="involuntary resettlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="22157" end="22168" title="food crisis" label="food crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q902410" start="22357" end="22367" title="Deregulation" label="deregulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="22372" end="22381" title="privatize" label="privatize"/>
<link wikidata="Q340195" start="23763" end="23787" title="African Development Bank" label="African Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150936" start="23790" end="23810" title="Asian Clearing Union" label="Asian Clearing Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806617" start="23813" end="23845" title="Asian Development Bank Institute" label="Asian Development Bank Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109843" start="23855" end="23891" title="Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank" label="Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q776874" start="23901" end="23926" title="Asia Cooperation Dialogue" label="Asia Cooperation Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324705" start="23929" end="23941" title="Asia Council" label="Asia Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614129" start="23944" end="24001" title="CAF – Development Bank of Latin America and the Caribbean" label="CAF – Development Bank of Latin America and the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772571" start="24004" end="24030" title="Caribbean Development Bank" label="Caribbean Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q498991" start="24033" end="24058" title="Eurasian Development Bank" label="Eurasian Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153087" start="24061" end="24092" title="Inter-American Development Bank" label="Inter-American Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="24095" end="24122" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152890" start="24125" end="24168" title="South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation" label="South Asia Subregional Economic Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="24171" end="24181" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2514" wikidata="Q29888" url="?curid=2514" title="Aswan">
<text>Aswan (, ; ; ) is a city in Southern Egypt, and is the capital of the Aswan Governorate.

Aswan is a busy market and tourist centre located just north of the Aswan Dam on the east bank of the Nile at the first cataract. The modern city has expanded and includes the formerly separate community on the island of Elephantine.

Aswan includes five monuments within the UNESCO World Heritage Site of the Nubian Monuments from Abu Simbel to Philae; these are the Old and Middle Kingdom tombs of Qubbet el-Hawa, the town of Elephantine, the stone quarries and Unfinished Obelisk, the Monastery of St. Simeon and the Fatimid Cemetery. The city&#x27;s Nubian Museum is an important archaeological center, containing finds from the International Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia before the Aswan Dam flooded all of Lower Nubia.

The city is part of the UNESCO Creative Cities Network in the category of craft and folk art. Aswan joined the UNESCO Global Network of Learning Cities in 2017.

==Other spellings and variations==
Aswan was formerly spelled Assuan or Assouan. Names in other languages include (; Ancient Egyptian: ; ; ; proposed Biblical Hebrew: סְוֵנֵה &quot;Sǝwēnê&quot;). The Nubians also call the city &quot;Dib&quot; which means &quot;fortress, palace&quot; and is derived from the Old Nubian name ⲇⲡ̅ⲡⲓ.

== History ==
Aswan is the ancient city of Swenett, later known as Syene, which in antiquity was the frontier town of Ancient Egypt facing the south. Swenett is supposed to have derived its name from an Egyptian goddess with the same name. This goddess later was identified as Eileithyia by the Greeks and Lucina by the Romans during their occupation of Ancient Egypt because of the similar association of their goddesses with childbirth, and of which the import is &quot;the opener&quot;. The ancient name of the city also is said to be derived from the Egyptian symbol for &quot;trade&quot;, or &quot;market&quot;.

Because the Ancient Egyptians oriented themselves toward the origin of the life-giving waters of the Nile in the south, and as Swenett was the southernmost town in the country, Egypt always was conceived to &quot;open&quot; or begin at Swenett. The city stood upon a peninsula on the right (east) bank of the Nile, immediately below (and north of) the first cataract of the flowing waters, which extended to it from Philae. Navigation to the delta was possible from this location without encountering a barrier.

The stone quarries of ancient Egypt located here were celebrated for their stone, and especially for the granitic rock called syenite. They furnished the colossal statues, obelisks, and monolithic shrines that are found throughout Egypt, including the pyramids; and the traces of the quarrymen who worked (alongside domesticated draft animals) in these 3,000 years ago are still visible in the native rock. They lie on either bank of the Nile, and a road, in length, was cut beside them from Syene to Philae.

Swenett was equally important as a military station and for its position on a trade route. Under every dynasty it was a garrison town; and here tolls and customs were levied on all boats passing southwards and northwards. Around 330, the legion stationed here received a bishop from Alexandria; this later became the Coptic Diocese of Syene. The city is mentioned by numerous ancient writers, including Herodotus, Strabo, Stephanus of Byzantium, Ptolemy, Pliny the Elder, Vitruvius, and it appears on the Antonine Itinerary. It may also be mentioned in the Book of Ezekiel and the Book of Isaiah.
The Nile is nearly wide above Aswan. From this frontier town to the northern extremity of Egypt, the river flows for more than without bar or cataract. The voyage from Aswan to Alexandria usually took 21 to 28 days in favorable weather.

=== Archaeological findings ===
In April 2018, the Egyptian Ministry of Antiquities announced the discovery of the head of the bust of Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius at the Temple of Kom Ombo during work to protect the site from groundwater.

In September 2018, the Egyptian Antiquities Minister Khaled el-Enany announced that a sandstone sphinx statue had been discovered at the temple of Kom Ombo. The statue, measuring approximately in width and ) in height, probably dates to the Ptolemaic Dynasty.

Archaeologists discovered 35 mummified remains of Egyptians in a tomb in Aswan in 2019. Italian archaeologist Patrizia Piacentini and El-Enany both reported that the tomb, where the remains of ancient men, women and children were found, dates back to the Greco-Roman period between 332 BC and 395 AD. While the findings assumed belonging to a mother and a child were well preserved, others had suffered major destruction. Other than the mummies, artifacts including painted funerary masks, vases of bitumen used in mummification, pottery and wooden figurines were revealed. Thanks to the hieroglyphs on the tomb, it was detected that the tomb belongs to a tradesman named Tjit.

Piacentini commented &quot;It&#x27;s a very important discovery because we have added something to the history of Aswan that was missing. We knew about tombs and necropoli dating back to the second and third millennium, but we didn&#x27;t know where the people who lived in the last part of the Pharaonic era were. Aswan, on the southern border of Egypt, was also a very important trading city&quot;.

Stan Hendrick, John Coleman Darnell and Maria Gatto in 2012 excavated petroglyphic engravings from Nag el-Hamdulab in Aswan which featured representations of a boat procession, solar symbolism and the earliest depiction of the White Crown with an estimated dating range between 3200BC and 3100BC.

In February 2021, archaeologists from the Egyptian Ministry of Antiquities announced significant discoveries at an archaeological site called Shiha Fort in Aswan, namely a Ptolemaic period temple, a Roman fort, an early Coptic church and an inscription in hieratic script. According to Mostafa Waziri, the crumbling temple was decorated with palm leaf carvings and an incomplete sandstone panel that described a Roman emperor. Researcher Abdel Badie states more generally that the church contained ovens used to bake pottery, four rooms, a long hall, stairs, and stone tiles.

== Geography ==
=== Northern Tropic boundary ===
The latitude of the city that would become Aswan – located at 24° 5′ 23″ – was an object of great interest to the ancient geographers and mathematicians. They believed that it was seated immediately under the tropic, and that on the day of the summer solstice, a vertically positioned staff cast no shadow. They noted that the sun&#x27;s disc was reflected in a deep well (or pit) at noon. This statement is only approximately correct; at the summer solstice, the shadow was only of the staff, and so could scarcely be discerned, and the northern limb of the Sun&#x27;s disc would be nearly vertical. More than 2200 years ago, Greek polymath Eratosthenes used this information to calculate Earth&#x27;s circumference.

=== Climate ===
Aswan has a hot desert climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;BWh&quot;) like the rest of Egypt. Aswan and Luxor have the hottest summer days of any city in Egypt. Aswan is one of the hottest, sunniest and driest cities in the world. Average high temperatures are consistently above during summer (June, July, August and also September) while average low temperatures remain above . Average high temperatures remain above during the coldest month of the year while average low temperatures remain above . Summers are very prolonged and extremely hot with blazing sunshine although desert heat is dry. Winters are brief and pleasantly mild, though nights may be cool at times.

The climate of Aswan is extremely dry year-round, with less than of average annual precipitation. The desert city is one of the driest ones in the world, and rainfall does not occur every year; in early 2001, the last rain in Aswan had been seven years earlier. When heavy precipitation does occur, as in a November 2021 rain and hail storm, flash flooding can drive scorpions from their lairs to deadly effects. Aswan is one of the least humid cities on the planet, with an average relative humidity of only 26%, with a maximum mean of 42% during winter and a minimum mean of 16% during summer.

The weather of Aswan is extremely clear, bright and sunny year-round in all seasons, with low seasonal variation and almost 4,000 hours of annual sunshine – very close to the maximum theoretical sunshine duration. Aswan is one of the sunniest places on Earth.

The highest record temperature was on July 4, 1918, and the lowest record temperature was on January 6, 1989.

== Education ==
In 2012, the Aswan University was inaugurated, which is headquartered in the city. Aswan is also home to the Aswan Higher Institute of Social Work, which was established in 1975.

== Transport ==
The city is crossed by the Cape to Cairo Road, which connects it to Luxor and Cairo to the north, and Abu Simbel and Wadi Halfa to the south. Also important is the Aswan-Berenice highway, which connects with the ports of the Red Sea.

Aswan is linked to Cairo by the Cape to Cairo Railway, which also connects it with Wadi Halfa. The railway is incomplete towards the south.

Other key transport infrastructures are the Port of Aswan, the largest river port in the region, and Aswan International Airport.

== International relations ==
=== Twin towns/Sister cities ===
Aswan is twinned with:

* Sonoma, California, United States 

== Gallery ==
== See also ==


== References ==


== External links ==
* Ancient Aswan City</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q29888" start="0" end="5" title="Aswan" label="Aswan"/>
<link wikidata="Q203751" start="28" end="42" title="Southern Egypt" label="Southern Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q29937" start="70" end="87" title="Aswan Governorate" label="Aswan Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38891" start="158" end="167" title="Aswan Dam" label="Aswan Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="192" end="196" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q649907" start="204" end="218" title="cataracts of the Nile" label="first cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q284009" start="311" end="322" title="Elephantine" label="Elephantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105840120" start="400" end="442" title="International Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia" label="Nubian Monuments from Abu Simbel to Philae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518125" start="490" end="504" title="Qubbet el-Hawa" label="Qubbet el-Hawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q284009" start="518" end="529" title="Elephantine" label="Elephantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q735438" start="535" end="572" title="Unfinished obelisk" label="stone quarries and Unfinished Obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="" start="578" end="601" title=":de:Simeonskloster (Assuan)" label="Monastery of St. Simeon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="610" end="626" title=":ar:المقابر الفاطمية (اسوان)" label="Fatimid Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354677" start="644" end="657" title="Nubian Museum" label="Nubian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q105840120" start="723" end="776" title="International Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia" label="International Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38891" start="788" end="797" title="Aswan Dam" label="Aswan Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q630356" start="813" end="824" title="Lower Nubia" label="Lower Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139352" start="851" end="881" title="Creative Cities Network" label="UNESCO Creative Cities Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="1106" end="1122" title="Egyptian language" label="Ancient Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982248" start="1139" end="1154" title="Biblical Hebrew" label="Biblical Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q15140604" start="1189" end="1196" title="Nubians" label="Nubians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268" start="1297" end="1307" title="Old Nubian" label="Old Nubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1439" end="1452" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q207435" start="1471" end="1478" title="Taweret" label="Swenett"/>
<link wikidata="Q94066" start="1598" end="1608" title="Eileithyia" label="Eileithyia"/>
<link wikidata="Q604898" start="1627" end="1633" title="Lucina (goddess)" label="Lucina"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="1876" end="1884" title="Egyptian language" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="1951" end="1968" title="Ancient Egyptians" label="Ancient Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2116" end="2121" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="2248" end="2252" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503673" start="2355" end="2361" title="Philae" label="Philae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940319" start="2456" end="2487" title="stone quarries of ancient Egypt" label="stone quarries of ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q329118" start="2578" end="2585" title="syenite" label="syenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170980" start="2624" end="2631" title="obelisk" label="obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q175582" start="2704" end="2712" title="Egyptian pyramids" label="pyramids"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="2890" end="2894" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503673" start="2953" end="2959" title="Philae" label="Philae"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="3245" end="3255" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169021" start="3279" end="3302" title="Coptic Diocese of Syene" label="Coptic Diocese of Syene"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="3365" end="3374" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="3376" end="3382" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q380881" start="3384" end="3406" title="Stephanus of Byzantium" label="Stephanus of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="3408" end="3415" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="3417" end="3432" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="3434" end="3443" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q512256" start="3467" end="3485" title="Antonine Itinerary" label="Antonine Itinerary"/>
<link wikidata="Q178390" start="3519" end="3534" title="Book of Ezekiel" label="Book of Ezekiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131458" start="3543" end="3557" title="Book of Isaiah" label="Book of Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="3563" end="3567" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q649907" start="3701" end="3709" title="Cataracts of the Nile" label="cataract"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="3736" end="3746" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116921" start="3848" end="3880" title="Ministry of Antiquities (Egypt)" label="Egyptian Ministry of Antiquities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="3946" end="3961" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q138833" start="3979" end="3987" title="Kom Ombo" label="Kom Ombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q151480" start="4135" end="4141" title="sphinx" label="sphinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q131976" start="4280" end="4297" title="Ptolemaic dynasty" label="Ptolemaic Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q83643769" start="4410" end="4429" title="Patrizia Piacentini" label="Patrizia Piacentini"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="4555" end="4573" title="Greco-Roman world" label="Greco-Roman period"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="4888" end="4899" title="Egyptian hieroglyphs" label="hieroglyphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q381885" start="5131" end="5135" title="tomb" label="tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q200141" start="5141" end="5150" title="Necropolis" label="necropoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088825" start="5308" end="5332" title="Egypt–Sudan border" label="southern border of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q113766128" start="5396" end="5416" title="John Coleman Darnell" label="John Coleman Darnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068234" start="5608" end="5619" title="White Crown" label="White Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="5851" end="5867" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="Ptolemaic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q208111" start="5935" end="5943" title="hieratic" label="hieratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q59782416" start="5965" end="5979" title="Mostafa Waziri" label="Mostafa Waziri"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="6309" end="6317" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q176635" start="6514" end="6520" title="Tropic of Cancer" label="tropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603898" start="6549" end="6564" title="summer solstice" label="summer solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="6947" end="6959" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60760152" start="6995" end="7021" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s circumference" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s circumference"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="7052" end="7070" title="hot desert climate" label="hot desert climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="7072" end="7101" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7153" end="7158" title="Luxor#Climate" label="Luxor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380816" start="7203" end="7208" title="climate of Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q109790360" start="8084" end="8116" title="Aswan scorpion invasion" label="drive scorpions from their lairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811978" start="8721" end="8737" title="Aswan University" label="Aswan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507197" start="8931" end="8949" title="Cape to Cairo Road" label="Cape to Cairo Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q130514" start="8972" end="8977" title="Luxor" label="Luxor"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="8982" end="8987" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6655437" start="9006" end="9016" title="Abu Simbel (village)" label="Abu Simbel"/>
<link wikidata="Q740865" start="9021" end="9031" title="Wadi Halfa" label="Wadi Halfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q737848" start="9074" end="9082" title="Berenice" label="Berenice"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="9129" end="9136" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201703" start="9171" end="9192" title="Cape to Cairo Railway" label="Cape to Cairo Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q752537" start="9381" end="9408" title="Aswan International Airport" label="Aswan International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="9483" end="9490" title="sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q11592" start="9500" end="9518" title="Sonoma, California" label="Sonoma, California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2519" wikidata="Q76802" url="?curid=2519" title="Adelaide of Italy">
<text>Adelaide of Italy (; 931 – 16 December 999 AD), also called Adelaide of Burgundy, was Holy Roman Empress by marriage to Emperor Otto the Great. She was crowned with him by Pope John XII in Rome on 2 February 962. She was the first empress designated &quot;consors regni&quot;, denoting a &quot;co-bearer of royalty&quot; who shared power with her husband. She was essential as a model for future consorts regarding both status and political influence. She was regent of the Holy Roman Empire as the guardian of her grandson in 991–995.

==Life==
===Early life===
Adelaide was born in Orbe Castle, Orbe, Kingdom of Upper Burgundy (now in modern-day Switzerland), to Rudolf II of Burgundy, a member of the Elder House of Welf, and Bertha of Swabia.

Adelaide was involved from the outset in the complicated fight to control not only Burgundy but also Lombardy. The battle between her father Rudolf II and Berengar I to control northern Italy ended with Berengar&#x27;s death, enabling Rudolf to claim the throne.

Not happy with this, the inhabitants of Lombardy appealed to another ally, Hugh of Provence, who had long considered Rudolf an enemy. Although Hugh challenged Rudolf for the Burgundian throne, he only succeeded when Adelaide&#x27;s father died in 937. So as to control Upper Burgundy, Hugh decided to marry his son Lothair II, the nominal King of Italy, to the 15-year-old Adelaide (in 947, before 27 June).

The marriage produced a daughter, Emma of Italy, born about 948. Emma became Queen of West Francia by marrying King Lothair of France.

===Marriage and alliance with Otto I===
The calendar of saints states that Lothair was poisoned on 22 November 950 in Turin by the holder of real power, his successor, Berengar II of Italy.

There were some suspicions amongst the people of Lombardy that Adelaide wanted to rule the kingdom by herself. Berengar attempted to thwart this and cement his political power by forcing her to marry his son Adalbert. Adelaide refused and fled, taking refuge in the castle of Como. However, she was quickly tracked down and was imprisoned for four months at Garda.

According to Adelaide&#x27;s contemporary biographer, Odilo of Cluny, she managed to escape from captivity. After a time spent in the marshes nearby, she was rescued by a priest and taken to a &quot;certain impregnable fortress,&quot; likely the fortified town of Canossa Castle near Reggio. She was able to send an emissary to the East Frankish king Otto I asking for his protection. Adelaide met Otto at the old Lombard capital of Pavia and they married on 23 September 951. Early in their marriage, Adelaide and Otto had two children, Henry and Bruno, both of whom died before reaching adulthood.

A few years later, in 953, Liudolf, Duke of Swabia, Otto&#x27;s son by his first marriage, instigated a big revolt that was quelled by his father. As a consequence, Otto decided to dispossess Liudolf of his ducal title. This decision favoured the position of Adelaide and her descendants at court. Adelaide also managed to retain her entire territorial dowry.

After returning to Germany with his new wife, Otto cemented the Holy Roman Empire by defeating the Hungarian invaders at the Battle of Lechfeld on 10 August 955. He then extended the boundaries of East Francia beyond the Elbe River, defeating the Obotrites and other Slavs of the Elbe at the battle of Recknitz on 16 October 955. That same year, Adelaide gave birth to Otto II. In 955 or 956, she gave birth to a daughter who would become Matilda, Abbess of Quedlinburg.

===Holy Roman Empress===
Adelaide accompanied her husband on his second expedition to Italy to subdue the revolt of Berengar II and to protect Pope John XII. In Rome, Otto the Great was crowned Holy Roman Emperor on 2 February 962 by Pope John XII. Breaking new ground, Pope John XII also crowned Adelaide as Holy Roman Empress. In 960, a new &quot;ordo&quot; was created for her coronation and anointing, including prayers to biblical female figures, especially Esther. The &quot;ordo&quot; presents a theological and political concept that legitimizes the empress&#x27;s status as a divinely ordained component of the earthly rule. In 966, Adelaide and the eleven-year-old Otto II, travelled again with Otto on his third expedition to Italy, where the Emperor restored the newly elected Pope John XIII to his throne (and executed some of the Roman rioters who had deposed him). Crucial to Otto&#x27;s establishing legitimacy in his conquest of Italy and in bringing the imperial crown to the couple, was the support of Adelaide and her extensive network of relations. As heir to the Italian throne, Adelaide established for late Carolingian traditions the legitimate claim over Italy by the imperial throne.

Adelaide remained in Rome for six years while Otto ruled his kingdom from Italy. Otto II was crowned co-emperor in 967, then married the Byzantine princess Theophanu in April 972, resolving the conflict between the two empires in southern Italy and ensuring the imperial succession. Adelaide and her husband returned to Germany, where Otto I died in May 973, at the same Memleben palace where his father had died 37 years earlier.

After her coronation, which increased her power as she was now &quot;consors regni&quot; and able to receive people from the entire Empire, Adelaide&#x27;s interventions in political decisions increased. According to Buchinger, &quot;Between 962 and 972 Adelheid appears as intervenient in seventy-five charters. Additionally Adelheid and Otto I are named together in Papal bulls&quot;. She often protected the ecclesiastic institutions, seemingly to gain a sphere of influence separate from that of her husband. Between 991 and 993, the brothers of Feuchtwang wrote to her and requested to be &quot;protected by the shadow of your rule from now on, we may be safe from the tumults of secular attacks&quot;. They promised they would pray for her so that her reign would be long and stable.

Adelaide wielded a great amount of power during her husband&#x27;s reign, as evidenced by several requests made to her. A letter, written in the 980s by her daughter Emma demanded that Adelaide intervene against Emma&#x27;s enemies and mobilize forces in the Ottonian Empire. She also asked that Adelaide capture Hugh Capet, who was already elected king of West Frankia in 987.
Another enemy of Emma&#x27;s was Charles, the brother of Emma&#x27;s deceased consort Lothar, who had accused his sister-in-law of adultery. Another pleader was Gerbert of Aurillac, at that time archbishop of Reims (the later Pope Sylvester II), who wrote to Adelaide to ask for protection against his enemies. Buchinger remarks that, &quot;These examples are remarkable, because they imply that Adelheid had the possibilities to help in both cases or at least Emma and Gerbert do believe that she could have intervened and succeeded. Both are themselves important political figures in their realm and still they rely on Adelheid. Adelheid’s power and importance must have been extremely stable and reliable to do as wished by the pleaders.&quot;

===Otto II&#x27;s era===
In the years following Otto I&#x27;s death, Adelaide exerted a powerful influence at court. However, Adelaide was in conflict with her daughter-in-law, the Byzantine princess Theophanu, as only one woman could be queen and hold the associated functions and powers at court. Adelaide was able to maintain the title &quot;imperatrix augusta&quot; even though Theophanu now also used it. Moreover, Theophanu opposed Adelaide in the use of her dowry lands, which Adelaide wanted to continue to use and donate to ecclesiastical institutions, ensuring her power base. Adelaide had the right to make transactions of her Italian lands as she pleased, but she needed the permission of the emperor to use her Ottonian lands. Adelaide also sided with her extended kin against Otto II. Wilson compares this action with those of other royal women: &quot;Royal women possessed agency and did not always do the bidding of male relatives. Engelberge greatly influenced her husband, Emperor Louis II, in his attempts to extend imperial control to southern Italy in the 870s. Matilda’s favouritism for her younger son Heinrich caused Otto I considerable trouble, while Adelaide sided with her extended kin against her own son, Otto II, until he temporarily exiled her to Burgundy in 978. Agency was clearest during regencies, because these lacked formal rules, offering scope for forceful personalities to assert themselves.&quot; After being expelled from court by Otto II in 978, she divided her time between living in Italy in the royal palace of Pavia and Arles with her brother Conrad I, King of Burgundy, through whom she was finally reconciled with her son. In 983 (shortly before his death) Otto II appointed her his viceroy in Italy.

===Regency===
In 983, her son Otto II died and was succeeded by Adelaide&#x27;s grandson Otto III under the regency of Theophanu while Adelaide remained in Italy. For some time, Adelaide and Theophanu were able to put aside their separate interests and work together to ensure Otto III&#x27;s succession. This is seen through their joint appearance in the charters. According to the &quot;Annales Quedlinburgenses&quot;, after Otto II&#x27;s death, Henry, duke of Bavaria kidnapped Otto III. The narrative claims that Adelaide returned from Lombardy to join with Theophanu, Matilda, and other leaders of Europe and reclaim the child.

When Theophanu died in 990, Adelaide assumed regency on behalf of Otto III until he reached legal majority four years later. 
Adelaide&#x27;s role in establishing Otto&#x27;s position can be seen in a letter Otto III wrote to his grandmother in 996: &quot;According to your [Adelheid’s] wishes and desires, the divinity has conferred the rights of an empire on us [Otto III] with a happy outcome&quot;.

Troubles in the East continued under Adelaide, as Boleslaus of Bohemia wavered in his loyalty. In 992, there was war between Bohemia and Poland, and again like in Theophanu&#x27;s time, the Ottonian regime sided with Poland. Jestice comments that, &quot;Christianity was not re-established in the land of the Liutizi during their lifetimes. But there were territorial gains, and by 987 it was possible to begin rebuilding destroyed fortresses along the Elbe&quot;. A Saxon army, with Otto III&#x27;s presence, took Brandenburg in 991. The reports that there was another expedition in 992.

Thietmar of Merseburg reports that Otto III dismissed his grandmother after his mother&#x27;s death, but Althoff doubts this story. Even after Otto attained majority, Adelaide often accompanied him in his travels and influenced him, along with other women.

In Burgundy, Adelaide&#x27;s homeland, the counts and castellans behaved increasingly independently from their king Rudolph III. Just before her death in 999, she had to intervene in Burgundy to restore peace.

===Later years===
Adelaide resigned as regent when Otto III was declared to be of the legal majority in 995. From then on, she devoted herself exclusively to her works of charity, in particular to the foundation and restoration of religious houses, i.e. monasteries, churches and abbeys.
Adelaide had long entertained close relations with Cluny, then the center of the movement for ecclesiastical reform, and in particular with its abbots Majolus and Odilo. She retired to a nunnery she had founded in c. 991 at Selz in Alsace.

On her way to Burgundy to support her nephew Rudolf III against a rebellion, she died at Selz Abbey on 16 December 999, days short of the millennium she thought would bring the Second Coming of Christ. She was buried in the Abbey and Pope Urban II canonized her in 1097. After serious flooding, which almost completely destroyed it in 1307, Adelaide&#x27;s relics were moved elsewhere. A goblet reputed to have belonged to Saint Adelaide has long been preserved in Seltz.; it was used to give potions to people with fever and the healings were said to have been numerous.

Adelaide constantly devoted herself to the service of the church and peace, and to the empire as guardian of both; she also interested herself in the conversion of the Slavs. She was thus a principal agent — almost an embodiment — of the work of the pre-schism Church at the end of the Early Middle Ages in the construction of the religious culture of Central Europe.
Some of her relics are preserved in a shrine in Hanover. Her feast day, 16 December, is still kept in many German dioceses.

==Issue==
In 947, Adelaide was married to King Lothair II of Italy. The union produced one child:
* Emma of Italy (948 – after 987), queen of France and wife of Lothair of France

In 951, Adelaide was married to King Otto I, the future Holy Roman Emperor. The union produced four children:
* Henry (952 – 7 April 954)
* Bruno (953 – 8 September 957)
* Matilda (early 955 – † 6 February 999), the first Princess-Abbess of Quedlinburg
* Otto II (end 955 – 7 December 983), later Holy Roman Emperor.

==Historiography and cultural depictions==
===Historiography===

Adelaide was one of the most important and powerful medieval female rulers. Historically, as empress and saint, she has been described as powerful, with both male attributes (like strength, justness and prudence) and female attributes (piety, self denying). Modern German historiography tends to focus on her contributions to the Ottonian dynasty and the development of the Holy Roman Empire.

===Depictions in art===
Adelaide is usually represented in the garb of an empress, with sceptre and crown. Since the 14th century, she is also given as an attribute a model church or a ship (by which she is said to have escaped from captivity).

The most famous representation of Adelaide in German art belongs to a group of sandstone figures in the choir of Meissen Cathedral, which was created around 1260. She is shown here with her husband, who was not canonized, since he founded the diocese of Meissen with her.

==== Operas ====
* Adelaide of Burgundy is the main character of the opera &quot;l&#x27;Adelaide&quot; (1672) by Antonio Sartorio.
* Adelaide is the subject of a 1723 opera by Nicola Porpora, where she was played by the great castrato Farinelli en travesti.
* &quot;Lotario&quot; is a 1729 opera seria in three acts by George Frideric Handel. It is a fictionalisation of some events in the life of Adelaide.
* Adelaide is the heroine of &quot;Adelaide di Borgogna&quot;, an opera with two acts (1817) by Gioachino Rossini (music) and Giovanni Schmidt (libretto). 
* Adelaide is the heroine of William Bernard McCabe&#x27;s 1856 novel &quot;Adelaide, Queen of Italy, or The Iron Crown&quot;.

==== Books and novels ====
* &quot;Adelheid, Mutter der Königreiche (&quot;Adelaide, Mother of Kingdoms) published in 1936 by Gertrud Bäumer.
* &quot;Die fremde Königin&quot; (The Foreign Queen), published in 2017, Adelaide is one of the central characters in Rebecca Gablé&#x27;s novel.
* &quot;Empress Adelheid and Countess Matilda: medieval female rulership and the foundations of European society&quot; by Penelope Nash (2017).
* &quot;Imperial ladies of the Ottonian Dynasty: women and rule in tenth-century Germany&quot; by Phyllis G. Jestice (2018)
* &quot;God&#x27;s Maidservant: The story of Adelaide of Italy (Women of the Dark Ages)&quot; by Anna Chant (2017)

==== Artwork ====
* &quot;San Giuseppe con Gesù Bambino tra Sant&#x27;Adelaide, Sant&#x27;Antonio da Padova, San Lupo e San Michele arcangelo&quot; by Francesco Coghetti, 1828
* Adelaide is a featured figure on Judy Chicago&#x27;s installation piece &quot;The Dinner Party&quot;, being represented as one of the 999 names on the &quot;Heritage Floor,&quot; with the related place setting of Theodora (wife of Justinian I).

==See also==
* List of Eastern Orthodox saints
* List of Holy Roman empresses
* List of Catholic saints

==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==
* Genealogie-Mittelalter: &quot;Adelheid von Burgund&quot;.

==Bibliography==
* Friedrich Wilhelm Bautz: Adelheid of Burgundy. In: Biographical-Bibliographical Dictionary of Churches (BBKL). Volume 1, Bautz, Hamm 1975. 2nd, unchanged edition Hamm 1990, , Sp. 35–35.
* Amalie Fößel: Adelheid. In: Amalie Fößel (Ed.): The Empresses of the Middle Ages. Pustet, Regensburg 2011, , p. 35-59.
* Werner Goez: Empress Adelheid. In: Pictures of life from the Middle Ages. The time of the Ottonians, Salians and Staufers. Primus, Darmstadt 2010, , p. 66-82.
* Bruno Keiser: Adelheid. Queen, empress, saint. Piper Verlag, Munich 2009, .
* Walter Schlesinger: Adelheid. In: New German Biography (NDB). Volume 1, Duncker &amp; Humblot, Berlin 1953, , p. 57 f. (digitized version).
* Franz Staab: Thorsten Unger (Ed.): Empress Adelheid and her monastery foundation in Selz (= Publications of the Palatinate Society for the Advancement of Science in Speyer. Vol. 99). Presentations at the scientific conference in Landau and Selz from 15 to 17 October 1999, published by the Society for the Advancement of Science, Speyer 2005, .
* Ernst Steindorff: Adelheid (Empress). In: General German Biography (ADB). Volume 1, Duncker &amp; Humblot, Leipzig 1875, pp. 75–77.
* Stefan Weinfurter: Empress Adelheid and the Ottonian Empire. In: Early Medieval Studies. Vol. 33, 1999, pp. 1–19, (digitised version).

==External links==
* &quot;Women&#x27;s Biography: Adelaide of Burgundy, Ottonian empress&quot;
* Monks of Ramsgate. &quot;Adelaide&quot;. Book of Saints, 1921. Saints.SQPN.com. 1 May 2012. Web. {2012-9-20}. 


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76802" start="0" end="17" title="Adelaide of Italy" label="Adelaide of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76802" start="60" end="80" title="Adelaide of Italy" label="Adelaide of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15727374" start="86" end="104" title="Holy Roman Empress" label="Holy Roman Empress"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="128" end="142" title="Otto the Great" label="Otto the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q172933" start="172" end="185" title="Pope John XII" label="Pope John XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="189" end="193" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="474" end="491" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2968312" start="584" end="595" title="Orbe Castle" label="Orbe Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q68213" start="597" end="601" title="Orbe" label="Orbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33235" start="614" end="628" title="Upper Burgundy" label="Upper Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="648" end="659" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q442257" start="665" end="686" title="Rudolf II of Burgundy" label="Rudolf II of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270246" start="704" end="723" title="Elder House of Welf" label="Elder House of Welf"/>
<link wikidata="Q270395" start="729" end="745" title="Bertha of Swabia" label="Bertha of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q274606" start="903" end="913" title="Berengar I of Italy" label="Berengar I"/>
<link wikidata="Q378763" start="1087" end="1103" title="Hugh of Provence" label="Hugh of Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q364485" start="1327" end="1337" title="Lothair II of Italy" label="Lothair II"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="1351" end="1364" title="King of Italy" label="King of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q261883" start="1455" end="1468" title="Emma of Italy" label="Emma of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q242832" start="1537" end="1554" title="Lothair of France" label="Lothair of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="1601" end="1619" title="calendar of saints" label="calendar of saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="1675" end="1680" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q314521" start="1725" end="1745" title="Berengar II of Italy" label="Berengar II of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q347480" start="1956" end="1964" title="Adalbert of Italy" label="Adalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308" start="2024" end="2028" title="Como" label="Como"/>
<link wikidata="Q47585" start="2106" end="2111" title="Garda, Veneto" label="Garda"/>
<link wikidata="Q918431" start="2168" end="2182" title="Odilo of Cluny" label="Odilo of Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033649" start="2378" end="2392" title="Canossa Castle" label="Canossa Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360" start="2398" end="2404" title="Reggio Emilia" label="Reggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q153080" start="2446" end="2459" title="East Frankish" label="East Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="2465" end="2471" title="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="2528" end="2535" title="Lombards" label="Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="2547" end="2552" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q504535" start="2742" end="2765" title="Liudolf, Duke of Swabia" label="Liudolf, Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q273069" start="3201" end="3219" title="Battle of Lechfeld" label="Battle of Lechfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q153080" start="3273" end="3285" title="East Francia" label="East Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="3297" end="3307" title="Elbe River" label="Elbe River"/>
<link wikidata="Q156108" start="3323" end="3332" title="Obotrites" label="Obotrites"/>
<link wikidata="Q453870" start="3368" end="3386" title="Battle on the Raxa" label="battle of Recknitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q150512" start="3445" end="3452" title="Otto II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q273319" start="3515" end="3545" title="Matilda, Abbess of Quedlinburg" label="Matilda, Abbess of Quedlinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q172933" start="3691" end="3704" title="Pope John XII" label="Pope John XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="3709" end="3713" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="3742" end="3760" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15727374" start="3857" end="3875" title="Holy Roman Empress" label="Holy Roman Empress"/>
<link wikidata="Q732413" start="4011" end="4017" title="Esther" label="Esther"/>
<link wikidata="Q181952" start="4337" end="4351" title="Pope John XIII" label="Pope John XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q464081" start="4915" end="4924" title="Theophanu" label="Theophanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q703786" start="5130" end="5138" title="Memleben" label="Memleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q261883" start="6148" end="6152" title="Emma of Italy" label="Emma"/>
<link wikidata="Q159575" start="6295" end="6305" title="Hugh Capet" label="Hugh Capet"/>
<link wikidata="Q46370" start="6339" end="6351" title="West Francia" label="West Frankia"/>
<link wikidata="Q469603" start="6393" end="6400" title="Charles, Duke of Lower Lorraine" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q242832" start="6446" end="6452" title="Lothair of France" label="Lothar"/>
<link wikidata="Q172383" start="6521" end="6540" title="Pope Sylvester II" label="Gerbert of Aurillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q464081" start="7308" end="7317" title="Theophanu" label="Theophanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q255437" start="8056" end="8066" title="Engelberga" label="Engelberge"/>
<link wikidata="Q215204" start="8099" end="8115" title="Emperor Louis II" label="Emperor Louis II"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="8636" end="8641" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="8665" end="8670" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48292" start="8675" end="8680" title="Arles" label="Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q506442" start="8698" end="8706" title="Conrad I of Burgundy" label="Conrad I"/>
<link wikidata="Q151090" start="8948" end="8956" title="Otto III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q360112" start="9948" end="9968" title="Boleslaus I, Duke of Bohemia" label="Boleslaus of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q504792" start="10862" end="10873" title="Rudolph III of Burgundy" label="Rudolph III"/>
<link wikidata="Q220301" start="11296" end="11301" title="Cluny Abbey" label="Cluny"/>
<link wikidata="Q42107" start="11396" end="11403" title="Majolus" label="Majolus"/>
<link wikidata="Q918431" start="11408" end="11413" title="Odilo of Cluny" label="Odilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q322445" start="11469" end="11473" title="Selz Abbey" label="Selz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="11477" end="11483" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="11500" end="11508" title="Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q504792" start="11531" end="11541" title="Rudolph III of Burgundy" label="Rudolf III"/>
<link wikidata="Q51639" start="11663" end="11686" title="Second Coming of Christ" label="Second Coming of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q30578" start="11720" end="11733" title="Pope Urban II" label="Pope Urban II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378782" start="12227" end="12232" title="early Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="12313" end="12319" title="East–West Schism" label="schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="12345" end="12362" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="12475" end="12482" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q364485" start="12599" end="12618" title="Lothair II of Italy" label="Lothair II of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q261883" start="12652" end="12665" title="Emma of Italy" label="Emma of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q242832" start="12713" end="12730" title="Lothair of France" label="Lothair of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="12769" end="12775" title="Otto I" label="Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q273319" start="12904" end="12911" title="Matilda, Abbess of Quedlinburg" label="Matilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634892" start="12954" end="12984" title="Princess-Abbess of Quedlinburg" label="Princess-Abbess of Quedlinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150512" start="12987" end="12994" title="Otto II" label="Otto II"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="13029" end="13047" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q322853" start="13868" end="13885" title="Meissen Cathedral" label="Meissen Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681660" start="14103" end="14130" title="Adelaide (Sartorio)" label="&amp;quot;l&amp;#x27;Adelaide&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q605062" start="14141" end="14157" title="Antonio Sartorio" label="Antonio Sartorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q312788" start="14204" end="14218" title="Nicola Porpora" label="Nicola Porpora"/>
<link wikidata="Q223744" start="14263" end="14272" title="Farinelli" label="Farinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q643799" start="14294" end="14301" title="Lotario (Handel)" label="Lotario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302" start="14347" end="14369" title="George Frideric Handel" label="George Frideric Handel"/>
<link wikidata="Q503447" start="14471" end="14491" title="Adelaide di Borgogna" label="Adelaide di Borgogna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9726" start="14532" end="14549" title="Gioachino Rossini" label="Gioachino Rossini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3768112" start="14562" end="14578" title="Giovanni Schmidt" label="Giovanni Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947214" start="14621" end="14643" title="William Bernard McCabe" label="William Bernard McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q71416" start="14846" end="14860" title="Gertrud Bäumer" label="Gertrud Bäumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134915" start="14980" end="14993" title="Rebecca Gablé" label="Rebecca Gablé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3749803" start="15543" end="15561" title="Francesco Coghetti" label="Francesco Coghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q441440" start="15603" end="15615" title="Judy Chicago" label="Judy Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915473" start="15648" end="15664" title="The Dinner Party" label="The Dinner Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532928" start="15727" end="15741" title="List of women in the Heritage Floor" label="Heritage Floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q204843" start="15783" end="15813" title="Theodora (wife of Justinian I)" label="Theodora (wife of Justinian I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569751" start="15831" end="15862" title="List of Eastern Orthodox saints" label="List of Eastern Orthodox saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q15727374" start="15865" end="15893" title="List of Holy Roman empresses" label="List of Holy Roman empresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566424" start="15896" end="15919" title="List of Catholic saints" label="List of Catholic saints"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2524" wikidata="Q6437" url="?curid=2524" title="Airbus A300">
<text>The Airbus A300 is Airbus&#x27; first production aircraft and the world&#x27;s first twin-engine, double-aisle (wide-body) airliner. It was developed by &quot;Airbus Industrie GIE&quot;, now merged into Airbus SE, and manufactured from 1971 to 2007.
In September 1967, aircraft manufacturers in France, West Germany and the United Kingdom signed an initial memorandum of understanding to collaborate to develop an innovative large airliner. The French and West Germans reached a firm agreement on 29 May 1969, after the British withdrew from the project on 10 April 1969. A new collaborative aerospace company, &quot;Airbus Industrie GIE&quot;, was formally created on 18 December 1970 to develop and produce it. The A300 prototype first flew on 28 October 1972.
The first twin-engine widebody airliner, the A300 typically seats 247 passengers in two classes over a range of 5,375 to 7,500 km (2,900 to 4,050 nmi; ).

Initial variants are powered by General Electric CF6-50 or Pratt &amp; Whitney JT9D turbofans and have a three-crew flight deck. The improved A300-600 has a two-crew cockpit and updated CF6-80C2 or PW4000 engines; it made its first flight on 8 July 1983 and entered service later that year. The A300 is the basis of the smaller A310 (first flown in 1982) and was adapted in a freighter version. Its cross section was retained for the larger four-engined A340 (1991) and the larger twin-engined A330 (1992). It is also the basis for the oversize Beluga transport (1994). Unlike most Airbus products, it has a yoke, not using a fly-by-wire system.
Launch customer Air France introduced the type on 23 May 1974.
After limited demand initially, sales took off as the type was proven in early service, beginning three decades of steady orders. It has a similar capacity to the Boeing 767-300, introduced in 1986, but lacked the 767-300ER range. During the 1990s, the A300 became popular with cargo aircraft operators, as both passenger airliner conversions and as original builds. Production ceased in July 2007 after 561 deliveries.
, there are 197 A300 family aircraft still in commercial service.

== Development ==

=== Origins ===
During the 1960s, European aircraft manufacturers such as Hawker Siddeley and the British Aircraft Corporation, based in the UK, and Sud Aviation of France, had ambitions to build a new 200-seat airliner for the growing civil aviation market. While studies were performed and considered, such as a stretched twin-engine variant of the Hawker Siddeley Trident and an expanded development of the British Aircraft Corporation (BAC) One-Eleven, designated the BAC Two-Eleven, it was recognized that if each of the European manufacturers were to launch similar aircraft into the market at the same time, neither would achieve sales volume needed to make them viable. In 1965, a British government study, known as the Plowden Report, had found British aircraft production costs to be between 10% and 20% higher than American counterparts due to shorter production runs, which was in part due to the fractured European market. To overcome this factor, the report recommended the pursuit of multinational collaborative projects between the region&#x27;s leading aircraft manufacturers.

European manufacturers were keen to explore prospective programmes; the proposed 260-seat wide-body &quot;HBN 100&quot; between Hawker Siddeley, Nord Aviation, and Breguet Aviation being one such example. National governments were also keen to support such efforts amid a belief that American manufacturers could dominate the European Economic Community; in particular, Germany had ambitions for a multinational airliner project to invigorate its aircraft industry, which had declined considerably following the Second World War. During the mid-1960s, both Air France and American Airlines had expressed interest in a short-haul twin-engine wide-body aircraft, indicating a market demand for such an aircraft to be produced. In July 1967, during a high-profile meeting between French, German, and British ministers, an agreement was made for greater cooperation between European nations in the field of aviation technology, and &quot;for the joint development and production of an airbus&quot;. The word &quot;airbus&quot; at this point was a generic aviation term for a larger commercial aircraft, and was considered acceptable in multiple languages, including French.

Shortly after the July 1967 meeting, French engineer Roger Béteille was appointed as the technical director of what would become the A300 programme, while Henri Ziegler, chief operating office of Sud Aviation, was appointed as the general manager of the organisation and German politician Franz Josef Strauss became the chairman of the supervisory board. Béteille drew up an initial work share plan for the project, under which French firms would produce the aircraft&#x27;s cockpit, the control systems, and lower-centre portion of the fuselage, Hawker Siddeley would manufacture the wings, while German companies would produce the forward, rear and upper part of the center fuselage sections. Additional work included moving elements of the wings being produced in the Netherlands, and Spain producing the horizontal tail plane.

An early design goal for the A300 that Béteille had stressed the importance of was the incorporation of a high level of technology, which would serve as a decisive advantage over prospective competitors. For this reason, the A300 would feature the first use of composite materials of any passenger aircraft, the leading and trailing edges of the tail fin being composed of glass fibre reinforced plastic. Béteille opted for English as the working language for the developing aircraft, as well against using Metric instrumentation and measurements, as most airlines already had US-built aircraft. These decisions were partially influenced by feedback from various airlines, such as Air France and Lufthansa, as an emphasis had been placed on determining the specifics of what kind of aircraft that potential operators were seeking. According to Airbus, this cultural approach to market research had been crucial to the company&#x27;s long-term success.

=== Workshare and redefinition ===

On 26 September 1967, the French, West German and British governments signed a Memorandum of Understanding to start the development of the 300-seat Airbus A300. At this point, the A300 was only the second major joint aircraft programme in Europe, the first being the Anglo-French Concorde. Under the terms of the memorandum, the French and British were to each receive a 37.5 per cent work share on the project, while the West Germans would receive a 25 per cent share. Sud Aviation was recognized as the lead contractor for the A300, with Hawker Siddeley being selected as the British partner company. At the time, the news of the announcement had been clouded by the British Government&#x27;s support for the Airbus, which coincided with its refusal to back BAC&#x27;s proposed competitor, the BAC 2–11, despite a preference for the latter expressed by British European Airways (BEA). Another parameter was the requirement for a new engine to be developed by Rolls-Royce to power the proposed airliner; a derivative of the in-development Rolls-Royce RB211, the triple-spool RB207, capable of producing of .
The programme cost was US$4.6 billion (in 1993 dollars, equivalent to $ in ).
In December 1968, the French and British partner companies (Sud Aviation and Hawker Siddeley) proposed a revised configuration, the 250-seat Airbus A250. It had been feared that the original 300-seat proposal was too large for the market, thus it had been scaled down to produce the A250. The dimensional changes involved in the shrink reduced the length of the fuselage by and the diameter by , reducing the overall weight by . For increased flexibility, the cabin floor was raised so that standard LD3 freight containers could be accommodated side-by-side, allowing more cargo to be carried. Refinements made by Hawker Siddeley to the wing&#x27;s design provided for greater lift and overall performance; this gave the aircraft the ability to climb faster and attain a level cruising altitude sooner than any other passenger aircraft. It was later renamed the A300B.

Perhaps the most significant change of the A300B was that it would not require new engines to be developed, being of a suitable size to be powered by Rolls-Royce&#x27;s RB211, or alternatively the American Pratt &amp; Whitney JT9D and General Electric CF6 powerplants; this switch was recognized as considerably reducing the project&#x27;s development costs. To attract potential customers in the US market, it was decided that General Electric CF6-50 engines would power the A300 in place of the British RB207; these engines would be produced in co-operation with French firm Snecma. By this time, Rolls-Royce had been concentrating their efforts upon developing their RB211 turbofan engine instead and progress on the RB207&#x27;s development had been slow for some time, the firm having suffered due to funding limitations, both of which had been factors in the engine switch decision.

On 10 April 1969, a few months after the decision to drop the RB207 had been announced, the British government announced that they would withdraw from the Airbus venture. In response, West Germany proposed to France that they would be willing to contribute up to 50% of the project&#x27;s costs if France was prepared to do the same. Additionally, the managing director of Hawker Siddeley, Sir Arnold Alexander Hall, decided that his company would remain in the project as a favoured sub-contractor, developing and manufacturing the wings for the A300, which would prove to be an important contributor to the performance of subsequent versions. Hawker Siddeley spent £35 million of its own funds, along with a further £35 million loan from the West German government, on the machine tooling to design and produce the wings.

=== Programme launch ===
On 29 May 1969, during the Paris Air Show, French transport minister Jean Chamant and German economics minister Karl Schiller signed an agreement officially launching the Airbus A300, the world&#x27;s first twin-engine widebody airliner. The intention of the project was to produce an aircraft that was smaller, lighter, and more economical than its three-engine American rivals, the McDonnell Douglas DC-10 and the Lockheed L-1011 TriStar. In order to meet Air France&#x27;s demands for an aircraft larger than 250-seat A300B, it was decided to stretch the fuselage to create a new variant, designated as the A300B2, which would be offered alongside the original 250-seat A300B, henceforth referred to as the A300B1. On 3 September 1970, Air France signed a letter of intent for six A300s, marking the first order to be won for the new airliner.

In the aftermath of the Paris Air Show agreement, it was decided that, in order to provide effective management of responsibilities, a Groupement d&#x27;intérêt économique would be established, allowing the various partners to work together on the project while remaining separate business entities. On 18 December 1970, Airbus Industrie was formally established following an agreement between Aérospatiale (the newly merged Sud Aviation and Nord Aviation) of France and the antecedents to Deutsche Aerospace of Germany, each receiving a 50 per cent stake in the newly formed company. In 1971, the consortium was joined by a third full partner, the Spanish firm CASA, who received a 4.2 per cent stake, the other two members reducing their stakes to 47.9 per cent each. In 1979, Britain joined the Airbus consortium via British Aerospace, which Hawker Siddeley had merged into, which acquired a 20 per cent stake in Airbus Industrie with France and Germany each reducing their stakes to 37.9 per cent.

=== Prototype and flight testing ===
Airbus Industrie was initially headquartered in Paris, which is where design, development, flight testing, sales, marketing, and customer support activities were centred; the headquarters was relocated to Toulouse in January 1974. The final assembly line for the A300 was located adjacent to Toulouse Blagnac International Airport. The manufacturing process necessitated transporting each aircraft section being produced by the partner companies scattered across Europe to this one location. The combined use of ferries and roads were used for the assembly of the first A300, however this was time-consuming and not viewed as ideal by Felix Kracht, Airbus Industrie&#x27;s production director. Kracht&#x27;s solution was to have the various A300 sections brought to Toulouse by a fleet of Boeing 377-derived Aero Spacelines Super Guppy aircraft, by which means none of the manufacturing sites were more than two hours away. Having the sections airlifted in this manner made the A300 the first airliner to use just-in-time manufacturing techniques, and allowed each company to manufacture its sections as fully equipped, ready-to-fly assemblies.

In September 1969, construction of the first prototype A300 began. On 28 September 1972, this first prototype was unveiled to the public, it conducted its maiden flight from Toulouse–Blagnac International Airport on 28 October that year. This maiden flight, which was performed a month ahead of schedule, lasted for one hour and 25 minutes; the captain was Max Fischl and the first officer was Bernard Ziegler, son of Henri Ziegler. In 1972, unit cost was US$17.5M. On 5 February 1973, the second prototype performed its maiden flight. The flight test programme, which involved a total of four aircraft, was relatively problem-free, accumulating 1,580 flight hours throughout. In September 1973, as part of promotional efforts for the A300, the new aircraft was taken on a six-week tour around North America and South America, to demonstrate it to airline executives, pilots, and would-be customers. Amongst the consequences of this expedition, it had allegedly brought the A300 to the attention of Frank Borman, the CEO of Eastern Airlines, one of the &quot;big four&quot; U.S. airlines.

=== Entry into service ===
On 15 March 1974, type certificates were granted for the A300 from both German and French authorities, clearing the way for its entry into revenue service. On 23 May 1974, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) certification was received. The first production model, the A300B2, entered service in 1974, followed by the A300B4 one year later. Initially, the success of the consortium was poor, in part due to the economic consequences of the 1973 oil crisis, but by 1979 there were 81 A300 passenger liners in service with 14 airlines, alongside 133 firm orders and 88 options. Ten years after the official launch of the A300, the company had achieved a 26 per cent market share in terms of dollar value, enabling Airbus to proceed with the development of its second aircraft, the Airbus A310.

== Design ==
The Airbus A300 is a wide-body medium-to-long range airliner; it has the distinction of being the first twin-engine wide-body aircraft in the world. In 1977, the A300 became the first Extended Range Twin Operations (ETOPS)-compliant aircraft, due to its high performance and safety standards. Another world-first of the A300 is the use of composite materials on a commercial aircraft, which were used on both secondary and later primary airframe structures, decreasing overall weight and improving cost-effectiveness. Other firsts included the pioneering use of centre-of-gravity control, achieved by transferring fuel between various locations across the aircraft, and electrically signalled secondary flight controls.

The A300 is powered by a pair of underwing turbofan engines, either General Electric CF6 or Pratt &amp; Whitney JT9D engines; the sole use of underwing engine pods allowed for any suitable turbofan engine to be more readily used. The lack of a third tail-mounted engine, as per the trijet configuration used by some competing airliners, allowed for the wings to be located further forwards and to reduce the size of the vertical stabiliser and elevator, which had the effect of increasing the aircraft&#x27;s flight performance and fuel efficiency.
Airbus partners had employed the latest technology, some of which having been derived from Concorde, on the A300. According to Airbus, new technologies adopted for the airliner were selected principally for increased safety, operational capability, and profitability. Upon entry into service in 1974, the A300 was a very advanced plane, which went on to influence later airliner designs. The technological highlights include advanced wings by de Havilland (later BAE Systems) with supercritical airfoil sections for economical performance and advanced aerodynamically efficient flight control surfaces.
The diameter circular fuselage section allows an eight-abreast passenger seating and is wide enough for 2 LD3 cargo containers side by side. Structures are made from metal billets, reducing weight. It is the first airliner to be fitted with wind shear protection. Its advanced autopilots are capable of flying the aircraft from climb-out to landing, and it has an electrically controlled braking system.

Later A300s incorporated other advanced features such as the Forward-Facing Crew Cockpit (FFCC), which enabled a two-pilot flight crew to fly the aircraft alone without the need for a flight engineer, the functions of which were automated; this two-man cockpit concept was a world-first for a wide-body aircraft. Glass cockpit flight instrumentation, which used cathode-ray tube (CRT) monitors to display flight, navigation, and warning information, along with fully digital dual autopilots and digital flight control computers for controlling the spoilers, flaps, and leading-edge slats, were also adopted upon later-built models. Additional composites were also made use of, such as carbon-fibre-reinforced polymer (CFRP), as well as their presence in an increasing proportion of the aircraft&#x27;s components, including the spoilers, rudder, air brakes, and landing gear doors. Another feature of later aircraft was the addition of wingtip fences, which improved aerodynamic performance and thus reduced cruise fuel consumption by about 1.5% for the A300-600.

In addition to passenger duties, the A300 became widely used by air freight operators; according to Airbus, it is the best-selling freight aircraft of all time. Various variants of the A300 were built to meet customer demands, often for diverse roles such as aerial refueling tankers, freighter models (new-build and conversions), combi aircraft, military airlifter, and VIP transport. Perhaps the most visually unique of the variants is the A300-600ST Beluga, an oversized cargo-carrying model operated by Airbus to carry aircraft sections between their manufacturing facilities. The A300 was the basis for, and retained a high level of commonality with, the second airliner produced by Airbus, the smaller Airbus A310.

== Operational history ==
On 23 May 1974, the first A300 to enter service performed the first commercial flight of the type, flying from Paris to London, for Air France.

Immediately after the launch, sales of the A300 were weak for some years, with most orders going to airlines that had an obligation to favor the domestically made product – notably Air France and Lufthansa, the first two airlines to place orders for the type. Following the appointment of Bernard Lathière as Henri Ziegler&#x27;s replacement, an aggressive sales approach was adopted. Indian Airlines was the world&#x27;s first domestic airline to purchase the A300, ordering three aircraft with three options. However, between December 1975 and May 1977, there were no sales for the type. During this period a number of &quot;whitetail&quot; A300s – completed but unsold aircraft – were completed and stored at Toulouse, and production fell to half an aircraft per month amid calls to pause production completely.

During the flight testing of the A300B2, Airbus held a series of talks with Korean Air on the topic of developing a longer-range version of the A300, which would become the A300B4. In September 1974, Korean Air placed an order for four A300B4s with options for two further aircraft; this sale was viewed as significant as it was the first non-European international airline to order Airbus aircraft. Airbus had viewed South-East Asia as a vital market that was ready to be opened up and believed Korean Air to be the &#x27;key&#x27;.

Airlines operating the A300 on short-haul routes were forced to reduce frequencies to try and fill the aircraft. As a result, they lost passengers to airlines operating more frequent narrow-body flights. Eventually, Airbus had to build its own narrowbody aircraft (the A320) to compete with the Boeing 737 and McDonnell Douglas DC-9/MD-80. The saviour of the A300 was the advent of ETOPS, a revised FAA rule which allows twin-engine jets to fly long-distance routes that were previously off-limits to them. This enabled Airbus to develop the aircraft as a medium/long-range airliner.

In 1977, US carrier Eastern Air Lines leased four A300s as an in-service trial. CEO Frank Borman was impressed that the A300 consumed 30% less fuel, even less than expected, than Eastern&#x27;s fleet of L-1011s. The A300 would replacing the aging DC-9s and 727-100s but in smaller numbers, while being a twinjet sized between the Tristars and 727-200s, and capable of operating from short runway airports with sufficient range from New York City to Miami. Borman proceeded to order 23 A300s, becoming the first U.S. customer for the type. This order is often cited as the point at which Airbus came to be seen as a serious competitor to the large American aircraft-manufacturers Boeing and McDonnell Douglas. Aviation author John Bowen alleged that various concessions, such as loan guarantees from European governments and compensation payments, were a factor in the decision as well. Although the A300 was originally too large for Eastern&#x27;s exiting routes, Airbus provided a fixed subsidy for a 57% load factor which decreased for every percent above that figure. The Eastern Air Lines breakthrough was shortly followed by an order from Pan Am. From then on, the A300 family sold well, eventually reaching a total of 561 delivered aircraft.

In December 1977, Aerocondor Colombia became the first Airbus operator in Latin America, leasing one Airbus A300B4-2C, named &quot;Ciudad de Barranquilla&quot;.

During the late 1970s, Airbus adopted a so-called &#x27;Silk Road&#x27; strategy, targeting airlines in the Far East. As a result, The aircraft found particular favor with Asian airlines, being bought by Japan Air System, Korean Air, China Eastern Airlines, Thai Airways International, Singapore Airlines, Malaysia Airlines, Philippine Airlines, Garuda Indonesia, China Airlines, Pakistan International Airlines, Indian Airlines, Trans Australia Airlines and many others. As Asia did not have restrictions similar to the FAA 60-minutes rule for twin-engine airliners which existed at the time, Asian airlines used A300s for routes across the Bay of Bengal and South China Sea.

In 1977, the A300B4 became the first ETOPS compliant aircraft, qualifying for Extended Twin Engine Operations over water, providing operators with more versatility in routing. In 1982, Garuda Indonesian Airways became the first airline to fly the A300B4-200FFCC with the newly Forward-Facing Crew Cockpit concept, the world&#x27;s first wide-body aircraft that only operated by two-man cockpit crew. By 1981, Airbus was growing rapidly, with over 400 aircraft sold to over forty airlines.

In 1989, Chinese operator China Eastern Airlines received its first A300; by 2006, the airline operated around 18 A300s, making it the largest operator of both the A300 and the A310 at that time. On 31 May 2014, China Eastern officially retired the last A300-600 in its fleet, having begun drawing down the type in 2010.

From 1997 to 2014, a single A300, designated A300 Zero-G, was operated by the European Space Agency (ESA), centre national d&#x27;études spatiales (CNES) and the German Aerospace Center (DLR) as a reduced-gravity aircraft for conducting research into microgravity; the A300 is the largest aircraft to ever have been used in this capacity. A typical flight would last for two and a half hours, enabling up to 30 parabolas to be performed per flight.

By the 1990s, the A300 was being heavily promoted as a cargo freighter. The largest freight operator of the A300 is FedEx Express, which has 70 A300 aircraft in service as of September 2022. UPS Airlines also operates 52 freighter versions of the A300.

The final version was the A300-600R and is rated for 180-minute ETOPS. The A300 has enjoyed renewed interest in the secondhand market for conversion to freighters; large numbers were being converted during the late 1990s. The freighter versions – either new-build A300-600s or converted ex-passenger A300-600s, A300B2s and B4s – account for most of the world&#x27;s freighter fleet after the Boeing 747 freighter.

The A300 provided Airbus the experience of manufacturing and selling airliners competitively. The basic fuselage of the A300 was later stretched (A330 and A340), shortened (A310), or modified into derivatives (A300-600ST &quot;Beluga&quot; Super Transporter). In 2006, unit cost of an −600F was $105 million. In March 2006, Airbus announced the impending closure of the A300/A310 final assembly line, making them the first Airbus aircraft to be discontinued. The final production A300, an A300F freighter, performed its initial flight on 18 April 2007, and was delivered to FedEx Express on 12 July 2007. Airbus has announced a support package to keep A300s flying commercially.
Airbus offers the A330-200F freighter as a replacement for the A300 cargo variants.

The life of UPS&#x27;s fleet of 52 A300s, delivered from 2000 to 2006, will be extended to 2035 by a flight deck upgrade based around Honeywell Primus Epic avionics; new displays and flight management system (FMS), improved weather radar, a central maintenance system, and a new version of the current enhanced ground proximity warning system.
With a light usage of only two to three cycles per day, it will not reach the maximum number of cycles by then.
The first modification will be made at Airbus Toulouse in 2019 and certified in 2020.

As of July 2017, there are 211 A300s in service with 22 operators, with the largest operator being FedEx Express with 68 A300-600F aircraft.

== Variants ==
=== A300B1 ===
The A300B1 was the first variant to take flight. It had a maximum takeoff weight (MTOW) of , was long and was powered by two General Electric CF6-50A engines. Only two prototypes of the variant were built before it was adapted into the A300B2, the first production variant of the airliner. The second prototype was leased to Trans European Airways in 1974.

=== A300B2 ===
==== A300B2-100 ====
Responding to a need for more seats from Air France, Airbus decided that the first production variant should be larger than the original prototype A300B1. The CF6-50A powered A300B2-100 was longer than the A300B1 and had an increased MTOW of , allowing for 30 additional seats and bringing the typical passenger count up to 281, with capacity for 20 LD3 containers. Two prototypes were built and the variant made its maiden flight on 28 June 1973, became certified on 15 March 1974 and entered service with Air France on 23 May 1974.

==== A300B2-200 ====
For the A300B2-200, originally designated as the A300B2K, Krueger flaps were introduced at the leading-edge root, the slat angles were reduced from 20 degrees to 16 degrees, and other lift related changes were made in order to introduce a high-lift system. This was done to improve performance when operating at high-altitude airports, where the air is less dense and lift generation is reduced. The variant had an increased MTOW of and was powered by CF6-50C engines, was certified on 23 June 1976, and entered service with South African Airways in November 1976. CF6-50C1 and CF6-50C2 models were also later fitted depending on customer requirements, these became certified on 22 February 1978 and 21 February 1980 respectively.

==== A300B2-320 ====
The A300B2-320 introduced the Pratt &amp; Whitney JT9D powerplant and was powered by JT9D-59A engines. It retained the MTOW of the B2-200, was certified on 4 January 1980, and entered service with Scandinavian Airlines on 18 February 1980, with only four being produced.


=== A300B4 ===
==== A300B4-100 ====
The initial A300B4 variant, later named the A300B4-100, included a centre fuel tank for an increased fuel capacity of , and had an increased MTOW of . It also featured Krueger flaps and had a similar high-lift system to what was later fitted to the A300B2-200. The variant made its maiden flight on 26 December 1974, was certified on 26 March 1975, and entered service with Germanair in May 1975.

==== A300B4-200 ====
The A300B4-200 had an increased MTOW of and featured an additional optional fuel tank in the rear cargo hold, which would reduce the cargo capacity by two LD3 containers. The variant was certified on 26 April 1979.


===== A300B4-200FFCC =====
It is the A300B4-200 without the flight engineer but analog flight instruments. Introduced by Garuda Indonesian Airways in 1982

=== A300-600 ===

The A300-600, officially designated as the A300B4-600, was slightly longer than the A300B2 and A300B4 variants and had an increased interior space from using a similar rear fuselage to the Airbus A310, this allowed it to have two additional rows of seats. It was initially powered by Pratt &amp; Whitney JT9D-7R4H1 engines, but was later fitted with General Electric CF6-80C2 engines, with Pratt &amp; Whitney PW4156 or PW4158 engines being introduced in 1986. Other changes include an improved wing featuring a recambered trailing edge, the incorporation of simpler single-slotted Fowler flaps, the deletion of slat fences, and the removal of the outboard ailerons after they were deemed unnecessary on the A310. The variant made its first flight on 8 July 1983, was certified on 9 March 1984, and entered service in June 1984 with Saudi Arabian Airlines. A total of 313 A300-600s (all versions) have been sold. The A300-600 uses the A310 cockpits, featuring digital technology and electronic displays, eliminating the need for a flight engineer. The FAA issues a single type rating which allows operation of both the A310 and A300-600.
* A300-600: (Official designation: A300B4-600) The baseline model of the −600 series.
* A300-620C: (Official designation: A300C4-620) A convertible-freighter version. Four delivered between 1984 and 1985.
* A300-600F: (Official designation: A300F4-600) The freighter version of the baseline −600.
* A300-600R: (Official designation: A300B4-600R) The increased-range −600, achieved by an additional trim fuel tank in the tail. First delivery in 1988 to American Airlines; all A300s built since 1989 (freighters included) are −600Rs. Japan Air System (later merged into Japan Airlines) took delivery of the last new-built passenger A300, an A300-622R, in November 2002.
* A300-600RC: (Official designation: A300C4-600R) The convertible-freighter version of the −600R. Two were delivered in 1999.
* A300-600RF: (Official designation: A300F4-600R) The freighter version of the −600R. All A300s delivered between November 2002 and 12 July 2007 (last ever A300 delivery) were A300-600RFs.

=== A300B10 (A310) ===


Airbus had demand for an aircraft smaller than the A300.
On 7 July 1978, the A310 (initially the A300B10) was launched with orders from Swissair and Lufthansa.
On 3 April 1982, the first prototype conducted its maiden flight and it received its type certification on 11 March 1983.
Keeping the same eight-abreast cross-section, the A310 is shorter than the initial A300 variants, and has a smaller wing, down from . The A310 introduced a two-crew glass cockpit, later adopted for the A300-600 with a common type rating. It was powered by the same GE CF6-80 or Pratt &amp; Whitney JT9D then PW4000 turbofans. It can seat 220 passengers in two classes, or 240 in all-economy, and can fly up to .
It has overwing exits between the two main front and rear door pairs.
In April 1983, the aircraft entered revenue service with Swissair and competed with the Boeing 767–200, introduced six months before.
Its longer range and ETOPS regulations allowed it to be operated on transatlantic flights. Until the last delivery in June 1998, 255 aircraft were produced, as it was succeeded by the larger Airbus A330-200.

It has cargo aircraft versions, and was derived into the Airbus A310 MRTT military tanker/transport.

=== A300-600ST ===

Commonly referred to as the Airbus Beluga or &quot;Airbus Super Transporter&quot;, these five airframes are used by Airbus to ferry parts between the company&#x27;s disparate manufacturing facilities, thus enabling workshare distribution. They replaced the four Aero Spacelines Super Guppys previously used by Airbus.

ICAO code: A3ST

== Operators ==

, there are 197 A300 family aircraft in commercial service.
The five largest operators were FedEx Express (70), UPS Airlines (52), European Air Transport Leipzig (23), Iran Air (11), and Mahan Air (11).

=== Deliveries ===

== Accidents and incidents ==
As of June 2021, the A300 has been involved in 77 occurrences including 24 hull-loss accidents causing 1133 fatalities, and 36 criminal occurrences and hijackings causing 302 fatalities.

=== Accidents with fatalities ===

* 21 September 1987: An Egyptair Airbus A300B4-203 touched down past the runway threshold during a training flight. The right main gear hit the runway lights and the aircraft collided with an antenna and fences. No passengers were on board the plane, but 5 crew members were killed. The aircraft was written off. This was the first fatal accident of an Airbus A300.
* 28 September 1992: PIA Flight 268, an A300B4 crashed on approach near Kathmandu, Nepal. All 12 crew and 155 passengers died.
* 26 April 1994: China Airlines Flight 140 crashed at the end of runway at Nagoya, Japan, killing all 15 crew and 249 of 256 passengers on board.
* 26 September 1997: Garuda Indonesia Flight 152 was on approach to Polonia International Airport in Medan. The plane later crashed into a ravine in Buah Nabar due to ATC error and apparent haze that covers the country which limits the visibility. All 234 passengers and crew aboard were killed in Indonesia&#x27;s deadliest crash.
* 16 February 1998: China Airlines Flight 676 crashed into a residential area close to CKS International Airport near Taipei, Taiwan. All 196 people on board were killed, including Taiwan&#x27;s central bank president. Six people on the ground were also killed.
* 2 February 2000: During take-off, a Lockheed C-130 Hercules owned by the Iranian Air Force lost control and veered off the runway, striking an Airbus A300B2-203 owned by Iran Air, killing eight people.
* 12 November 2001: American Airlines Flight 587 crashed into Belle Harbor—a neighbourhood in Queens, New York, United States—shortly after takeoff from John F. Kennedy International Airport. The vertical stabiliser ripped off the aircraft after the rudder was mishandled during wake turbulence. All 260 people on board were killed, along with 5 people on the ground. It is the second-deadliest incident involving an A300 to date and the second-deadliest aircraft incident in the United States.
* 14 April 2010: AeroUnion Flight 302, an A300B4-203F, crashed on a road short of the runway while attempting to land at Monterrey Airport in Mexico. Seven people (five crew members and two on the ground) were killed.
* 14 August 2013: UPS Flight 1354, an Airbus A300F4-622R, crashed outside the perimeter fence on approach to Birmingham–Shuttlesworth International Airport in Birmingham, Alabama, United States. Both crew members died.

=== Non-fatal hull losses ===
* 18 December 1983: Malaysian Airline System Flight 684, an Airbus A300B4 leased from Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS), registration OY-KAA, crashed short of the runway at Kuala Lumpur in bad weather while attempting to land on a flight from Singapore. All 247 people aboard escaped unharmed but the aircraft was destroyed in the resulting fire.
* 24 April 1993: an Air Inter Airbus A300B2-1C was written off after colliding with a light pole while being pushed back at Montpellier.
* 15 November 1993, an Indian Airlines Airbus A300, registered as VT-EDV, crash landed near Hyderabad Airport. There were no deaths but the aircraft was written off.
* 10 August 1994 – Korean Air Flight 2033 (Airbus A300) from Seoul to Jeju, the flight approached faster than usual to avoid potential windshear. Fifty feet above the runway the co-pilot, who was not flying the aircraft, decided that there was insufficient runway left to land and tried to perform a go-around against the captain&#x27;s wishes. The aircraft touched down 1,773 meters beyond the runway threshold. The aircraft could not be stopped on the remaining 1,227 meters of runway and overran at a speed of 104 knots. After striking the airport wall and a guard post at 30 knots, the aircraft burst into flames and was incinerated. The cabin crew was credited with safely evacuating all passengers although only half of the aircraft&#x27;s emergency exits were usable.
* 17 October 2001: Pakistan International Airlines flight PK231, registration AP-BCJ, from Islamabad via Peshawar to Dubai veered off the side of the runway after the right hand main landing gear collapsed as it touched down. The aircraft skidded and eventually came to rest in sand 50 meters from the runway. The aircraft sustained damage to its right wing structure and its no. 2 engine, which partly broke off the wing. All 205 passengers and crew survived.
* 1 March 2004: Pakistan International Airlines Flight 2002 burst 2 tyres whilst taking off from King Abdulaziz International Airport. Fragments of the tyre were ingested by the engines, this caused the engines to catch fire and an aborted takeoff was performed. Due to the fire substantial damage to the engine and the left wing caused the aircraft to be written off. All 261 passengers and 12 crew survived.
* 16 November 2012: an Air Contractors Airbus A300B4-203(F) EI-EAC, operating flight QY6321 on behalf of EAT Leipzig from Leipzig (Germany) to Bratislava (Slovakia), suffered a nose wheel collapse during roll out after landing at Bratislava&#x27;s M. R. Štefánik Airport. All three crew members survived unharmed, the aircraft was written off. As of December 2017, the aircraft still was parked at a remote area of the airport between runways 13 and 22.
* 12 October 2015: An Airbus A300B4-200F Freighter operated by Egyptian Tristar cargo carrier crashed in Mogadishu, Somalia. All the passengers and crew members survived the crash.
* 1 October 2016: An Airbus A300-B4 registration PR-STN on a cargo flight between São Paulo-Guarulhos and Recife suffered a runway excursion after landing and the aft gear collapsed upon touchdown.

=== Violent incidents ===
* 27 June 1976: Air France Flight 139, originating in Tel Aviv, Israel and carrying 248 passengers and a crew of 12 took off from Athens, Greece, headed for Paris, France. The flight was hijacked by terrorists, and was eventually flown to Entebbe Airport in Uganda. At the airport, Israeli commandos rescued 102 of the 106 hostages.
* 26 October 1986: Thai Airways Flight 620, an Airbus A300B4-601, originating in Bangkok suffered an explosion mid-flight. The aircraft descended rapidly and was able to land safely at Osaka. The aircraft was later repaired and there were no fatalities. The cause was a hand grenade brought onto the plane by a Japanese gangster of the Yamaguchi-gumi. 62 of the 247 people on board were injured.
* 3 July 1988: Iran Air Flight 655 was shot down by USS &quot;Vincennes&quot; in the Persian Gulf after being mistaken for an attacking Iranian F-14 Tomcat, killing all 290 passengers and crew.
* 15 February 1991: two Kuwait Airways A300C4-620s and two Boeing 767s that had been seized during Iraq&#x27;s occupation of Kuwait were destroyed in coalition bombing of Mosul Airport.
* 24 December 1994: Air France Flight 8969 was hijacked at Houari Boumedienne Airport in Algiers, by four terrorists who belonged to the Armed Islamic Group. The terrorists apparently intended to crash the plane over the Eiffel Tower on Boxing Day. After a failed attempt to leave Marseille following a confrontational firefight between the terrorists and the GIGN French Special Forces, the result was the death of all four terrorists. (Snipers on the terminal front&#x27;s roof shot dead two of the terrorists. The other two terrorists died as a result of gunshots in the cabin after approximately 20 minutes.) Three hostages including a Vietnamese diplomat were executed in Algiers, 229 hostages survived, many of them wounded by shrapnel. The almost 15-year-old aircraft was written off.
* 24 December 1999: Indian Airlines Flight IC 814 from Kathmandu, Nepal, to New Delhi was hijacked. After refuelling and offloading a few passengers, the flight was diverted to Kandahar, Afghanistan. A Nepalese man was murdered while the plane was in flight.
* 22 November 2003: European Air Transport OO-DLL, operating on behalf of DHL Aviation, was hit by an SA-14 &#x27;Gremlin&#x27; missile after takeoff from Baghdad International Airport. The aeroplane lost hydraulic pressure and thus the controls. After extending the landing gear to create more drag, the crew piloted the plane using differences in engine thrust and landed the plane with minimal further damage. The plane was repaired and offered for sale, but in April 2011 it still remained parked at Baghdad Intl.
* 25 August 2011: an A300B4-620 5A-IAY of Afriqiyah Airways and A300B4-622 5A-DLZ of Libyan Arab Airlines were both destroyed in fighting between pro- and anti-Gaddafi forces at Tripoli International Airport.

== Aircraft on display ==
Fifteen A300s are currently preserved:
*F-BUAD Airbus A300 ZERO-G, since August 2015 preserved at Cologne Bonn Airport, Germany.
*F-WUAB The first prototype of the Airbus A300 is Partially preserved with a fuselage section, the right-hand wing, and an engine on display at the Deutsches Museum
*ex-HL7219 Korean Air Airbus A300B4 preserved at Korean Air Jeongseok Airfield.
*ex-N11984 Continental Airlines Airbus A300B4 preserved in South Korea as a Night Flight Restaurant.
*ex TC-ACD and TC-ACE Air ACT, preserved as coffee house at Uçak Cafe in Burhaniye, Turkey.
*ex TC-MNJ MNG Airlines, preserved as Köfte Airlines restaurant at Tekirdağ, Turkey.
*ex TC-FLA Fly Air, preserved as the Airbus Cafe &amp; Restaurant at Kayseri, Turkey.
*ex TC-ACC Air ACT, preserved as the Uçak Kütüphane library and education centre at Çankırı, Turkey.
*ex EP-MHA Mahan Air, preserved as instructional airframe at the Botia Mahan Aviation College at Kerman, Iran.
*ex TC-FLM Fly Air, preserved as a restaurant at Istanbul, Turkey.
*ex B-18585 China Airlines, preserved as the Flight of Happiness restaurant at Taoyuan, Taiwan.
*ex-PK-JID Sempati Air Airbus A300B4 repainted in first A300B1 prototype colours, including original F-WUAB registration, became an exhibit in 2014 at the Aeroscopia museum in Blagnac, near Toulouse, France.
*ex TC-MCE MNG Airlines, preserved as a restaurant at the Danialand theme park at Agadir, Morocco.
*ex HL7240 Korean Air, preserved as instructional airframe (gate guard) at the Korea Aerospace University at Goyang, South Korea.
*ex HS-TAM Thai Airways A300-600R, preserved in a field near Doi Saket, Chiang Mai.

== Specifications ==


=== Aircraft model designations ===

== See also ==

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6437" start="4" end="15" title="Airbus A300" label="Airbus A300"/>
<link wikidata="Q233132" start="85" end="96" title="Twinjet" label="twin-engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q309078" start="111" end="131" title="Wide-body aircraft" label="(wide-body) airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="203" end="212" title="Airbus SE" label="Airbus SE"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="295" end="301" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="303" end="315" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="324" end="338" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="357" end="384" title="memorandum of understanding" label="memorandum of understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q936518" start="592" end="609" title="aerospace manufacturer" label="aerospace company"/>
<link wikidata="Q905424" start="866" end="871" title="Range (aircraft)" label="range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501579" start="950" end="973" title="General Electric CF6-50" label="General Electric CF6-50"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107978" start="977" end="1001" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney JT9D" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney JT9D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501579" start="1104" end="1112" title="General Electric CF6-80C2" label="CF6-80C2"/>
<link wikidata="Q128862" start="1116" end="1122" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney PW4000" label="PW4000"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471" start="1246" end="1250" title="Airbus A310" label="A310"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481" start="1372" end="1376" title="Airbus A340" label="A340"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="1412" end="1416" title="Airbus A330" label="A330"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486" start="1463" end="1469" title="Airbus Beluga" label="Beluga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="1500" end="1506" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759012" start="1526" end="1530" title="Yoke (aeronautics)" label="yoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q626658" start="1544" end="1555" title="fly-by-wire" label="fly-by-wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="1580" end="1590" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="1790" end="1800" title="Boeing 767" label="Boeing 767"/>
<link wikidata="Q19799" start="1905" end="1919" title="cargo aircraft" label="cargo aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q952062" start="2207" end="2222" title="Hawker Siddeley" label="Hawker Siddeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q655224" start="2231" end="2259" title="British Aircraft Corporation" label="British Aircraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428793" start="2282" end="2294" title="Sud Aviation" label="Sud Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423689" start="2484" end="2507" title="Hawker Siddeley Trident" label="Hawker Siddeley Trident"/>
<link wikidata="Q655224" start="2543" end="2571" title="British Aircraft Corporation" label="British Aircraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504" start="2578" end="2588" title="One-Eleven" label="One-Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q82856" start="2605" end="2619" title="BAC Three-Eleven" label="BAC Two-Eleven"/>
<link wikidata="Q309078" start="3318" end="3327" title="wide-body" label="wide-body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513679" start="3373" end="3386" title="Nord Aviation" label="Nord Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q176035" start="3392" end="3408" title="Breguet Aviation" label="Breguet Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="3554" end="3581" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3740" end="3756" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="3785" end="3795" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q32396" start="3800" end="3817" title="American Airlines" label="American Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q309078" start="3869" end="3887" title="wide-body aircraft" label="wide-body aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="4390" end="4396" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438767" start="4452" end="4466" title="Roger Béteille" label="Roger Béteille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132187" start="4554" end="4567" title="Henri Ziegler" label="Henri Ziegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q44620" start="4688" end="4707" title="Franz Josef Strauss" label="Franz Josef Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="5170" end="5181" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="5492" end="5501" title="composite material" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="5604" end="5634" title="Fiberglass" label="glass fibre reinforced plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="5738" end="5744" title="Metric system" label="Metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q9325" start="5927" end="5936" title="Lufthansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="6500" end="6508" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q919252" start="7075" end="7099" title="British European Airways" label="British European Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q679888" start="7181" end="7192" title="Rolls-Royce Limited" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636078" start="7260" end="7277" title="Rolls-Royce RB211" label="Rolls-Royce RB211"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7283" end="7295" title="Turbofan#Three-spool" label="triple-spool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="7352" end="7355" title="US$" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q405515" start="7907" end="7929" title="unit load device" label="LD3 freight containers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107978" start="8483" end="8507" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney JT9D" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney JT9D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501579" start="8512" end="8532" title="General Electric CF6" label="General Electric CF6"/>
<link wikidata="Q773875" start="8854" end="8860" title="Snecma" label="Snecma"/>
<link wikidata="Q654051" start="8953" end="8961" title="turbofan" label="turbofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794935" start="9557" end="9582" title="Arnold Alexander Hall" label="Sir Arnold Alexander Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q174352" start="10044" end="10058" title="Paris Air Show" label="Paris Air Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3171209" start="10086" end="10098" title="Jean Chamant" label="Jean Chamant"/>
<link wikidata="Q65513" start="10129" end="10142" title="Karl Schiller" label="Karl Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q208075" start="10401" end="10424" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-10" label="McDonnell Douglas DC-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q852" start="10433" end="10456" title="Lockheed L-1011 TriStar" label="Lockheed L-1011 TriStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118017" start="11000" end="11036" title="Groupement d&amp;#x27;intérêt économique" label="Groupement d&amp;#x27;intérêt économique"/>
<link wikidata="Q650639" start="11259" end="11271" title="Aérospatiale" label="Aérospatiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428793" start="11290" end="11302" title="Sud Aviation" label="Sud Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513679" start="11307" end="11320" title="Nord Aviation" label="Nord Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q704874" start="11355" end="11373" title="Deutsche Aerospace" label="Deutsche Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128353" start="11527" end="11531" title="Construcciones Aeronáuticas" label="CASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q918733" start="11685" end="11702" title="British Aerospace" label="British Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="11953" end="11958" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="12110" end="12118" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q372615" start="12197" end="12235" title="Toulouse Blagnac International Airport" label="Toulouse Blagnac International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q70745" start="12540" end="12552" title="Felix Kracht" label="Felix Kracht"/>
<link wikidata="Q652964" start="12694" end="12704" title="Boeing 377" label="Boeing 377"/>
<link wikidata="Q58219" start="12713" end="12740" title="Aero Spacelines Super Guppy" label="Aero Spacelines Super Guppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380772" start="12914" end="12940" title="just-in-time manufacturing" label="just-in-time manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="13206" end="13219" title="maiden flight" label="maiden flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="13845" end="13858" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="13863" end="13876" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18762" start="14050" end="14062" title="Frank Borman" label="Frank Borman"/>
<link wikidata="Q611742" start="14075" end="14091" title="Eastern Airlines" label="Eastern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418690" start="14186" end="14202" title="type certificate" label="type certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="14340" end="14371" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="14609" end="14624" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471" start="14948" end="14959" title="Airbus A310" label="Airbus A310"/>
<link wikidata="Q309078" start="14996" end="15005" title="wide-body" label="wide-body"/>
<link wikidata="Q210932" start="15027" end="15035" title="airliner" label="airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048926" start="15159" end="15189" title="ETOPS" label="Extended Range Twin Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q833237" start="15537" end="15554" title="center of gravity of an aircraft" label="centre-of-gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q849579" start="15978" end="15984" title="trijet" label="trijet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080767" start="16116" end="16135" title="vertical stabiliser" label="vertical stabiliser"/>
<link wikidata="Q252451" start="16140" end="16148" title="elevator (aeronautics)" label="elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="16336" end="16344" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q283666" start="16688" end="16700" title="de Havilland" label="de Havilland"/>
<link wikidata="Q739416" start="16708" end="16719" title="BAE Systems" label="BAE Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118725" start="16726" end="16747" title="supercritical airfoil" label="supercritical airfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8424" start="16797" end="16812" title="aerodynamically" label="aerodynamically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1705284" start="16823" end="16846" title="flight control surfaces" label="flight control surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q405515" start="16954" end="16957" title="LD3" label="LD3"/>
<link wikidata="Q867705" start="17020" end="17027" title="billet (manufacturing)" label="billets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698467" start="17089" end="17110" title="airborne wind shear detection and alert system" label="wind shear protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q432425" start="17437" end="17452" title="flight engineer" label="flight engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15038173" start="17566" end="17579" title="Glass cockpit" label="Glass cockpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="17615" end="17631" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q11481471" start="17756" end="17780" title="Aircraft flight control system" label="flight control computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760097" start="17801" end="17809" title="Spoiler (aeronautics)" label="spoilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="17811" end="17816" title="Flap (aeronautics)" label="flaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534008" start="17822" end="17840" title="leading-edge slats" label="leading-edge slats"/>
<link wikidata="Q910977" start="17938" end="17969" title="carbon-fibre-reinforced polymer" label="carbon-fibre-reinforced polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q209760" start="18091" end="18097" title="rudder" label="rudder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004684" start="18099" end="18109" title="air brake (aeronautics)" label="air brakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q263421" start="18115" end="18127" title="landing gear" label="landing gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q691858" start="18189" end="18202" title="wingtip fence" label="wingtip fence"/>
<link wikidata="Q142804" start="18577" end="18593" title="aerial refueling" label="aerial refueling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032623" start="18649" end="18663" title="combi aircraft" label="combi aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q256905" start="18674" end="18681" title="airlift" label="airlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q956495" start="18689" end="18692" title="VIP" label="VIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486" start="18760" end="18777" title="Airbus Beluga" label="A300-600ST Beluga"/>
<link wikidata="Q876323" start="19596" end="19611" title="Indian Airlines" label="Indian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q213147" start="20103" end="20113" title="Korean Air" label="Korean Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="20831" end="20835" title="Airbus A320 family" label="A320"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="20857" end="20867" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q221414" start="20872" end="20894" title="McDonnell Douglas DC-9" label="McDonnell Douglas DC-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q207400" start="20895" end="20900" title="MD-80" label="MD-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="20961" end="20964" title="FAA" label="FAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q611742" start="21167" end="21184" title="Eastern Air Lines" label="Eastern Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18762" start="21231" end="21243" title="Frank Borman" label="Frank Borman"/>
<link wikidata="Q852" start="21350" end="21357" title="Lockheed L-1011 TriStar" label="L-1011s"/>
<link wikidata="Q66" start="21826" end="21832" title="Boeing" label="Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q201815" start="21837" end="21854" title="McDonnell Douglas" label="McDonnell Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="22291" end="22297" title="Pan Am" label="Pan Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835801" start="22414" end="22433" title="Aerocondor Colombia" label="Aerocondor Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311" start="22451" end="22457" title="Airbus" label="Airbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="22470" end="22483" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q62823" start="22537" end="22549" title="Barranquilla" label="Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="22614" end="22623" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="22666" end="22674" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138263" start="22762" end="22778" title="Japan Air System" label="Japan Air System"/>
<link wikidata="Q213147" start="22780" end="22790" title="Korean Air" label="Korean Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q291796" start="22792" end="22814" title="China Eastern Airlines" label="China Eastern Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q188710" start="22816" end="22842" title="Thai Airways International" label="Thai Airways International"/>
<link wikidata="Q32245" start="22844" end="22862" title="Singapore Airlines" label="Singapore Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q308952" start="22864" end="22881" title="Malaysia Airlines" label="Malaysia Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q846910" start="22883" end="22902" title="Philippine Airlines" label="Philippine Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q512468" start="22904" end="22920" title="Garuda Indonesia" label="Garuda Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51756" start="22922" end="22936" title="China Airlines" label="China Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q204887" start="22938" end="22969" title="Pakistan International Airlines" label="Pakistan International Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q876323" start="22971" end="22986" title="Indian Airlines" label="Indian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448822" start="22988" end="23012" title="Trans Australia Airlines" label="Trans Australia Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048926" start="23083" end="23098" title="ETOPS" label="60-minutes rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="23200" end="23213" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="23218" end="23233" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q512468" start="23421" end="23446" title="Garuda Indonesian Airways" label="Garuda Indonesian Airways"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24093" end="24104" title="Weightlessness#European Space Agency A300 Zero-G" label="A300 Zero-G"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="24126" end="24147" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q48756" start="24155" end="24194" title="centre national d&amp;#x27;études spatiales" label="centre national d&amp;#x27;études spatiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q157332" start="24210" end="24233" title="German Aerospace Center" label="German Aerospace Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898068" start="24245" end="24269" title="reduced-gravity aircraft" label="reduced-gravity aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299309" start="24299" end="24311" title="microgravity" label="microgravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q48297" start="24459" end="24467" title="parabola" label="parabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q782557" start="24614" end="24627" title="FedEx Express" label="FedEx Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318737" start="24689" end="24701" title="UPS Airlines" label="UPS Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="25144" end="25154" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478" start="25313" end="25317" title="A330" label="A330"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481" start="25322" end="25326" title="A340" label="A340"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486" start="25377" end="25424" title="Airbus Beluga" label="A300-600ST &amp;quot;Beluga&amp;quot; Super Transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030691" start="26065" end="26081" title="Honeywell Primus" label="Honeywell Primus"/>
<link wikidata="Q657919" start="26114" end="26138" title="flight management system" label="flight management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q863343" start="26155" end="26168" title="weather radar" label="weather radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138034" start="26242" end="26273" title="ground proximity warning system" label="ground proximity warning system"/>
<link wikidata="Q938476" start="26704" end="26726" title="maximum takeoff weight" label="maximum takeoff weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501579" start="26771" end="26795" title="General Electric CF6-50A" label="General Electric CF6-50A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731894" start="26971" end="26993" title="Trans European Airways" label="Trans European Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q131005" start="27081" end="27091" title="Air France" label="Air France"/>
<link wikidata="Q405515" start="27390" end="27393" title="LD3" label="LD3"/>
<link wikidata="Q915311" start="27654" end="27667" title="Krueger flaps" label="Krueger flaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534008" start="27714" end="27718" title="Leading-edge slat" label="slat"/>
<link wikidata="Q223763" start="28121" end="28142" title="South African Airways" label="South African Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107978" start="28379" end="28403" title="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney JT9D" label="Pratt &amp;amp; Whitney JT9D"/>
<link wikidata="Q187854" start="28546" end="28567" title="Scandinavian Airlines" label="Scandinavian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29032" end="29041" title="Germanair" label="Germanair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471" start="29657" end="29668" title="Airbus A310" label="Airbus A310"/>
<link wikidata="Q18407944" start="30057" end="30062" title="Flap (aeronautics)" label="flaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q509379" start="30125" end="30133" title="ailerons" label="ailerons"/>
<link wikidata="Q541179" start="30301" end="30323" title="Saudi Arabian Airlines" label="Saudi Arabian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q213140" start="31174" end="31188" title="Japan Airlines" label="Japan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q694098" start="31751" end="31759" title="Swissair" label="Swissair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134219" start="32122" end="32133" title="type rating" label="type rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114095" start="32316" end="32329" title="overwing exit" label="overwing exit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32467" end="32481" title="Boeing 767#767-200" label="Boeing 767–200"/>
<link wikidata="Q732410" start="32581" end="32601" title="transatlantic flight" label="transatlantic flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q19799" start="32729" end="32743" title="cargo aircraft" label="cargo aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490" start="32779" end="32795" title="Airbus A310 MRTT" label="Airbus A310 MRTT"/>
<link wikidata="Q58219" start="33106" end="33133" title="Aero Spacelines Super Guppy" label="Aero Spacelines Super Guppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839845" start="33163" end="33172" title="List of ICAO aircraft type designators" label="ICAO code"/>
<link wikidata="Q782557" start="33289" end="33302" title="FedEx Express" label="FedEx Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318737" start="33309" end="33321" title="UPS Airlines" label="UPS Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q479159" start="33328" end="33358" title="European Air Transport Leipzig" label="European Air Transport Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q461631" start="33365" end="33373" title="Iran Air" label="Iran Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149762" start="33384" end="33393" title="Mahan Air" label="Mahan Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q374740" start="33698" end="33706" title="Egyptair" label="Egyptair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064550" start="34061" end="34075" title="PIA Flight 268" label="PIA Flight 268"/>
<link wikidata="Q699055" start="34184" end="34209" title="China Airlines Flight 140" label="China Airlines Flight 140"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="34242" end="34248" title="Nagoya" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503541" start="34334" end="34361" title="Garuda Indonesia Flight 152" label="Garuda Indonesia Flight 152"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332829" start="34381" end="34410" title="Polonia International Airport" label="Polonia International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972" start="34414" end="34419" title="Medan" label="Medan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592792" start="34503" end="34531" title="1997 Southeast Asian haze" label="haze that covers the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q709416" start="34665" end="34690" title="China Airlines Flight 676" label="China Airlines Flight 676"/>
<link wikidata="Q44856" start="34732" end="34757" title="CKS International Airport" label="CKS International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q182027" start="34945" end="34968" title="Lockheed C-130 Hercules" label="Lockheed C-130 Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q378442" start="34982" end="34999" title="Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force" label="Iranian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q513684" start="35040" end="35048" title="2000 Tehran airport collision" label="striking"/>
<link wikidata="Q461631" start="35079" end="35087" title="Iran Air" label="Iran Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q384845" start="35131" end="35159" title="American Airlines Flight 587" label="American Airlines Flight 587"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894717" start="35173" end="35185" title="Belle Harbor" label="Belle Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="35205" end="35211" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="35264" end="35301" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="John F. Kennedy International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677721" start="35623" end="35643" title="AeroUnion Flight 302" label="AeroUnion Flight 302"/>
<link wikidata="Q767660" start="35727" end="35744" title="Monterrey Airport" label="Monterrey Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q14566965" start="35842" end="35857" title="UPS Flight 1354" label="UPS Flight 1354"/>
<link wikidata="Q865724" start="35933" end="35979" title="Birmingham–Shuttlesworth International Airport" label="Birmingham–Shuttlesworth International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="35983" end="35993" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15698040" start="36094" end="36129" title="Malaysian Airline System Flight 684" label="Malaysian Airline System Flight 684"/>
<link wikidata="Q187854" start="36160" end="36188" title="Scandinavian Airlines System" label="Scandinavian Airlines System"/>
<link wikidata="Q407368" start="36442" end="36451" title="Air Inter" label="Air Inter"/>
<link wikidata="Q575865" start="36546" end="36557" title="Fréjorgues Airport" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16261359" start="36744" end="36766" title="Korean Air Flight 2033" label="Korean Air Flight 2033"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190316" start="37591" end="37600" title="Islamabad International Airport" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516769" start="37605" end="37613" title="Bacha Khan International Airport" label="Peshawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q193439" start="37617" end="37622" title="Dubai International Airport" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q153592" start="38058" end="38094" title="King Abdulaziz International Airport" label="King Abdulaziz International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q407043" start="38394" end="38409" title="Air Contractors" label="Air Contractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q479159" start="38476" end="38487" title="EAT Leipzig" label="EAT Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q828379" start="38619" end="38641" title="M. R. Štefánik Airport" label="M. R. Štefánik Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138803" start="38897" end="38904" title="Tristar Air" label="Tristar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33933" start="39247" end="39268" title="Operation Entebbe" label="Air France Flight 139"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="39285" end="39293" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q586065" start="39470" end="39485" title="Entebbe Airport" label="Entebbe Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11315858" start="39583" end="39606" title="Thai Airways Flight 620" label="Thai Airways Flight 620"/>
<link wikidata="Q763018" start="39900" end="39914" title="Yamaguchi-gumi" label="Yamaguchi-gumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q743060" start="39975" end="39994" title="Iran Air Flight 655" label="Iran Air Flight 655"/>
<link wikidata="Q385541" start="40012" end="40037" title="USS Vincennes (CG-49)" label="USS &amp;quot;Vincennes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="40045" end="40057" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q34945" start="40104" end="40115" title="F-14 Tomcat" label="F-14 Tomcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q860389" start="40178" end="40192" title="Kuwait Airways" label="Kuwait Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="40253" end="40285" title="Iraq&amp;#x27;s occupation of Kuwait" label="Iraq&amp;#x27;s occupation of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115894" start="40304" end="40313" title="coalition of the Gulf War" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432089" start="40325" end="40338" title="Mosul Airport" label="Mosul Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574009" start="40360" end="40382" title="Air France Flight 8969" label="Air France Flight 8969"/>
<link wikidata="Q623452" start="40399" end="40425" title="Houari Boumedienne Airport" label="Houari Boumedienne Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="40429" end="40436" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125408" start="40477" end="40496" title="Armed Islamic Group" label="Armed Islamic Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="40561" end="40573" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q956699" start="40577" end="40587" title="Boxing Day" label="Boxing Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="40621" end="40630" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q63481" start="40700" end="40704" title="GIGN" label="GIGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="41017" end="41024" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009640" start="41152" end="41181" title="Indian Airlines Flight IC 814" label="Indian Airlines Flight IC 814"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="41187" end="41196" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="41309" end="41317" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q370143" start="41411" end="41440" title="2003 Baghdad DHL attempted shootdown incident" label="European Air Transport OO-DLL"/>
<link wikidata="Q323329" start="41465" end="41477" title="DHL Aviation" label="DHL Aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051186" start="41493" end="41518" title="SA-14 Gremlin" label="SA-14 &amp;#x27;Gremlin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q304438" start="41546" end="41575" title="Baghdad International Airport" label="Baghdad International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q387901" start="41951" end="41968" title="Afriqiyah Airways" label="Afriqiyah Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056939" start="41994" end="42014" title="Libyan Arab Airlines" label="Libyan Arab Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q609013" start="42025" end="42046" title="2011 Battle of Tripoli" label="destroyed in fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q44588" start="42087" end="42116" title="Tripoli International Airport" label="Tripoli International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898068" start="42199" end="42210" title="Reduced gravity aircraft" label="A300 ZERO-G"/>
<link wikidata="Q157741" start="42243" end="42263" title="Cologne Bonn Airport" label="Cologne Bonn Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q125119127" start="42286" end="42301" title="F-WUAB" label="first prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q131617" start="42422" end="42438" title="Deutsches Museum" label="Deutsches Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q213147" start="42450" end="42460" title="Korean Air" label="Korean Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="42530" end="42550" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="42578" end="42589" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q288836" start="42642" end="42649" title="Air ACT" label="Air ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012901" start="42693" end="42702" title="Burhaniye" label="Burhaniye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881674" start="42723" end="42735" title="MNG Airlines" label="MNG Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q182009" start="42779" end="42787" title="Tekirdağ" label="Tekirdağ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434515" start="42808" end="42815" title="Fly Air" label="Fly Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q48338" start="42866" end="42873" title="Kayseri" label="Kayseri"/>
<link wikidata="Q288836" start="42894" end="42901" title="Air ACT" label="Air ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q209925" start="42967" end="42974" title="Çankırı" label="Çankırı"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149762" start="42995" end="43004" title="Mahan Air" label="Mahan Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q171714" start="43081" end="43087" title="Kerman" label="Kerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434515" start="43106" end="43113" title="Fly Air" label="Fly Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="43144" end="43152" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q51756" start="43174" end="43188" title="China Airlines" label="China Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q115256" start="43241" end="43248" title="Taoyuan, Taiwan" label="Taoyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189342" start="43269" end="43280" title="Sempati Air" label="Sempati Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q15714017" start="43413" end="43423" title="Aeroscopia" label="Aeroscopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271068" start="43434" end="43441" title="Blagnac" label="Blagnac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="43448" end="43456" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="43458" end="43464" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881674" start="43477" end="43489" title="MNG Airlines" label="MNG Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q170525" start="43548" end="43554" title="Agadir" label="Agadir"/>
<link wikidata="Q213147" start="43576" end="43586" title="Korean Air" label="Korean Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q6431586" start="43644" end="43670" title="Korea Aerospace University" label="Korea Aerospace University"/>
<link wikidata="Q42061" start="43674" end="43680" title="Goyang" label="Goyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q188710" start="43706" end="43718" title="Thai Airways" label="Thai Airways"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2526" wikidata="Q316269" url="?curid=2526" title="Agostino Carracci">
<text>Agostino Carracci (or Caracci; ; 16 August 1557 – 22 March 1602) was an Italian painter, printmaker, tapestry designer, and art teacher. He was, together with his brother, Annibale Carracci, and cousin, Ludovico Carracci, one of the founders of the Accademia degli Incamminati (Academy of the Progressives) in Bologna. Intended to devise alternatives to the Mannerist style favored in the preceding decades, this teaching academy helped propel painters of the School of Bologna to prominence.

==Life==
Agostino Carracci was born in Bologna as the son of a tailor. He was the elder brother of Annibale Carracci and the cousin of Ludovico Carracci. He initially trained as a goldsmith. He later studied painting, first with Prospero Fontana, who had been Lodovico&#x27;s master, and later with Bartolomeo Passarotti. He traveled to Parma to study the works of Correggio. Accompanied by his brother Annibale, he spent a long time in Venice, where he trained as an engraver under the renowned Cornelis Cort. Starting from 1574 he worked as a reproductive engraver, copying works of 16th century masters such as Federico Barocci, Tintoretto, Antonio Campi, Veronese and Correggio. He also produced some original prints, including two etchings.

He traveled to Venice (1582, 1587–1589) and Parma (1586–1587). Together with Annibale and Ludovico he worked in Bologna on the fresco cycles in Palazzo Fava (&quot;Histories of Jason and Medea&quot;, 1584) and Palazzo Magnani (&quot;Histories of Romulus&quot;, 1590–1592). In 1592 he also painted the &quot;Communion of St. Jerome&quot;, now in the Pinacoteca di Bologna and considered his masterwork. In 1620, Giovanni Lanfranco, a pupil of the Carracci, famously accused another Carracci student, Domenichino, of plagiarizing this painting. From 1586 is his altarpiece of the &quot;Madonna with Child and Saints&quot;, in the National Gallery of Parma. In 1598 Carracci joined his brother Annibale in Rome, to collaborate on the decoration of the Gallery in Palazzo Farnese. From 1598 to 1600 is a &quot;triple Portrait&quot;, now in Naples, an example of genre painting. In 1600 he was called to Parma by Duke Ranuccio I Farnese to begin the decoration of the Palazzo del Giardino, but he died before it was finished. His friend the poet Claudio Achillini composed an epitaph, which was later published by Carlo Cesare Malvasia in the life of the Carracci.

Agostino&#x27;s son Antonio Carracci was also a painter, and attempted to compete with his father&#x27;s Academy.

An engraving by Agostino Carraci after the painting &quot;Love in the Golden Age&quot; by the 16th-century Flemish painter Paolo Fiammingo was the inspiration for Matisse&#x27;s &quot;Le bonheur de vivre&quot; (Joy of Life).

==Critical evaluation==
While his undoubted value in the graphic field is widely recognised, Agostino, as a painter, although admired by his contemporaries, ended up being overshadowed by the fame of his brother Annibale. Perhaps even his long practice of engraving ended up putting him at disadvantage, since he might have been perceived as more inclined to copy than to create.

Even Giovanni Pietro Bellori, who included Agostino Carracci in his selective collection of biographies of artists (&quot;Vite de&#x27; pittori, scultori e architetti moderni&quot;, 1672), described his activity as a painter, with the sole exception of the &quot;Communion of Saint Jerome&quot;, a work that he praises, almost entirely limited to the role of supporting his younger brother Annibale, and reproaches him for having dedicated too much of his work to graphic production.

The modern critical evaluation of the painter Agostino Carracci probably still suffers from the negative legacies of the past. The fact that there is still only one important monograph dedicated to him published (Stephen E. Ostrow, from the United States, 1966, never translated into Italian), and that an individual exhibition on this artist has yet to be held, are probably significant factors that show that he remains an underrated artist.

However, there have been a positive critical reevaluation of the painter, since there is now a better awareness of his artistic role, alongside his more famous relatives, and the knowledge of his personal work is now greater.

==Works==
&quot;Oil on canvas unless otherwise noted&quot;

* 1573 – &quot;Pietà&quot; (Muscarelle Museum of Art, Williamsburg, Virginia)
* 1586 – &quot;Madonna and Child with Saints&quot; (Galleria nazionale di Parma)
* – &quot;Lamentation&quot; or &quot;Pietà&quot; (Hermitage, St. Petersburg)
* – (engraving, Baltimore Museum of Art)
* – &quot;Annunciation&quot; (Musée du Louvre, Paris)
* 1590–1595 – &quot;Portrait of a Woman as Judith&quot; (private collection)
* – &quot;Assumption&quot; (Ss. Salvatore church, Bologna)
* 1592–1597 – &quot;The Last Communion of Saint Jerome&quot; (Pinacoteca Nazionale di Bologna)
* – &quot;Head of a Faun in a Concave&quot; (drawing in roundel, National Gallery of Art, Washington DC)
* 1598–1600 – &quot;Triple Portrait of Arrigo, Pietro and Amon&quot; (National Museum of Capodimonte, Naples)

===Fresco collaborations with Annibale and Ludovico===
*&quot;Life of Aeneas&quot; (Palazzo Fava, Bologna)
*&quot;Lives of Jason and Medea&quot; (Palazzo Fava, Bologna)
*&quot;Scenes from the Foundation of Rome&quot; (Palazzo Magnani, Bologna)
*&quot;Life of Hercules&quot; (Palazzo Sampieri Talon, Bologna)

===Undated===
* &quot;The Penitent Magdalen&quot; (private collection)
* Carracci&#x27;s erotic work (prints)

==See also==
* The Carracci

==Bibliography==
* Stephen E. Ostrow, &quot;Agostino Carracci&quot; (1966), Thesis (Ph.D.) New York University, New York

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q316269" start="0" end="17" title="Agostino Carracci" label="Agostino Carracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q316269" start="22" end="29" title="Agostino Carracci" label="Caracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q271588" start="89" end="99" title="Printmaking" label="printmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824" start="172" end="189" title="Annibale Carracci" label="Annibale Carracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q380553" start="203" end="220" title="Ludovico Carracci" label="Ludovico Carracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720193" start="249" end="276" title="Accademia degli Incamminati" label="Accademia degli Incamminati"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="358" end="367" title="Mannerism" label="Mannerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q891532" start="460" end="477" title="Bolognese School (painting)" label="School of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891" start="533" end="540" title="Bologna" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q460751" start="723" end="739" title="Prospero Fontana" label="Prospero Fontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q809512" start="793" end="814" title="Bartolomeo Passarotti" label="Bartolomeo Passarotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q8457" start="859" end="868" title="Correggio" label="Correggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q167220" start="990" end="1003" title="Cornelis Cort" label="Cornelis Cort"/>
<link wikidata="Q139106" start="1052" end="1060" title="engraver" label="engraver"/>
<link wikidata="Q316731" start="1108" end="1124" title="Federico Barocci" label="Federico Barocci"/>
<link wikidata="Q9319" start="1126" end="1136" title="Tintoretto" label="Tintoretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q601175" start="1138" end="1151" title="Antonio Campi" label="Antonio Campi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9440" start="1153" end="1161" title="Paolo Veronese" label="Veronese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8457" start="1166" end="1175" title="Correggio" label="Correggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="1230" end="1237" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="1256" end="1262" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683" start="1285" end="1290" title="Parma" label="Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q24197182" start="1385" end="1397" title="Palazzo Fava" label="Palazzo Fava"/>
<link wikidata="Q24197182" start="1399" end="1439" title="Lives of Jason and Medea" label="&amp;quot;Histories of Jason and Medea&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084955" start="1451" end="1466" title="Palazzo Magnani, Bologna" label="Palazzo Magnani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084955" start="1468" end="1500" title="Scenes from the Foundation of Rome" label="&amp;quot;Histories of Romulus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685503" start="1542" end="1577" title="The Last Communion of Saint Jerome (Carracci)" label="&amp;quot;Communion of St. Jerome&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103550" start="1590" end="1611" title="Pinacoteca di Bologna" label="Pinacoteca di Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q447730" start="1652" end="1670" title="Giovanni Lanfranco" label="Giovanni Lanfranco"/>
<link wikidata="Q320118" start="1740" end="1751" title="Domenichino" label="Domenichino"/>
<link wikidata="Q20087547" start="1756" end="1782" title="The Last Communion of Saint Jerome (Domenichino)" label="plagiarizing this painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683" start="1889" end="1894" title="Parma" label="Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q848386" start="2001" end="2016" title="Palazzo Farnese, Rome" label="Palazzo Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="2077" end="2083" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q544873" start="2154" end="2172" title="Ranuccio I Farnese" label="Ranuccio I Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q712713" start="2282" end="2299" title="Claudio Achillini" label="Claudio Achillini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772" start="2312" end="2319" title="epitaph" label="epitaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160847" start="2350" end="2371" title="Carlo Cesare Malvasia" label="Carlo Cesare Malvasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624075" start="2422" end="2438" title="Antonio Marziale Carracci" label="Antonio Carracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q213284" start="2640" end="2655" title="Paolo Fiammingo" label="Paolo Fiammingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589" start="2680" end="2687" title="Matisse" label="Matisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538580" start="2701" end="2720" title="Le bonheur de vivre" label="Le bonheur de vivre"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3850" end="3863" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940210" start="4369" end="4393" title="Muscarelle Museum of Art" label="Muscarelle Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q492346" start="4395" end="4417" title="Williamsburg, Virginia" label="Williamsburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19966582" start="4434" end="4463" title="Madonna and Child with Saints (Agostino Carracci)" label="Madonna and Child with Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q772890" start="4471" end="4498" title="Galleria nazionale di Parma" label="Galleria nazionale di Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16596973" start="4692" end="4721" title="Portrait of a Woman as Judith" label="Portrait of a Woman as Judith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685503" start="4828" end="4862" title="The Last Communion of Saint Jerome (Carracci)" label="The Last Communion of Saint Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103550" start="4870" end="4901" title="Pinacoteca Nazionale di Bologna" label="Pinacoteca Nazionale di Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3998987" start="5028" end="5070" title="Triple Portrait of Arrigo, Pietro and Amon" label="Triple Portrait of Arrigo, Pietro and Amon"/>
<link wikidata="Q290549" start="5078" end="5108" title="National Museum of Capodimonte" label="National Museum of Capodimonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q24197182" start="5181" end="5195" title="Life of Aeneas" label="Life of Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q24197182" start="5203" end="5224" title="Palazzo Fava, Bologna" label="Palazzo Fava, Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q24197182" start="5233" end="5257" title="Lives of Jason and Medea" label="Lives of Jason and Medea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084955" start="5295" end="5329" title="Scenes from the Foundation of Rome" label="Scenes from the Foundation of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084955" start="5337" end="5361" title="Palazzo Magnani, Bologna" label="Palazzo Magnani, Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q28668013" start="5370" end="5386" title="Palazzo Sampieri frescoes" label="Life of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q25112745" start="5394" end="5416" title="Palazzo Sampieri Talon" label="Palazzo Sampieri Talon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464946" start="5501" end="5528" title="Erotic art of Agostino Carracci" label="Carracci&amp;#x27;s erotic work"/>
<link wikidata="Q14594649" start="5554" end="5566" title="The Carracci" label="The Carracci"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2528" wikidata="Q356257" url="?curid=2528" title="Adenylyl cyclase">
<text>Adenylate cyclase (EC 4.6.1.1, also commonly known as adenyl cyclase and adenylyl cyclase, abbreviated AC) is an enzyme with systematic name ATP diphosphate-lyase (cyclizing; 3′,5′-cyclic-AMP-forming). It catalyzes the following reaction:

:ATP = 3′,5′-cyclic AMP + diphosphate

It has key regulatory roles in essentially all cells. It is the most polyphyletic known enzyme: six distinct classes have been described, all catalyzing the same reaction but representing unrelated gene families with no known sequence or structural homology. The best known class of adenylyl cyclases is class III or AC-III (Roman numerals are used for classes). AC-III occurs widely in eukaryotes and has important roles in many human tissues.

All classes of adenylyl cyclase catalyse the conversion of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) to 3&#x27;,5&#x27;-cyclic AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. Magnesium ions are generally required and appear to be closely involved in the enzymatic mechanism. The cAMP produced by AC then serves as a regulatory signal via specific cAMP-binding proteins, either transcription factors, enzymes (e.g., cAMP-dependent kinases), or ion transporters.

== Classes ==

=== Class I ===

The first class of adenylyl cyclases occur in many bacteria including &quot;E. coli&quot; (as CyaA [unrelated to the Class II enzyme]). This was the first class of AC to be characterized. It was observed that &quot;E. coli&quot; deprived of glucose produce cAMP that serves as an internal signal to activate expression of genes for importing and metabolizing other sugars. cAMP exerts this effect by binding the transcription factor CRP, also known as CAP. Class I AC&#x27;s are large cytosolic enzymes (~100 kDa) with a large regulatory domain (~50 kDa) that indirectly senses glucose levels. , no crystal structure is available for class I AC.

Some indirect structural information is available for this class. It is known that the N-terminal half is the catalytic portion, and that it requires two Mg2+ ions. S103, S113, D114, D116 and W118 are the five absolutely essential residues. The class I catalytic domain () belongs to the same superfamily () as the palm domain of DNA polymerase beta (). Aligning its sequence onto the structure onto a related archaeal CCA tRNA nucleotidyltransferase () allows for assignment of the residues to specific functions: γ-phosphate binding, structural stabilization, DxD motif for metal ion binding, and finally ribose binding.

=== Class II ===
These adenylyl cyclases are toxins secreted by pathogenic bacteria such as &quot;Bacillus anthracis&quot;, &quot;Bordetella pertussis&quot;, &quot;Pseudomonas aeruginosa&quot;, and &quot;Vibrio vulnificus&quot; during infections. These bacteria also secrete proteins that enable the AC-II to enter host cells, where the exogenous AC activity undermines normal cellular processes. The genes for Class II ACs are known as cyaA, one of which is anthrax toxin. Several crystal structures are known for AC-II enzymes.

=== Class III ===

These adenylyl cyclases are the most familiar based on extensive study due to their important roles in human health. They are also found in some bacteria, notably &quot;Mycobacterium tuberculosis&quot; where they appear to have a key role in pathogenesis. Most AC-III&#x27;s are integral membrane proteins involved in transducing extracellular signals into intracellular responses. A Nobel Prize was awarded to Earl Sutherland in 1971 for discovering the key role of AC-III in human liver, where adrenaline indirectly stimulates AC to mobilize stored energy in the &quot;fight or flight&quot; response. The effect of adrenaline is via a G protein signaling cascade, which transmits chemical signals from outside the cell across the membrane to the inside of the cell (cytoplasm). The outside signal (in this case, adrenaline) binds to a receptor, which transmits a signal to the G protein, which transmits a signal to adenylyl cyclase, which transmits a signal by converting adenosine triphosphate to cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). cAMP is known as a second messenger.

Cyclic AMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal transduction, a so-called second messenger. Adenylyl cyclases are often activated or inhibited by G proteins, which are coupled to membrane receptors and thus can respond to hormonal or other stimuli. Following activation of adenylyl cyclase, the resulting cAMP acts as a second messenger by interacting with and regulating other proteins such as protein kinase A and cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channels.

Photoactivated adenylyl cyclase (PAC) was discovered in &quot;Euglena gracilis&quot; and can be expressed in other organisms through genetic manipulation. Shining blue light on a cell containing PAC activates it and abruptly increases the rate of conversion of ATP to cAMP. This is a useful technique for researchers in neuroscience because it allows them to quickly increase the intracellular cAMP levels in particular neurons, and to study the effect of that increase in neural activity on the behavior of the organism. A green-light activated rhodopsin adenylyl cyclase (CaRhAC) has recently been engineered by modifying the nucleotide binding pocket of rhodopsin guanylyl cyclase.

==== Structure ====

Most class III adenylyl cyclases are transmembrane proteins with 12 transmembrane segments. The protein is organized with 6 transmembrane segments, then the C1 cytoplasmic domain, then another 6 membrane segments, and then a second cytoplasmic domain called C2. The important parts for function are the N-terminus and the C1 and C2 regions. The C1a and C2a subdomains are homologous and form an intramolecular &#x27;dimer&#x27; that forms the active site. In &quot;Mycobacterium tuberculosis&quot; and many other bacterial cases, the AC-III polypeptide is only half as long, comprising one 6-transmembrane domain followed by a cytoplasmic domain, but two of these form a functional homodimer that resembles the mammalian architecture with two active sites. In non-animal class III ACs, the catalytic cytoplasmic domain is seen associated with other (not necessarily transmembrane) domains.

Class III adenylyl cyclase domains can be further divided into four subfamilies, termed class IIIa through IIId. Animal membrane-bound ACs belong to class IIIa.

====Mechanism====
The reaction happens with two metal cofactors (Mg or Mn) coordinated to the two aspartate residues on C1. They perform a nucleophilic attack of the 3&#x27;-OH group of the ribose on the α-phosphoryl group of ATP. The two lysine and aspartate residues on C2 selects ATP over GTP for the substrate, so that the enzyme is not a guanylyl cyclase. A pair of arginine and asparagine residues on C2 stabilizes the transition state. In many proteins, these residues are nevertheless mutated while retaining the adenylyl cyclase activity.

==== Types ====
There are ten known isoforms of adenylyl cyclases in mammals:

These are also sometimes called simply AC1, AC2, etc., and, somewhat confusingly, sometimes Roman numerals are used for these isoforms that all belong to the overall AC class III. They differ mainly in how they are regulated, and are differentially expressed in various tissues throughout mammalian development.

==== Regulation ====
Adenylyl cyclase is regulated by G proteins, which can be found in the monomeric form or the heterotrimeric form, consisting of three subunits. Adenylyl cyclase activity is controlled by heterotrimeric G proteins. The inactive or inhibitory form exists when the complex consists of alpha, beta, and gamma subunits, with GDP bound to the alpha subunit. In order to become active, a ligand must bind to the receptor and cause a conformational change. This conformational change causes the alpha subunit to dissociate from the complex and become bound to GTP. This G-alpha-GTP complex then binds to adenylyl cyclase and causes activation and the release of cAMP. Since a good signal requires the help of enzymes, which turn on and off signals quickly, there must also be a mechanism in which adenylyl cyclase deactivates and inhibits cAMP. The deactivation of the active G-alpha-GTP complex is accomplished rapidly by GTP hydrolysis due to the reaction being catalyzed by the intrinsic enzymatic activity of GTPase located in the alpha subunit. It is also regulated by forskolin, as well as other isoform-specific effectors:

* Isoforms I, III, and VIII are also stimulated by Ca2+/calmodulin.
* Isoforms V and VI are inhibited by Ca2+ in a calmodulin-independent manner.
* Isoforms II, IV and IX are stimulated by alpha subunit of the G protein.
* Isoforms I, V and VI are most clearly inhibited by Gi, while other isoforms show less dual regulation by the inhibitory G protein.
* Soluble AC (sAC) is not a transmembrane form and is not regulated by G proteins or forskolin, instead acts as a bicarbonate/pH sensor. It is anchored at various locations within the cell and, with phosphodiesterases, forms local cAMP signalling domains.

In neurons, calcium-sensitive adenylyl cyclases are located next to calcium ion channels for faster reaction to Ca2+ influx; they are suspected of playing an important role in learning processes. This is supported by the fact that adenylyl cyclases are &quot;coincidence detectors&quot;, meaning that they are activated only by several different signals occurring together. In peripheral cells and tissues adenylyl cyclases appear to form molecular complexes with specific receptors and other signaling proteins in an isoform-specific manner.

==== Function ====
Individual transmembrane adenylyl cyclase isoforms have been linked to numerous physiological functions. Soluble adenylyl cyclase (sAC, AC10) has a critical role in sperm motility. Adenylyl cyclase has been implicated in memory formation, functioning as a coincidence detector.

=== Class IV ===

AC-IV was first reported in the bacterium &quot;Aeromonas hydrophila&quot;, and the structure of the AC-IV from &quot;Yersinia pestis&quot; has been reported. These are the smallest of the AC enzyme classes; the AC-IV (CyaB) from &quot;Yersinia&quot; is a dimer of 19 kDa subunits with no known regulatory components (). AC-IV forms a superfamily with mammalian thiamine-triphosphatase called CYTH (CyaB, thiamine triphosphatase).

=== Classes V and VI ===

These forms of AC have been reported in specific bacteria (&quot;Prevotella ruminicola&quot; and &quot;Rhizobium etli&quot; , respectively) and have not been extensively characterized. There are a few extra members (~400 in Pfam) known to be in class VI. Class VI enzymes possess a catalytic core similar to the one in Class III.

==Additional images==
== References ==
== Further reading ==


== External links ==
*Interactive 3D views of Adenylate cyclase at </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q356257" start="0" end="17" title="Adenylyl cyclase" label="Adenylate cyclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q356257" start="54" end="68" title="Adenylyl cyclase" label="adenyl cyclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q356257" start="73" end="89" title="Adenylyl cyclase" label="adenylyl cyclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q356257" start="103" end="105" title="Adenylyl cyclase" label="AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="113" end="119" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q356257" start="141" end="200" title="Adenylyl cyclase" label="ATP diphosphate-lyase (cyclizing; 3′,5′-cyclic-AMP-forming)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="326" end="331" title="Cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q217743" start="348" end="360" title="Polyphyly" label="polyphyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="367" end="373" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="421" end="431" title="catalysis" label="catalyzing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="477" end="481" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278983" start="482" end="490" title="Gene family" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q414601" start="505" end="536" title="Sequence homology" label="sequence or structural homology"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="666" end="675" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q40397" start="715" end="722" title="Tissue (biology)" label="tissues"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="757" end="765" title="Catalysis" label="catalyse"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="784" end="806" title="adenosine triphosphate" label="adenosine triphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q210041" start="816" end="842" title="cyclic adenosine monophosphate" label="3&amp;#x27;,5&amp;#x27;-cyclic AMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q55506489" start="854" end="867" title="pyrophosphate" label="pyrophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="869" end="878" title="Magnesium" label="Magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="879" end="882" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="1054" end="1061" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="1071" end="1091" title="transcription factor" label="transcription factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q421851" start="1124" end="1130" title="kinase" label="kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q142943" start="1141" end="1153" title="membrane transport proteins" label="transporters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008668" start="1621" end="1624" title="cAMP receptor protein" label="CRP"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030641" start="2165" end="2184" title="DNA polymerase beta" label="DNA polymerase beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798575" start="2254" end="2285" title="CCA tRNA nucleotidyltransferase" label="CCA tRNA nucleotidyltransferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="2350" end="2361" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="γ-phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197350" start="2896" end="2900" title="cyaA" label="cyaA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935986" start="2918" end="2931" title="anthrax toxin" label="anthrax toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130971" start="3178" end="3204" title="Mycobacterium tuberculosis" label="Mycobacterium tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q68118" start="3420" end="3435" title="Earl Sutherland" label="Earl Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q407438" start="3646" end="3655" title="G protein" label="G protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="3777" end="3786" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="3984" end="4006" title="adenosine triphosphate" label="adenosine triphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q210041" start="4010" end="4040" title="cyclic adenosine monophosphate" label="cyclic adenosine monophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q899814" start="4068" end="4084" title="second messenger" label="second messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q210041" start="4087" end="4097" title="Cyclic AMP" label="Cyclic AMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="4126" end="4136" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q828130" start="4137" end="4156" title="signal transduction" label="signal transduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q899814" start="4170" end="4186" title="second messenger" label="second messenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q407438" start="4242" end="4251" title="G protein" label="G protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q281417" start="4491" end="4507" title="protein kinase A" label="protein kinase A"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459035" start="4512" end="4548" title="HCN channel" label="cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q85793186" start="4551" end="4582" title="Photoactivated adenylyl cyclase" label="Photoactivated adenylyl cyclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q309852" start="4613" end="4629" title="Euglena gracilis" label="Euglena gracilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419566" start="5218" end="5234" title="guanylyl cyclase" label="guanylyl cyclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="5309" end="5316" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="6929" end="6935" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q412747" start="8339" end="8348" title="forskolin" label="forskolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="8447" end="8451" title="calcium" label="Ca2+"/>
<link wikidata="Q409145" start="8452" end="8462" title="calmodulin" label="calmodulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24722135" start="8752" end="8762" title="Soluble adenylyl cyclase" label="Soluble AC"/>
<link wikidata="Q424304" start="8949" end="8967" title="phosphodiesterases" label="phosphodiesterases"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="9010" end="9016" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q62536" start="9083" end="9094" title="ion channel" label="ion channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141582" start="9826" end="9846" title="Coincidence detection in neurobiology" label="coincidence detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523977" start="10229" end="10252" title="thiamine-triphosphatase" label="thiamine-triphosphatase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242440" start="10390" end="10400" title="Prevotella" label="Prevotella"/>
<link wikidata="Q830142" start="10428" end="10437" title="Rhizobium" label="Rhizobium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2529" wikidata="Q6081128" url="?curid=2529" title="Alexandra">
<text>Alexandra () is a female given name of Greek origin. It is the first attested form of its variants, including Alexander (, ). Etymologically, the name is a compound of the Greek verb (; meaning &#x27;to defend&#x27;) and ( , ; meaning &#x27;man&#x27;). Thus it may be roughly translated as &quot;defender of man&quot; or &quot;protector of man&quot;. The name Alexandra was one of the epithets given to the Greek goddess Hera and as such is usually taken to mean &quot;one who comes to save warriors&quot;. The earliest attested form of the name is the Mycenaean Greek ( or //), written in the Linear B syllabic script. Alexandra and its masculine equivalent, Alexander, are both common names in Greece as well as countries where Germanic, Romance, and Slavic languages are spoken.

== Variants ==
* Alejandra, Alejandrina (diminutive) (Spanish)
* Aleksandra (Александра) (Albanian, Bulgarian, Estonian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Macedonian, Polish, Russian, Serbo-Croatian)
* Alessandra (Italian)
* Alessia (Italian)
* Alex (various languages)
* Alexa (English, Romanian, Spanish)
* Alexandra (English, German, Dutch, French, Swedish, Norwegian, Danish, Icelandic, Greek, Portuguese, Romanian, Czech, Slovak, Hungarian, Catalan, Spanish, Italian, Russian, Ukrainian, Ancient Greek)
* Alexis (English)
* Alexandra, Alexa, Alexis, Sandra, Sandy, Sasha (Indonesian)
* Aliaksandra (Belarusian)
* Alikhandra /اليخاندرا (Egyptian Arabic)
* Alissandra/Alyssandra (Sicilian, Greek)
* Allie (English)
* Ally (English)
* Alya (Russian)
* Ālēkjāndrā / আলেকজান্দ্রা (Bengali)
* Αλεξάνδρα (Greek)
* Leska (Czech)
* Lesya (Ukrainian)
* Lexa (English)
* Lexie (English)
* Lexine (English)
* Lexi (English)
* Lexy (English)
* Oleksandra (Ukrainian)
* Sacha (French)
* Sanda (Romanian)
* Sandie (English)
* Sandra (Danish, Dutch, English, Polish, Estonian, Italian, Finnish, German, Icelandic, Latvian, Lithuanian, Norwegian, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Spanish, Serbo-Croatian, Slovene, Swedish)
* Sandy (English)
* Sascha (German)
* Sasha (Russian, Belarusian, Ukrainian, English, Spanish)
* Saskia (Slavic)
* Saundra (English, Lowland Scottish)
* Saša (Czech, Serbo-Croatian, Slovak, Slovene)
* Saška (Serbian)
* Shura (Russian)
* Sondra (English)
* Szandra (Hungarian)

== People with the name ==
=== Royalty ===
* Alexandra of Russia (disambiguation), various grand duchesses and royal consorts
* Empress Alexandra (disambiguation), various empresses
** Alexandra Feodorovna (Alix of Hesse) (1872–1918), last empress consort of Russia by marriage to Nicholas II, Emperor of Russia. She is mentioned in the song &quot;Rasputin&quot;.
* Princess Alexandra (disambiguation), various princesses
* Queen Alexandra (disambiguation), various queens
** Alexandra of Denmark (1844–1925), queen consort of the United Kingdom by marriage to Edward VII, King of the United Kingdom
* Alexandra the Maccabee (63 BCE – 28 BCE), only child of Hyrcanus II, King of Judaea
* Duchess Alexandra of Oldenburg (1838–1900), eldest child of Duke Constantine Frederick Peter of Oldenburg

=== Alexandra ===
* Alexandra of Antioch (), Greek noblewoman and the sister of Calliopius of Antioch
* Alexandra of Lithuania (), duchess consort of Masovia
* Alexandra of Rome (), Christian saint and martyr of the Diocletianic persecutions
* Alexandra Aikhenvald (born 1957), Russian–Australian linguist
* Alexandra Aldridge (born 1994), American ice dancer
* Alexandra Allred (born 1965), American author and fitness instructor
* Alexandra Anghel (born 1997), Romanian freestyle wrestler
* Alexandra Ansanelli, American ballet dancer
* Alexandra Anstrell (born 1974), Swedish politician
* Alexandra Araújo (born 1972), Brazilian–born Italian water polo player
* Alexandra Arce (born 1977), Ecuadorian engineer and politician
* Alexandra Aristoteli (born 1997), Australian rhythmic gymnast
* Alexandra Asimaki (born 1988), Greek water polo player
* Alexandra Bachzetsis (born 1974), Greek–Swiss choreographer and visual artist
* Alexandra Backford (1942–2010), Aleut–American painter
* Alexandra Badea (born 1998), Romanian handballer
* Alexandra Balashova (1942–1969), Russian ballet dancer and choreographer
* Alexandra Barré (born 1958), Hungarian–born Canadian sprint kayaker
* Alexandra Barreto (born 1975), American actress
* Alexandra Bastedo (1946–2014), English actress
* Alexandra Beaton (born ), Canadian actress
* Alexandra Bellow (born 1935), Romanian–American mathematician
* Alexandra Benado (born 1976), Chilean politician and football player
* Alexandra Béres (born 1976), Hungarian bodybuilder and curler
* Alexandra Berzon (born 1979), American investigative reporter and journalist
* Alexandra Beukes, South African politician
* Alexandra Beverfjord (born 1977), Norwegian journalist, crime fiction writer, and newspaper editor
* Alexandra Bezeková (born 1992), Slovakian sprinter
* Alexandra Boltasseva (born 1978), Russian engineer and physicist
* Alexandra Borbély (born 1986), Slovakian–Hungarian actress
* Alexandra Botez (born 1995), American–Canadian chess player and Twitch streamer
* Alexandra Bounxouei (born 1987), Laotian–Bulgarian actress, model, and singer
* Alexandra Boyko (1916–1996), Russian tank commander
* Alexandra Bracken (born 1987), American author
* Alexandra Bradshaw (1888–1981), Canadian–American art professor and watercolor artist
* Alexandra Branitskaya (1754–1838), Russian courtier
* Alexandra Braun (born 1983), Venezuelan actress, model, and beauty queen
* Alexandra Breckenridge (born 1982), American actress, model, and photographer
* Alexandra Brewis Slade (born 1965), New Zealand-American anthropologist
* Alexandra Brooks (born 1995), English footballer
* Alexandra Bruce (born 1990), Canadian badminton player
* Alexandra Brushtein (1884–1968), Russian and Soviet writer, playwright, and memoirist
* Alexandra Buch (born 1979), German mixed martial artist
* Alexandra Bugailiskis (born 1956), Canadian diplomat
* Alexandra Bujdoso (born 1990), Hungarian–German sabre fencer
* Alexandra Bunton (born 1993), Australian basketball player
* Alexandra Burghardt (born 1994), German bobsledder and sprinter
* Alexandra Burke (born 1988), British singer
* Alexandra W. Busch (born 1975), German Roman archaeologist
* Alexandra Byrne (born 1962), English costume designer
* Alexandra Cardenas (born 1976), Colombian composer
* Alexandra Carlisle (1886–1936), English actress and suffragist
* Alexandra Carpenter (born 1994), American ice hockey player
* Alexandra Caso (born 1987), Dominican volleyball player
* Alexandra Cassavetes, American actress and filmmaker
* Alexandra Castillo (born 1971), Chilean–Canadian actress and dancer
* Alexandra Chalupa (born 1976 or 1977), American lawyer and pro–Ukrainian activist
* Alexandra Chambon (born 2000), French rugby player
* Alexandra Chando (born 1986), American actress
* Alexandra Charles (born 1946), Swedish nightclub owner
* Alexandra Chasin (born 1961), American experimental writer
* Alexandra Chaves (born 2001), Canadian actress and dancer
* Alexandra Chekina (born 1993), Russian cyclist
* Alexandra Cheron (1983–2011), Dominican–American actress, businesswoman, model, and socialite
* Alexandra Chidiac (born 1999), Australian footballer
* Alexandra Chong, Jamaican entrepreneur
* Alexandra Chreiteh (born 1987), Lebanese author
* Alexandra Coletti (born 1983), Monégasque alpine skier
* Alexandra Cousteau (born 1976), French environmental activist and filmmaker
* Alexandra Cunha (born 1962), Mozambican–born Portuguese marine biologist
* Alexandra Cunningham (born 1972 or 1973), American playwright, screenwriter, and television producer
* Alexandra Curtis (born 1991), American beauty queen
* Alexandra Čvanová (1897–1939), Ukrainian–born Czech operatic soprano
* Alexandra Daddario (born 1986), American actress
* Alexandra Dahlström (born 1984), Swedish actress
* Alexandra Dane (born 1940), South African–born English actress
* Alexandra Danilova (1903–1997), Russian ballet dancer
* Alexandra Dariescu (born 1985), Romanian pianist
* Alexandra Dascalu (born 1991), French volleyball player
* Alexandra Daum (born 1986), Austrian alpine skier
* Alexandra David-Néel (1868–1969), French explorer and spiritualist
* Alexandra Davies (born 1977), English–born Australian actress
* Alexandra de la Mora (born 1979), Mexican actress
* Alexandra Dementieva (born 1960), Russian artist
* Alexandra Denisova (1922–2018), Canadian ballet dancer
* Alexandra Deshorties (born 1975), French–Canadian operatic soprano
* Alexandra Dimoglou (born 1981), Greek Paralympic track and field athlete
* Alexandra Dindiligan (born 1997), Romanian handballer
* Alexandra DiNovi (born 1989), American actress
* Alexandra Dinu (born 1981), Romanian actress and television presenter
* Alexandra Diplarou (born 1981), Greek volleyball player
* Alexandra Dobolyi (born 1971), Hungarian politician
* Alexandra Dowling (born 1990), English actress
* Alexandra Duckworth (born 1987), Canadian snowboarder
* Alexandra Duel-Hallen, American electrical engineer
* Alexandra Dulgheru (born 1989), Romanian tennis player
* Alexandra Dunn (born 1967), American lawyer
* Alexandra Eade (born 1998), Australian artistic gymnast
* Alexandra Elbakyan (born 1988), Kazakhstani computer programmer
* Alexandra Eldridge (born 1948), American painter
* Alexandra Engen (born 1988), Swedish cross country cyclist
* Alexandra Eremia (born 1987), Romanian rhythmic gymnast
* Alexandra Ermakova (born 1992), Russian rhythmic gymnast
* Alexandra Escobar (born 1980), Ecuadorian weightlifter
* Alexandra Feigin (born 2002), Bulgarian figure skater
* Alexandra Feracci (born 1992), French karateka
* Alexandra Finder (born 1977), German actress
* Alexandra Fisher (born 1988), Kazakhstani athlete
* Alexandra Flood (born 1990), Australian operatic soprano
* Alexandra Fomina (born 1975), Ukrainian volleyball player
* Alexandra Försterling (born 1999), German amateur golfer
* Alexandra Föster (born 2002), German rower
* Alexandra Fouace (born 1979), French archer
* Alexandra Fuentes (born 1978), Puerto Rican actress and radio host
* Alexandra Fusai (born 1973), French tennis player
* Alexandra Gage, Viscountess Gage (born 1969), British lecturer
* Alexandra Pavlovna Galitzine (1905–2006), Russian princess
* Alexandra Gajda (born 1979), English historian
* Alexandra Gallagher (born 1980), English artist
* Alexandra Gardner (born 1967), American composer
* Alexandra Daisy Ginsberg (born 1982), English–South African artist
* Alexandra Goujon (born 1972), French political scientist
* Alexandra Gowie (born 1990), South African–born Hungarian–Canadian ice hockey player
* Alexandra Grande (born 1990), Peruvian karateka
* Alexandra Grant (born 1973), American visual artist
* Alexandra Gripenberg (1857–1913), Finnish activist, author, and newspaper publisher
* Alexandra Gummer (born 1992), Australian soccer player
* Alexandra Hagan (born 1991), Australian rower
* Alexandra Hargreaves (born 1980), Australian rugby player
* Alexandra Harrison (born 2002), French ice hockey player
* Alexandra Hasluck (1908–1993), Australian author and historian
* Alexandra Hedison (born 1969), American actress, director, and photographer
* Alexandra Heidrich, German canoeist
* Alexandra Helbling (born 1993), Sri Lankan–born Swiss Paralympic athlete
* Alexandra Heminsley (born 1976), British journalist and writer
* Alexandra Henao, Venezuelan cinematographer and director
* Alexandra Herbríková (born 1992), Slovakian–Czech ice dancer
* Alexandra Hernandez (born 1981), French singer and songwriter
* Alexandra Hidalgo, Venezuelan–American documentarian
* Alexandra Hildebrandt (born 1959), German human rights activist
* Alexandra Mary Hirschi (born 1985), Australian social media personality and vlogger
* Alexandra Hoffman (born 1987), American beauty queen
* Alexandra Hoffmeyer (born 1988), American ice hockey player
* Alexandra Höglund (born 1990), Swedish football player
* Alexandra Holden (born 1977), American actress
* Alexandra Hollá (born 1994), Slovakian football player
* Alexandra van Huffelen (born 1968), Dutch politician
* Alexandra Ashley Hughes (born 1985), Canadian singer and songwriter
* Alexandra Hulley (born 1997), Australian athlete
* Alexandra Hurst (born 1994), Northern Irish soccer player
* Alexandra Huynh (born 1994), Australian soccer player
* Alexandra Ianculescu (born 1991), Romanian–Canadian speed skater
* Alexandra Issayeva (born 1982), Kazakhstani volleyball player
* Alexandra Ivanovskaya (born 1989), Russian beauty queen and model
* Alexandra Jackson (born 1952), Irish–English swimmer
* Alexandra Jiménez (born 1980), Spanish actress
* Alexandra Jóhannsdóttir (born 2000), Icelandic football player
* Alexandra Johnes (born 1976), American documentary film producer
* Alexandra Joner (born 1990), Norwegian dancer and singer
* Alexandra Jupiter (born 1990), French volleyball player
* Alexandra Kalinovská (born 1974), Czech modern pentathlete
* Alexandra Kamieniecki (born 1996), Polish figure skater
* Alexandra Kamp (born 1966), German actress and model
* Alexandra Kapustina (born 1984), Russian ice hockey player
* Alexandra Kasser (born 1967), American attorney and politician
* Alexandra Kavadas (born 1983), Greek football player
* Alexandra Kehayoglou (born 1981), Argentine textile artist
* Alexandra Kenworthy (born 1932), American voice actress
* Alexandra Keresztesi (born 1983), Hungarian–born Argentine sprint canoer
* Alexandra Kerry (born 1973), American filmmaker
* Alexandra Killewald (born 1983), American sociology professor
* Alexandra Kiroi-Bogatyreva (born 2002), Australian Olympic rhythmic gymnast
* Alexandra Kim (1885–1918), Russian–Korean revolutionary political activist
* Alexandra Kleeman (born 1986), American writer
* Alexandra Kluge (1937–2017), German actress
* Alexandra Koefoed (born 1978), Norwegian sailor
* Alexandra Kolesnichenko (born 1992), Uzbekistani tennis player
* Alexandra Kollontai (1872–1952), Russian politician
* Alexandra Konofalskaya (born 1986), Belarusian sand animation artist
* Alexandra Korelova (born 1977), Russian equestrian
* Alexandra Korolkova (born 1984), Russian typeface designer
* Alexandra Kosinski (born 1989), American long-distance runner
* Alexandra Kosteniuk (born 1984), Russian chess grandmaster
* Alexandra Kotur, American fashion journalist
* Alexandra Kropotkin (1887–1966), Russian–American writer
* Alexandra Krosney, American actress
* Alexandra Kunová (born 1992), Slovakian figure skater
* Alexandra Kutas (born 1993), Ukrainian model
* Alexandra Lacrabère (born 1987), French handballer
* Alexandra Lamy (born 1971), French actress
* Alexandra Langley (born 1992), English badminton player
* Alexandra Lapierre, French author
* Alexandra Maria Lara (born 1978), Romanian–German actress
* Alexandra Larochelle (born 1993), Canadian writer
* Alexandra Larsson (born 1986), Swedish–Argentine model
* Alexandra Lazarowich, Cree–Canadian director and producer
* Alexandra Lebenthal (born 1964), American businesswoman
* Alexandra Leclère, French director and screenwriter
* Alexandra Lehti (born 1996), Finnish singer, known as Lxandra
* Alexandra Leitão (born 1973), Portuguese law professor and politician
* Alexandra Lemoine (born 1928), French artistic gymnast
* Alexandra Lencastre (born 1965), Portuguese actress
* Alexandra Lethbridge (born 1987), Hong Kong–born English photographer
* Alexandra Levit (born 1976), American writer
* Alexandra Lisney (born 1987), Australian cyclist and rower
* Alexandra London (born 1973), French actress
* Alexandra Longová (born 1994), Slovakian archer
* Alexandra López (born 1989), Spanish soccer player
* Alexandra Louis (born 1983), French lawyer and politician
* Alexandra Lúgaro (born 1981), Puerto Rican attorney, businesswoman, and politician
* Alexandra Lukin (born 1998), New Zealand field hockey player
* Alexandra Lunca (born 1995), Romanian soccer player
* Alexandra Lydon, American actress
* Alexandra Măceșanu (2003–2019), Romanian murder victim
* Alexandra Makovskaya (1837–1915), Russian landscape painter
* Alexandra Manly (born 1998), Australian cyclist
* Alexandra Mařasová (born 1965), Czech alpine skier
* Alexandra Mardell (born 1993), English actress
* Alexandra Marinescu (born 1982), Romanian artistic gymnast
* Alexandra Marinina (born 1957), Russian writer
* Alexandra Martin (born 1968), French politician
* Alexandra Marzo (born 1968), Brazilian actress and screenwriter
* Alexandra Mavrokordatou (1605–1684), Greek intellectual
* Alexandra Mazur (born 1986), Russian beauty queen
* Alexandra Meissnitzer (born 1973), Austrian alpine ski racer
* Alexandra Mendès (born 1963), Canadian politician
* Alexandra Merkulova (born 1995), Russian rhythmic gymnast
* Alexandra Micu, Romanian fashion model
* Alexandra Miller (born 1973), American businesswoman and politician
* Alexandra Milton (born 1967), French artist and illustrator
* Alexandra Mîrca (born 1993), Moldovan archer
* Alexandra Mitroshina (born 1994), Russian journalist
* Alexandra Mitsotaki (born 1956), Greek activist and entrepreneur
* Alexandra Moreno (born 2000), Spanish racing cyclist
* Alexandra Morgenrood (born 1940), Zimbabwean diver
* Alexandra Morrison, Canadian photographer
* Alexandra Morton (born 1957), American conservation activist and marine biologist
* Alexandra Mousavizadeh (born 1970), Danish economist
* Alexandra Mueller (born 1988), American tennis player
* Alexandra Muñoz (born 1992), Peruvian volleyball player
* Alexandra Munteanu (born 1980), Romanian alpine skier
* Alexandra Najarro (born 1993), Canadian figure skater
* Alexandra Nancarrow (born 1993), Australian tennis player
* Alexandra Ndolo (born 1986), German–born Kenyan épée fencer
* Alexandra Nechita (born 1985), Romanian–American cubist painter and philanthropist
* Alexandra Nekvapilová (1919–2014), Czech alpine skier
* Alexandra Neldel (born 1976), German actress
* Alexandra Nemich (born 1995), Kazakhstani synchronized swimmer
* Alexandra Nereïev (born 1976), French painter and sculptor
* Alexandra Nessmar (born 1994), Swedish racing cyclist
* Alexandra Newton, South African pharmacology professor
* Alexandra Niepel (born 1970), British tennis player
* Alexandra Nikiforova (born 1993), Russian actress

* Alexandra Obolentseva (born 2001), Russian chess player
* Alexandra Ocles (born 1979), Ecuadorian educator and politician
* Alexandra Oliver (born 1970), Canadian poet
* Alexandra Olsson (born 1998), Finnish handballer
* Alexandra Opachanova (born 1989), Kazakh rower
* Alexandra Oquendo (born 1984), Puerto Rican volleyball player
* Alexandra Ordolis (born 1986), Greek–Canadian actress
* Alexandra Osborne (born 1995), Australian tennis player
* Alexandra Panova (born 1989), Russian tennis player
* Alexandra Papageorgiou (born 1980), Greek hammer thrower
* Alexandra Park (born 1989), Australian actress
* Alexandra Parks (born 1984), English singer-songwriter
* Alexandra Pascalidou (born 1970), Greek–Swedish author and columnist
* Alexandra Paschalidou-Moreti (1912–2010), Greek architect
* Alexandra Patsavas (born 1968), Greek–American music supervisor
* Alexandra Pelosi (born 1970), American documentarian and journalist
* Alexandra Penney, American artist, author, and journalist
* Alexandra Perper (born 1991), Moldovan tennis player
* Alexandra Petkovski, Canadian composer
* Alexandra Petrova (1980–2000), Russian beauty queen and model
* Alexandra Picatto (born 1983), American accountant and child actress
* Alexandra Pierce (1934–2021), American composer and pianist
* Alexandra Piscupescu (born 1994), Romanian rhythmic gymnast
* Alexandra Podkolzina (born 1985), Russian–American tennis player
* Alexandra Podryadova (born 1989), Kazakhstani judoka
* Alexandra Polivanchuk (born 1990), Swedish deaf swimmer
* Alexandra Pomales (born 1995), American actress
* Alexandra Popp (born 1991), German soccer player
* Alexandra Potter (born 1970), English author
* Alexandra Poulovassilis, Greek–English computer scientist
* Alexandra Powers, American actress
* Alexandra Pringle (born 1953), British publisher
* Alexandra Quinn (born 1973), Canadian pornographic actress
* Alexandra Radius (born 1942), Dutch ballet dancer
* Alexandra Raeva (born 1992), Russian curler
* Alexandra Raffé (born 1955), Canadian film and television producer
* Alexandra Ramniceanu (born 1976), French film producer and screenwriter
* Alexandra Rapaport (born 1971), Swedish actress
* Alexandra Razarenova (born 1990), Russian triathlete
* Alexandra Recchia (born 1988), French karateka
* Alexandra Reid (born 1989), American rapper and singer
* Alexandra Rexová (born 2005), Slovakian blind alpine skier
* Alexandra Richards (born 1986), American artist and model
* Alexandra Richter (born 1967), Brazilian actress
* Alexandra Rickham (born 1981), Jamaican–born English Paralympic sailor
* Alexandra Ridout (born 1998), English jazz trumpeter
* Alexandra Ripley (1934–2004), American writer
* Alexandra Roach (born 1987), Welsh actress
* Alexandra Robbins, American author, journalist, and lecturer
* Alexandra Roche, Lady Roche (born 1934), British philanthropist
* Alexandra Rochelle (born 1983), French volleyball player
* Alexandra Rodionova (born 1984), Russian bobsledder
* Alexandra Rojas (born 1995), American activist and political commentator
* Alexandra Rosenfeld (born 1986), French beauty queen and model
* Alexandra Rotan (born 1996), Norwegian singer and songwriter
* Alexandra Rout (born 1993), New Zealand figure skater
* Alexandra Rozenman (born 1971), Russian–born American graphic designer, illustrator, and painter
* Alexandra Rutherford, Canadian psychology professor
* Alexandra Rutlidge (born 1988), English water polo player
* Alexandra Saduakassova (born 2002), Kazakh sport shooter
* Alexandra Sahlen (born 1982), American soccer player
* Alexandra Salmela (born 1980), Slovakian author
* Alexandra Salvador (born 1995), Canadian–born Ecuadorian soccer player
* Alexandra Savior (born 1995), American singer and songwriter
* Alexandra Schepisi, Australian actress
* Alexandra Schörghuber (born 1958), German entrepreneur
* Alexandra Sharp (born 1997), Australian basketball player
* Alexandra Shevchenko (born 1988), Ukrainian radical feminist activist
* Alexandra Shimo, Canadian writer
* Alexandra Shipp, American actress and singer
* Alexandra Shiryayeva (born 1983), Russian beach volleyball player
* Alexandra Shiva, American documentarian
* Alexandra Shulman (born 1957), English journalist
* Alexandra Sicoe (1932–2019), Romanian sprinter
* Alexandra Sidorovici (1906–2000), Romanian politician
* Alexandra Silber, American actress, educator, singer, and writer
* Alexandra Silk (born 1963), American pornographic actress
* Alexandra Silocea (born 1984), Romanian–born French pianist
* Alexandra Silva (born 1984), Portuguese computer scientist
* Alexandra Slade, American actress
* Alexandra Smirnoff (1838–1913) Finnish pomologist
* Alexandra Sobo (born 1987), Romanian volleyball player
* Alexandra Socha (born 1990), American actress
* Alexandra Sokoloff, American novelist and screenwriter
* Alexandra Soler (born 1983), French artistic gymnast
* Alexandra Solnado, Portuguese writer
* Alexandra Sorina (1899–1973), Belarusian actress
* Alexandra Soumm (born 1989), Russian–born French violinist
* Alexandra Sourla (born 1973), Greek equestrian
* Alexandra Stan (born 1989), Romanian singer
* Alexandra Stepanova (born 1995), Russian ice dancer
* Alexandra Stevenson (born 1980), American tennis player
* Alexandra Stewart (born 1939), Canadian actress
* Alexandra Stréliski (born 1985), Canadian composer and pianist
* Alexandra Styron, American author and professor
* Alexandra Subțirică (born 1987), Romanian handballer
* Alexandra Suda (born 1981), Canadian art historian
* Alexandra Takounda (born 2000), Cameroonian soccer player
* Alexandra Talomaa (born 1975), Swedish songwriter
* Alexandra Tavernier (born 1993), French hammer thrower

* Alexandra Techet, American marine engineer
* Alexandra Tegleva (1894–1955), Russian nursemaid
* Alexandra Tessier (born 1993), Canadian rugby player
* Alexandra Thein (born 1963), German politician
* Alexandra Tilley (born 1993), Scottish alpine ski racer
* Alexandra Timoshenko (born 1972), Ukrainian rhythmic gymnast
* Alexandra Tolstaya (1884–1979), Russian secretary and the youngest daughter of Leo Tolstoy
* Alexandra Touretski (born 1994), Swiss freestyle swimmer
* Alexandra Trică (born 1985), Romanian volleyball player
* Alexandra Trofimov (born 1999), Romanian soccer player
* Alexandra Trusova (born 2004), Russian figure skater
* Alexandra Truwit (born 2000), American Paralympic swimmer
* Alexandra Tsiavou (born 1985), Greek rower
* Alexandra Tüchi (born 1983), Austrian bobsledder
* Alexandra Tydings (born 1972), American actress
* Alexandra Udženija (born 1975), Serbian–Czech politician
* Alexandra Vafina (born 1990), Russian ice hockey player
* Alexandra Valetta-Ardisson (born 1976), French politician
* Alexandra Vandernoot (born 1965), Belgian actress
* Alexandra Vasilieva (born 1995), Russian figure skater
* Alexandra Vela, Ecuadorian lawyer and politician
* Alexandra Verbeek (born 1973), Dutch sailor
* Alexandra Viney (born 1992), Australian Paralympic rower
* Alexandra Vinogradova (born 1988), Russian volleyball player
* Alexandra Völker (born 1989), Swedish politician
* Alexandra von der Weth (born 1968), German operatic soprano
* Alexandra von Dyhrn (1873–1945), German author and genealogist
* Alexandra von Fürstenberg (born 1972), Hong Kong–born American entrepreneur, heiress, and socialite
* Alexandra Voronin (1905–1993), Russian wife of Vidkun Quisling
* Alexandra Vydrina (1988–2021), Russian linguist
* Alexandra Wager (born ), American child actress and the daughter of Michael Wager
* Alexandra Wallace (born 1975 or 1976), American news media executive
* Alexandra Walsham (born 1966), English–Australian historian
* Alexandra Waluszewski (born 1956), Swedish professor and organizational theorist
* Alexandra Waterbury, American ballet dancer and model
* Alexandra Wedgwood (born 1938), English architectural historian
* Alexandra Wejchert (1921–1995), Polish–Irish sculptor
* Alexandra Wenk (born 1995), German swimmer
* Alexandra Wescourt (born 1975), English actress
* Alexandra Wester (born 1994), Gambian–born German long jumper
* Alexandra Williams, American rugby player
* Alexandra Wong (born 1956), Hong Kong activist
* Alexandra Worden (born 1970), American genome scientist and microbial ecologist
* Alexandra Worisch (born 1965), Austrian synchronized swimmer
* Alexandra Zabelina (1937–2022), Soviet fencer
* Alexandra Zaharias (born 1929), American ballet teacher
* Alexandra Zapruder (born 1969), American author and editor
* Alexandra Zaretsky (born 1987), Israeli ice dancer
* Alexandra Zarini (born 1985), Italian–American daughter of Patricia Gucci
* Alexandra Zazzi (born 1966), Italian–born Swedish chef, journalist, and television presenter
* Alexandra Zertsalova (born 1982), Kyrgyz swimmer
* Alexandra Zhukovskaya (1842–1899), Russian–German lady-in-waiting
* Alexandra Zimmermann, English conservation scientist
* Alexandra Zvorigina (born 1991), Russian ice dancer

=== Aleksandra ===
* Aleksandra Antonova, various people
* Aleksandra Avramović (born 1982), Serbian volleyball player
* Aleksandra Crnčević (born 1987), Serbian volleyball player
* Aleksandra Crvendakić (born 1996), Serbian basketball player
* Aleksandra Cvetićanin (born 1993), Serbian volleyball player
* Aleksandra Dimitrova (born 2000), Russian chess master
* Aleksandra Dulkiewicz (born 1979), Polish lawyer
* Aleksandra Fedoriva (born 1988), Russian athlete
* Aleksandra Izmailovich (1878–1941), Belarusian revolutionary
* Aleksandra Klepaczka (born 2000), Polish beauty pageant titleholder
* Aleksandra Adamovna Kolemina-Bacheracht (1854–1941), Polish novelist
* Aleksandra Krunić (born 1993), Serbian tennis player
* Aleksandra Maltsevskaya (born 2002), Russian chess master
* Aleksandra Melnichenko (born 1977), Serbian billionaire, former singer, and model who is the wife of the Russian billionaire Andrey Melnichenko
* Aleksandra Perišić (born 2002), Serbian taekwondo practitioner
* Aleksandra Prijović (born 1995), Serbian pop-folk singer
* Aleksandra Przegalińska (born 1982), Polish futurist
* Aleksandra Ranković (born 1980), Serbian volleyball player
* Aleksandra Shchekoldina (born 2002), retired Russian gymnast
* Aleksandra Stepanović (born 1994), Serbian volleyball player
* Aleksandra Vukajlović (born 1997), Serbian handball player
* Aleksandra Wozniak (born 1987), Canadian tennis player
* Aleksandra Ziółkowska-Boehm (born 1949), Polish writer

== Fictional characters ==
* Alexandra, a character from the game &quot;Mystic Defender&quot;
* Alexandra, &quot;Nikita&quot; character
* Alexandra, the main antagonist in &quot;The Wildwood Chronicles&quot;
* Alexandra the Royal Baby Fairy, character in the British book series &quot;Rainbow Magic&quot;
* Alexandra &quot;Alex&quot; Bailey, a main character in Chris Colfer&#x27;s &quot;The Land of Stories&quot;
* Alexandra Borgia, an Assistant District Attorney in Law &amp; Order, played by Annie Parisse
* Alexandra Brooks DiMera, a.k.a. Lexie Carver, character in the NBC soap opera &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot;
* Alexandra Cabot, an Assistant District Attorney in Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit, played by Stephanie March
* Alexandra &quot;Alex&quot; Cahill, character in the 1990s television series &quot;Walker, Texas Ranger&quot;
* Alexandra Cross, a.k.a. Lexy Cross, a character in the USA/Syfy TV series, &quot;Chucky&quot;, based on the &quot;Child&#x27;s Play&quot; media franchise
* Alexandra Danvers, a.k.a. Alex Danvers, Kara Danvers&#x27; sister in &quot;Supergirl&quot;
* Alexandra Dunphy, a.k.a. Alex Dunphy, character in the popular television series &quot;Modern Family&quot;
* Alexandra Eames, a detective in Law &amp; Order Criminal Intent, played by Kathryn Erbe
* Alexandra Finch, sister of Atticus Finch in the 1960 novel &quot;To Kill A Mockingbird&quot;
* Alexandra Garcia, a character in the anime and manga series &quot;Kuroko&#x27;s Basketball&quot;
* Alexandra Grey, a.k.a. Lexie Grey, character in the ABC medical drama &quot;Grey&#x27;s Anatomy&quot;
* Alexandra Vladimirovna Litvyak, a.k.a. Sanya V. Litvyak, a character from the anime/manga franchise &quot;Strike Witches&quot; 
* Alexandra Mack, a.k.a. Alex Mack, titular lead character in the popular television series &quot;The Secret World of Alex Mack&quot;
* Alexandra Nuñez, a.k.a. Alex Nuñez, character in the Canadian television drama &quot;&quot;
* Alexandra Margarita Russo, a.k.a. Alex Russo, character in the Disney Channel television series &quot;Wizards of Waverly Place&quot;, played by Selena Gomez
* Alexandra Vause, a.k.a. Alex Vause, imprisoned drug dealer and love interest to protagonist to Piper Chapman in Netflix&#x27;s &quot;Orange Is The New Black&quot;
* Aleksandra Billewicz, a character in &quot;Deluge&quot; by Henryk Sienkiewicz
* Aleksandra &#x27;Zarya&#x27; Zaryanova, a Russian weightlifter turned soldier in the video game &quot;Overwatch&quot;
* Alexandra &quot;Lex&quot; Foster, the main protagonist of &quot;Team StarKid&quot;&#x27;s Black Friday (musical)

== See also ==
* Alexander
* Alexandria (given name)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6081128" start="0" end="9" title="Alexandra" label="Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q202444" start="25" end="35" title="given name" label="given name"/>
<link wikidata="Q923" start="110" end="119" title="Alexander" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q35245" start="126" end="140" title="Etymology" label="Etymologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="421" end="425" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q668366" start="553" end="568" title="Mycenaean Greek" label="Mycenaean Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q190102" start="594" end="602" title="Linear B" label="Linear B"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="696" end="702" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="730" end="738" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="740" end="747" title="Romance languages" label="Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="753" end="769" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q108709" start="824" end="834" title="diminutive" label="diminutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="873" end="881" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="883" end="892" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="894" end="902" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="904" end="911" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="913" end="923" title="Lithuanian language" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="925" end="935" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="937" end="943" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="954" end="968" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13258171" start="1015" end="1019" title="Alex" label="Alex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="1058" end="1066" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="1107" end="1112" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="1122" end="1129" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="1131" end="1140" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="1142" end="1148" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="1150" end="1159" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1161" end="1166" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="1168" end="1178" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="1190" end="1195" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="1197" end="1203" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="1205" end="1214" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="1216" end="1223" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="1252" end="1261" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1263" end="1276" title="Ancient Greek language" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558167" start="1280" end="1286" title="Alexis (given name)" label="Alexis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="1347" end="1357" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="1374" end="1384" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29919" start="1411" end="1426" title="Egyptian Arabic" label="Egyptian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="1453" end="1461" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9610" start="1551" end="1558" title="Bengali language" label="Bengali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="1845" end="1852" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="1961" end="1968" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="2033" end="2043" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q337257" start="2076" end="2082" title="Saskia" label="Saskia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="2112" end="2128" title="Scots language" label="Lowland Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720785" start="2301" end="2337" title="Alexandra of Russia (disambiguation)" label="Alexandra of Russia (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q205706" start="2347" end="2362" title="Grand duke" label="grand duchesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273157" start="2367" end="2381" title="Royal consort" label="royal consorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q113536108" start="2384" end="2418" title="Empress Alexandra (disambiguation)" label="Empress Alexandra (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q152094" start="2441" end="2477" title="Alexandra Feodorovna (Alix of Hesse)" label="Alexandra Feodorovna (Alix of Hesse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="2537" end="2567" title="Nicholas II" label="Nicholas II, Emperor of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503685" start="2598" end="2618" title="Rasputin (song)" label="&amp;quot;Rasputin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7244516" start="2622" end="2657" title="Princess Alexandra (disambiguation)" label="Princess Alexandra (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270180" start="2680" end="2712" title="Queen Alexandra (disambiguation)" label="Queen Alexandra (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q152260" start="2732" end="2752" title="Alexandra of Denmark" label="Alexandra of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875" start="2817" end="2855" title="Edward VII" label="Edward VII, King of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q446110" start="2858" end="2880" title="Alexandra the Maccabee" label="Alexandra the Maccabee"/>
<link wikidata="Q359684" start="2914" end="2941" title="Hyrcanus II" label="Hyrcanus II, King of Judaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q58001" start="2944" end="2974" title="Duchess Alexandra of Oldenburg" label="Duchess Alexandra of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q62816" start="3004" end="3049" title="Duke Peter of Oldenburg" label="Duke Constantine Frederick Peter of Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720782" start="3071" end="3091" title="Alexandra of Antioch" label="Alexandra of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5022231" start="3131" end="3152" title="Calliopius of Antioch" label="Calliopius of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318426" start="3155" end="3177" title="Alexandra of Lithuania" label="Alexandra of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361927" start="3201" end="3208" title="Duchy of Masovia" label="Masovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q392097" start="3211" end="3228" title="Alexandra of Rome" label="Alexandra of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4059042" start="3295" end="3315" title="Alexandra Aikhenvald" label="Alexandra Aikhenvald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720575" start="3359" end="3377" title="Alexandra Aldridge" label="Alexandra Aldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q33127620" start="3413" end="3429" title="Alexandra Allred" label="Alexandra Allred"/>
<link wikidata="Q52634900" start="3484" end="3500" title="Alexandra Anghel" label="Alexandra Anghel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720572" start="3544" end="3563" title="Alexandra Ansanelli" label="Alexandra Ansanelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q30035697" start="3590" end="3608" title="Alexandra Anstrell" label="Alexandra Anstrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449764" start="3643" end="3659" title="Alexandra Araújo" label="Alexandra Araújo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685495" start="3716" end="3730" title="Alexandra Arce" label="Alexandra Arce"/>
<link wikidata="Q107655343" start="3781" end="3801" title="Alexandra Aristoteli" label="Alexandra Aristoteli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720578" start="3845" end="3862" title="Alexandra Asimaki" label="Alexandra Asimaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q28502575" start="3902" end="3922" title="Alexandra Bachzetsis" label="Alexandra Bachzetsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104398266" start="3982" end="4000" title="Alexandra Backford" label="Alexandra Backford"/>
<link wikidata="Q56472423" start="4039" end="4054" title="Alexandra Badea" label="Alexandra Badea"/>
<link wikidata="Q52008200" start="4090" end="4109" title="Alexandra Balashova" label="Alexandra Balashova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855296" start="4165" end="4180" title="Alexandra Barré" label="Alexandra Barré"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720585" start="4235" end="4252" title="Alexandra Barreto" label="Alexandra Barreto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720587" start="4285" end="4302" title="Alexandra Bastedo" label="Alexandra Bastedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22071451" start="4334" end="4350" title="Alexandra Beaton" label="Alexandra Beaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500025" start="4379" end="4395" title="Alexandra Bellow" label="Alexandra Bellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q110636091" start="4443" end="4459" title="Alexandra Benado" label="Alexandra Benado"/>
<link wikidata="Q511816" start="4514" end="4529" title="Alexandra Béres" label="Alexandra Béres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720586" start="4578" end="4594" title="Alexandra Berzon" label="Alexandra Berzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q61625015" start="4657" end="4673" title="Alexandra Beukes" label="Alexandra Beukes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15093660" start="4702" end="4722" title="Alexandra Beverfjord" label="Alexandra Beverfjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q17138549" start="4803" end="4821" title="Alexandra Bezeková" label="Alexandra Bezeková"/>
<link wikidata="Q61611955" start="4856" end="4876" title="Alexandra Boltasseva" label="Alexandra Boltasseva"/>
<link wikidata="Q28722363" start="4923" end="4940" title="Alexandra Borbély" label="Alexandra Borbély"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550435" start="4984" end="4999" title="Alexandra Botez" label="Alexandra Botez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653685" start="5066" end="5085" title="Alexandra Bounxouei" label="Alexandra Bounxouei"/>
<link wikidata="Q18236723" start="5146" end="5161" title="Alexandra Boyko" label="Alexandra Boyko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720592" start="5200" end="5217" title="Alexandra Bracken" label="Alexandra Bracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720593" start="5249" end="5267" title="Alexandra Bradshaw" label="Alexandra Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670161" start="5337" end="5358" title="Alexandra Branitskaya" label="Alexandra Branitskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547782" start="5391" end="5406" title="Alexandra Braun" label="Alexandra Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q444190" start="5466" end="5488" title="Alexandra Breckenridge" label="Alexandra Breckenridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q48808737" start="5546" end="5568" title="Alexandra Brewis Slade" label="Alexandra Brewis Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q61009993" start="5620" end="5636" title="Alexandra Brooks" label="Alexandra Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q517062" start="5671" end="5686" title="Alexandra Bruce" label="Alexandra Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4097310" start="5728" end="5747" title="Alexandra Brushtein" label="Alexandra Brushtein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4276907" start="5816" end="5830" title="Alexandra Buch" label="Alexandra Buch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720600" start="5874" end="5895" title="Alexandra Bugailiskis" label="Alexandra Bugailiskis"/>
<link wikidata="Q104586" start="5929" end="5946" title="Alexandra Bujdoso" label="Alexandra Bujdoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720601" start="5992" end="6008" title="Alexandra Bunton" label="Alexandra Bunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147216" start="6053" end="6072" title="Alexandra Burghardt" label="Alexandra Burghardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q234161" start="6119" end="6134" title="Alexandra Burke" label="Alexandra Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q54857922" start="6165" end="6183" title="Alexandra W. Busch" label="Alexandra W. Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q458815" start="6226" end="6241" title="Alexandra Byrne" label="Alexandra Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19956757" start="6282" end="6300" title="Alexandra Cardenas" label="Alexandra Cardenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q26212462" start="6335" end="6353" title="Alexandra Carlisle" label="Alexandra Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720607" start="6400" end="6419" title="Alex Carpenter" label="Alexandra Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720609" start="6462" end="6476" title="Alexandra Caso" label="Alexandra Caso"/>
<link wikidata="Q511864" start="6520" end="6540" title="Alexandra Cassavetes" label="Alexandra Cassavetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720610" start="6575" end="6593" title="Alexandra Castillo" label="Alexandra Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q76591663" start="6645" end="6662" title="Alexandra Chalupa" label="Alexandra Chalupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q111370055" start="6729" end="6746" title="Alexandra Chambon" label="Alexandra Chambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q433212" start="6782" end="6798" title="Alexandra Chando" label="Alexandra Chando"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720613" start="6831" end="6848" title="Alexandra Charles" label="Alexandra Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q28113171" start="6888" end="6904" title="Alexandra Chasin" label="Alexandra Chasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28869483" start="6949" end="6965" title="Alexandra Chaves" label="Alexandra Chaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q19281859" start="7009" end="7026" title="Alexandra Chekina" label="Alexandra Chekina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4523187" start="7058" end="7074" title="Alexandra Cheron" label="Alexandra Cheron"/>
<link wikidata="Q21005343" start="7154" end="7171" title="Alex Chidiac" label="Alexandra Chidiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q22087891" start="7209" end="7224" title="Alexandra Chong" label="Alexandra Chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702462" start="7250" end="7268" title="Alexandra Chreiteh" label="Alexandra Chreiteh"/>
<link wikidata="Q433280" start="7300" end="7317" title="Alexandra Coletti" label="Alexandra Coletti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720612" start="7357" end="7375" title="Alexandra Cousteau" label="Alexandra Cousteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q95491294" start="7435" end="7450" title="Alexandra Cunha" label="Alexandra Cunha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720616" start="7510" end="7530" title="Alexandra Cunningham" label="Alexandra Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090533" start="7613" end="7629" title="Alexandra Curtis" label="Alexandra Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720792" start="7667" end="7684" title="Alexandra Čvanová" label="Alexandra Čvanová"/>
<link wikidata="Q231556" start="7738" end="7756" title="Alexandra Daddario" label="Alexandra Daddario"/>
<link wikidata="Q239527" start="7789" end="7808" title="Alexandra Dahlström" label="Alexandra Dahlström"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720615" start="7840" end="7854" title="Alexandra Dane" label="Alexandra Dane"/>
<link wikidata="Q263798" start="7905" end="7923" title="Alexandra Danilova" label="Alexandra Danilova"/>
<link wikidata="Q60563186" start="7961" end="7979" title="Alexandra Dariescu" label="Alexandra Dariescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q951773" start="8012" end="8029" title="Alexandra Dascalu" label="Alexandra Dascalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q89166" start="8070" end="8084" title="Alexandra Daum" label="Alexandra Daum"/>
<link wikidata="Q230456" start="8122" end="8142" title="Alexandra David-Néel" label="Alexandra David-Néel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720620" start="8191" end="8207" title="Alexandra Davies" label="Alexandra Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16298707" start="8255" end="8275" title="Alexandra de la Mora" label="Alexandra de la Mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193546" start="8307" end="8327" title="Alexandra Dementieva" label="Alexandra Dementieva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720621" start="8358" end="8376" title="Alexandra Denisova" label="Alexandra Denisova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720622" start="8415" end="8435" title="Alexandra Deshorties" label="Alexandra Deshorties"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720624" start="8484" end="8502" title="Alexandra Dimoglou" label="Alexandra Dimoglou"/>
<link wikidata="Q42907817" start="8559" end="8579" title="Alexandra Dindiligan" label="Alexandra Dindiligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720623" start="8615" end="8631" title="Alexandra DiNovi" label="Alexandra DiNovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610817" start="8664" end="8678" title="Alexandra Dinu" label="Alexandra Dinu"/>
<link wikidata="Q53870698" start="8736" end="8754" title="Alexandra Diplarou" label="Alexandra Diplarou"/>
<link wikidata="Q755906" start="8794" end="8811" title="Alexandra Dobolyi" label="Alexandra Dobolyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16233528" start="8848" end="8865" title="Alexandra Dowling" label="Alexandra Dowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147227" start="8897" end="8916" title="Alexandra Duckworth" label="Alexandra Duckworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q67661161" start="8953" end="8974" title="Alexandra Duel-Hallen" label="Alexandra Duel-Hallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q231028" start="9007" end="9025" title="Alexandra Dulgheru" label="Alexandra Dulgheru"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198910" start="9064" end="9078" title="Alexandra Dunn" label="Alexandra Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q91328417" start="9110" end="9124" title="Alexandra Eade" label="Alexandra Eade"/>
<link wikidata="Q21996568" start="9168" end="9186" title="Alexandra Elbakyan" label="Alexandra Elbakyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720633" start="9234" end="9252" title="Alexandra Eldridge" label="Alexandra Eldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897838" start="9285" end="9300" title="Alexandra Engen" label="Alexandra Engen"/>
<link wikidata="Q458071" start="9346" end="9362" title="Alexandra Eremia" label="Alexandra Eremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720638" start="9404" end="9422" title="Alexandra Ermakova" label="Alexandra Ermakova"/>
<link wikidata="Q527864" start="9463" end="9480" title="Alexandra Escobar" label="Alexandra Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q56244769" start="9520" end="9536" title="Alexandra Feigin" label="Alexandra Feigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q63611313" start="9576" end="9593" title="Alexandra Feracci" label="Alexandra Feracci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661225" start="9625" end="9641" title="Alexandra Finder" label="Alexandra Finder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060976" start="9672" end="9688" title="Alexandra Fisher" label="Alexandra Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q27643301" start="9724" end="9739" title="Alexandra Flood" label="Alexandra Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833273" start="9783" end="9799" title="Alexandra Fomina" label="Alexandra Fomina"/>
<link wikidata="Q110237265" start="9843" end="9864" title="Alexandra Försterling" label="Alexandra Försterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q101010431" start="9902" end="9918" title="Alexandra Föster" label="Alexandra Föster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720644" start="9947" end="9963" title="Alexandra Fouace" label="Alexandra Fouace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720643" start="9993" end="10010" title="Alexandra Fuentes" label="Alexandra Fuentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q468226" start="10062" end="10077" title="Alexandra Fusai" label="Alexandra Fusai"/>
<link wikidata="Q76240221" start="10114" end="10146" title="Alexandra Gage, Viscountess Gage" label="Alexandra Gage, Viscountess Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643649" start="10179" end="10207" title="Alexandra Pavlovna Galitzine" label="Alexandra Pavlovna Galitzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131750778" start="10240" end="10255" title="Alexandra Gajda" label="Alexandra Gajda"/>
<link wikidata="Q106640766" start="10289" end="10308" title="Alexandra Gallagher" label="Alexandra Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q107474449" start="10339" end="10356" title="Alexandra Gardner" label="Alexandra Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q107719092" start="10390" end="10414" title="Alexandra Daisy Ginsberg" label="Alexandra Daisy Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15943337" start="10459" end="10475" title="Alexandra Goujon" label="Alexandra Goujon"/>
<link wikidata="Q111836791" start="10518" end="10533" title="Alexandra Gowie" label="Alexandra Gowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q20730039" start="10605" end="10621" title="Alexandra Grande" label="Alexandra Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720650" start="10655" end="10670" title="Alexandra Grant" label="Alexandra Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q959307" start="10709" end="10729" title="Alexandra Gripenberg" label="Alexandra Gripenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q16212022" start="10795" end="10811" title="Alexandra Gummer" label="Alexandra Gummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610821" start="10852" end="10867" title="Alexandra Hagan" label="Alexandra Hagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17386018" start="10900" end="10920" title="Alexandra Hargreaves" label="Alexandra Hargreaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q64437342" start="10960" end="10978" title="Alexandra Harrison" label="Alexandra Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q539553" start="11019" end="11036" title="Alexandra Hasluck" label="Alexandra Hasluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q258980" start="11084" end="11101" title="Alexandra Hedison" label="Alexandra Hedison"/>
<link wikidata="Q89307690" start="11162" end="11180" title="Alexandra Heidrich" label="Alexandra Heidrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q89798688" start="11200" end="11218" title="Alexandra Helbling" label="Alexandra Helbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q104629936" start="11275" end="11294" title="Alexandra Heminsley" label="Alexandra Heminsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720658" start="11340" end="11355" title="Alexandra Henao" label="Alexandra Henao"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720663" start="11399" end="11419" title="Alexandra Herbríková" label="Alexandra Herbríková"/>
<link wikidata="Q99674823" start="11462" end="11481" title="Alexandra Hernandez" label="Alexandra Hernandez"/>
<link wikidata="Q84214718" start="11526" end="11543" title="Alexandra Hidalgo" label="Alexandra Hidalgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q92447" start="11581" end="11602" title="Alexandra Hildebrandt" label="Alexandra Hildebrandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q52106749" start="11647" end="11669" title="Alexandra Mary Hirschi" label="Alexandra Mary Hirschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720665" start="11733" end="11750" title="Alexandra Hoffman" label="Alexandra Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q26435589" start="11788" end="11807" title="Alexandra Hoffmeyer" label="Alexandra Hoffmeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955417" start="11850" end="11867" title="Alexandra Höglund" label="Alexandra Höglund"/>
<link wikidata="Q446045" start="11907" end="11923" title="Alexandra Holden" label="Alexandra Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q66840907" start="11956" end="11971" title="Alexandra Hollá" label="Alexandra Hollá"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916448" start="12013" end="12035" title="Alexandra van Huffelen" label="Alexandra van Huffelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150821" start="12068" end="12091" title="Alexandra Ashley Hughes" label="Alexandra Ashley Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q51746747" start="12138" end="12154" title="Alexandra Hulley" label="Alexandra Hulley"/>
<link wikidata="Q51874818" start="12189" end="12204" title="Alexandra Hurst" label="Alexandra Hurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q79180529" start="12249" end="12264" title="Alexandra Huynh" label="Alexandra Huynh"/>
<link wikidata="Q28611378" start="12305" end="12325" title="Alexandra Ianculescu" label="Alexandra Ianculescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q21285237" start="12372" end="12390" title="Alexandra Issayeva" label="Alexandra Issayeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482670" start="12436" end="12457" title="Alexandra Ivanovskaya" label="Alexandra Ivanovskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720669" start="12504" end="12521" title="Alexandra Jackson" label="Alexandra Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833293" start="12559" end="12576" title="Alexandra Jiménez" label="Alexandra Jiménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q66476025" start="12608" end="12631" title="Alexandra Jóhannsdóttir" label="Alexandra Jóhannsdóttir"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730332" start="12673" end="12689" title="Alexandra Johnes" label="Alexandra Johnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720677" start="12740" end="12755" title="Alexandra Joner" label="Alexandra Joner"/>
<link wikidata="Q14912008" start="12799" end="12816" title="Alexandra Jupiter" label="Alexandra Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610819" start="12857" end="12877" title="Alexandra Kalinovská" label="Alexandra Kalinovská"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026891" start="12918" end="12939" title="Alexandra Kamieniecki" label="Alexandra Kamieniecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q85697" start="12976" end="12990" title="Alexandra Kamp" label="Alexandra Kamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213304" start="13031" end="13050" title="Alexandra Kapustina" label="Alexandra Kapustina"/>
<link wikidata="Q106203839" start="13092" end="13108" title="Alexandra Kasser" label="Alexandra Kasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q23418687" start="13157" end="13174" title="Alexandra Kavadas" label="Alexandra Kavadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q29420210" start="13212" end="13232" title="Alexandra Kehayoglou" label="Alexandra Kehayoglou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535093" start="13273" end="13292" title="Alexandra Kenworthy" label="Alexandra Kenworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720673" start="13331" end="13351" title="Alexandra Keresztesi" label="Alexandra Keresztesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720675" start="13406" end="13421" title="Alexandra Kerry" label="Alexandra Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q27947765" start="13456" end="13475" title="Alexandra Killewald" label="Alexandra Killewald"/>
<link wikidata="Q51754550" start="13520" end="13546" title="Alexandra Kiroi-Bogatyreva" label="Alexandra Kiroi-Bogatyreva"/>
<link wikidata="Q867346" start="13598" end="13611" title="Alexandra Kim" label="Alexandra Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q22095986" start="13675" end="13692" title="Alexandra Kleeman" label="Alexandra Kleeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q92404" start="13724" end="13739" title="Alexandra Kluge" label="Alexandra Kluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11957320" start="13770" end="13787" title="Alexandra Koefoed" label="Alexandra Koefoed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15922087" start="13820" end="13843" title="Alexandra Kolesnichenko" label="Alexandra Kolesnichenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q179558" start="13885" end="13904" title="Alexandra Kollontai" label="Alexandra Kollontai"/>
<link wikidata="Q21994309" start="13939" end="13961" title="Alexandra Konofalskaya" label="Alexandra Konofalskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643607" start="14010" end="14028" title="Alexandra Korelova" label="Alexandra Korelova"/>
<link wikidata="Q20109662" start="14063" end="14082" title="Alexandra Korolkova" label="Alexandra Korolkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q18637545" start="14124" end="14142" title="Alexandra Kosinski" label="Alexandra Kosinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q620950" start="14188" end="14207" title="Alexandra Kosteniuk" label="Alexandra Kosteniuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720678" start="14249" end="14264" title="Alexandra Kotur" label="Alexandra Kotur"/>
<link wikidata="Q93578732" start="14296" end="14315" title="Alexandra Kropotkin" label="Alexandra Kropotkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q454874" start="14355" end="14372" title="Alexandra Krosney" label="Alexandra Krosney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720679" start="14393" end="14409" title="Alexandra Kunová" label="Alexandra Kunová"/>
<link wikidata="Q29065146" start="14449" end="14464" title="Alexandra Kutas" label="Alexandra Kutas"/>
<link wikidata="Q453693" start="14496" end="14515" title="Alexandra Lacrabère" label="Alexandra Lacrabère"/>
<link wikidata="Q457268" start="14549" end="14563" title="Alexandra Lamy" label="Alexandra Lamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412226" start="14594" end="14611" title="Alexandra Langley" label="Alexandra Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833288" start="14652" end="14670" title="Alexandra Lapierre" label="Alexandra Lapierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q65106" start="14688" end="14708" title="Alexandra Maria Lara" label="Alexandra Maria Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833289" start="14748" end="14768" title="Alexandra Larochelle" label="Alexandra Larochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720682" start="14800" end="14817" title="Alexandra Larsson" label="Alexandra Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q72845722" start="14857" end="14877" title="Alexandra Lazarowich" label="Alexandra Lazarowich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16866587" start="14917" end="14936" title="Alexandra Lebenthal" label="Alexandra Lebenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833294" start="14975" end="14992" title="Alexandra Leclère" label="Alexandra Leclère"/>
<link wikidata="Q65239622" start="15083" end="15090" title="Lxandra" label="Lxandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q25440529" start="15093" end="15109" title="Alexandra Leitão" label="Alexandra Leitão"/>
<link wikidata="Q11957322" start="15165" end="15182" title="Alexandra Lemoine" label="Alexandra Lemoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q440594" start="15222" end="15241" title="Alexandra Lencastre" label="Alexandra Lencastre"/>
<link wikidata="Q107284562" start="15276" end="15296" title="Alexandra Lethbridge" label="Alexandra Lethbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16215892" start="15348" end="15363" title="Alexandra Levit" label="Alexandra Levit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720651" start="15395" end="15411" title="Alexandra Lisney" label="Alexandra Lisney"/>
<link wikidata="Q289594" start="15456" end="15472" title="Alexandra London" label="Alexandra London"/>
<link wikidata="Q21066941" start="15503" end="15520" title="Alexandra Longová" label="Alexandra Longová"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720683" start="15553" end="15568" title="Alexandra López" label="Alexandra López"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914642" start="15606" end="15621" title="Alexandra Louis" label="Alexandra Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19647647" start="15666" end="15682" title="Alexandra Lúgaro" label="Alexandra Lúgaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q113381253" start="15751" end="15766" title="Alexandra Lukin" label="Alexandra Lukin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10543019" start="15814" end="15829" title="Alexandra Lunca" label="Alexandra Lunca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833299" start="15868" end="15883" title="Alexandra Lydon" label="Alexandra Lydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q66202842" start="15904" end="15922" title="Kidnapping of Alexandra Măceșanu" label="Alexandra Măceșanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17749075" start="15961" end="15981" title="Alexandra Makovskaya" label="Alexandra Makovskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q19661998" start="16023" end="16038" title="Alexandra Manly" label="Alexandra Manly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720688" start="16073" end="16091" title="Alexandra Mařasová" label="Alexandra Mařasová"/>
<link wikidata="Q105491158" start="16126" end="16143" title="Alexandra Mardell" label="Alexandra Mardell"/>
<link wikidata="Q963685" start="16175" end="16194" title="Alexandra Marinescu" label="Alexandra Marinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q236233" start="16236" end="16254" title="Alexandra Marinina" label="Alexandra Marinina"/>
<link wikidata="Q112639321" start="16285" end="16301" title="Alexandra Martin (born 1968)" label="Alexandra Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601794" start="16335" end="16350" title="Alexandra Marzo" label="Alexandra Marzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560895" start="16401" end="16424" title="Alexandra Mavrokordatou" label="Alexandra Mavrokordatou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720686" start="16459" end="16474" title="Alexandra Mazur" label="Alexandra Mazur"/>
<link wikidata="Q237477" start="16511" end="16532" title="Alexandra Meissnitzer" label="Alexandra Meissnitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833301" start="16574" end="16590" title="Alexandra Mendès" label="Alexandra Mendès"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832595" start="16626" end="16645" title="Alexandra Merkulova" label="Alexandra Merkulova"/>
<link wikidata="Q86475265" start="16686" end="16700" title="Alexandra Micu" label="Alexandra Micu"/>
<link wikidata="Q49172660" start="16727" end="16743" title="Alexandra Miller" label="Alexandra Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q15434562" start="16797" end="16813" title="Alexandra Milton" label="Alexandra Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20987568" start="16859" end="16874" title="Alexandra Mîrca" label="Alexandra Mîrca"/>
<link wikidata="Q66459001" start="16906" end="16926" title="Alexandra Mitroshina" label="Alexandra Mitroshina"/>
<link wikidata="Q23887886" start="16961" end="16980" title="Alexandra Mitsotaki" label="Alexandra Mitsotaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q60439135" start="17028" end="17044" title="Alexandra Moreno" label="Alexandra Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q94618138" start="17083" end="17103" title="Alexandra Morgenrood" label="Alexandra Morgenrood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244345" start="17136" end="17154" title="Alexandra Morrison" label="Alexandra Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720694" start="17180" end="17196" title="Alexandra Morton" label="Alexandra Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23881956" start="17264" end="17286" title="Alexandra Mousavizadeh" label="Alexandra Mousavizadeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q54703" start="17319" end="17336" title="Alexandra Mueller" label="Alexandra Mueller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720701" start="17375" end="17390" title="Alexandra Muñoz" label="Alexandra Muñoz"/>
<link wikidata="Q47459136" start="17433" end="17451" title="Alexandra Munteanu" label="Alexandra Munteanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720702" start="17489" end="17506" title="Alexandra Najarro" label="Alexandra Najarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q18759205" start="17545" end="17564" title="Alexandra Nancarrow" label="Alexandra Nancarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q30311555" start="17605" end="17620" title="Alexandra Ndolo" label="Alexandra Ndolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q115853" start="17667" end="17684" title="Alexandra Nechita" label="Alexandra Nechita"/>
<link wikidata="Q17580332" start="17752" end="17773" title="Alexandra Nekvapilová" label="Alexandra Nekvapilová"/>
<link wikidata="Q77758" start="17808" end="17824" title="Alexandra Neldel" label="Alexandra Neldel"/>
<link wikidata="Q26459677" start="17855" end="17871" title="Alexandra Nemich" label="Alexandra Nemich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16215973" start="17920" end="17937" title="Alexandra Nereïev" label="Alexandra Nereïev"/>
<link wikidata="Q18211220" start="17981" end="17998" title="Alexandra Nessmar" label="Alexandra Nessmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q88721048" start="18037" end="18053" title="Alexandra Newton" label="Alexandra Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q84408329" start="18094" end="18110" title="Alexandra Niepel" label="Alexandra Niepel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60837934" start="18148" end="18168" title="Alexandra Nikiforova" label="Alexandra Nikiforova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720705" start="18201" end="18222" title="Alexandra Obolentseva" label="Alexandra Obolentseva"/>
<link wikidata="Q16301572" start="18259" end="18274" title="Alexandra Ocles" label="Alexandra Ocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22279479" start="18325" end="18341" title="Alexandra Oliver" label="Alexandra Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q23772032" start="18371" end="18387" title="Alexandra Olsson" label="Alexandra Olsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9146630" start="18422" end="18442" title="Alexandra Opachanova" label="Alexandra Opachanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610822" start="18471" end="18488" title="Alexandra Oquendo" label="Alexandra Oquendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38459660" start="18535" end="18552" title="Alexandra Ordolis" label="Alexandra Ordolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105476810" start="18591" end="18608" title="Alexandra Osborne" label="Alexandra Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q289422" start="18649" end="18665" title="Alexandra Panova" label="Alexandra Panova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720712" start="18703" end="18725" title="Alexandra Papageorgiou" label="Alexandra Papageorgiou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16528505" start="18762" end="18776" title="Alexandra Park (actress)" label="Alexandra Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911007" start="18811" end="18826" title="Alexandra Parks" label="Alexandra Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q425747" start="18868" end="18888" title="Alexandra Pascalidou" label="Alexandra Pascalidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q18071139" start="18939" end="18967" title="Alexandra Paschalidou-Moreti" label="Alexandra Paschalidou-Moreti"/>
<link wikidata="Q521607" start="18999" end="19017" title="Alexandra Patsavas" label="Alexandra Patsavas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325554" start="19065" end="19081" title="Alexandra Pelosi" label="Alexandra Pelosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720727" start="19135" end="19151" title="Alexandra Penney" label="Alexandra Penney"/>
<link wikidata="Q22007384" start="19195" end="19211" title="Alexandra Perper" label="Alexandra Perper"/>
<link wikidata="Q113043810" start="19250" end="19269" title="Alexandra Petkovski" label="Alexandra Petkovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360902" start="19291" end="19308" title="Alexandra Petrova" label="Alexandra Petrova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720728" start="19355" end="19372" title="Alexandra Picatto" label="Alexandra Picatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q15431414" start="19426" end="19442" title="Alexandra Pierce" label="Alexandra Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710571" start="19488" end="19508" title="Alexandra Piscupescu" label="Alexandra Piscupescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18579763" start="19550" end="19570" title="Alexandra Podkolzina" label="Alexandra Podkolzina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260606" start="19617" end="19637" title="Alexandra Podryadova" label="Alexandra Podryadova"/>
<link wikidata="Q25428409" start="19672" end="19693" title="Alexandra Polivanchuk" label="Alexandra Polivanchuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q621950" start="19730" end="19747" title="Alexandra Pomales" label="Alexandra Pomales"/>
<link wikidata="Q432932" start="19780" end="19794" title="Alexandra Popp" label="Alexandra Popp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434616" start="19831" end="19847" title="Alexandra Potter" label="Alexandra Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q110511240" start="19878" end="19901" title="Alexandra Poulovassilis" label="Alexandra Poulovassilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720733" start="19938" end="19954" title="Alexandra Powers" label="Alexandra Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q54861108" start="19975" end="19992" title="Alexandra Pringle" label="Alexandra Pringle"/>
<link wikidata="Q537422" start="20026" end="20041" title="Alexandra Quinn" label="Alexandra Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738480" start="20087" end="20103" title="Alexandra Radius" label="Alexandra Radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q15696293" start="20139" end="20154" title="Alexandra Raeva" label="Alexandra Raeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720735" start="20185" end="20200" title="Alexandra Raffé" label="Alexandra Raffé"/>
<link wikidata="Q109354634" start="20254" end="20274" title="Alexandra Ramniceanu" label="Alexandra Ramniceanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q273862" start="20328" end="20346" title="Alexandra Rapaport" label="Alexandra Rapaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643593" start="20378" end="20398" title="Alexandra Razarenova" label="Alexandra Razarenova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833306" start="20433" end="20450" title="Alexandra Recchia" label="Alexandra Recchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26845374" start="20482" end="20496" title="Alexandra Reid" label="Alexandra Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q111116659" start="20539" end="20555" title="Alexandra Rexová" label="Alexandra Rexová"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833310" start="20600" end="20618" title="Alexandra Richards" label="Alexandra Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16336329" start="20660" end="20677" title="Alexandra Richter" label="Alexandra Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720738" start="20711" end="20728" title="Alexandra Rickham" label="Alexandra Rickham"/>
<link wikidata="Q57063043" start="20784" end="20800" title="Alexandra Ridout" label="Alexandra Ridout"/>
<link wikidata="Q259653" start="20839" end="20855" title="Alexandra Ripley" label="Alexandra Ripley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323734" start="20887" end="20902" title="Alexandra Roach" label="Alexandra Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q273187" start="20932" end="20949" title="Alexandra Robbins" label="Alexandra Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q114840940" start="20995" end="21022" title="Alexandra Roche, Lady Roche" label="Alexandra Roche, Lady Roche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833311" start="21061" end="21079" title="Alexandra Rochelle" label="Alexandra Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q293012" start="21120" end="21139" title="Alexandra Rodionova" label="Alexandra Rodionova"/>
<link wikidata="Q60221279" start="21174" end="21189" title="Alexandra Rojas" label="Alexandra Rojas"/>
<link wikidata="Q260854" start="21249" end="21268" title="Alexandra Rosenfeld" label="Alexandra Rosenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q12713325" start="21314" end="21329" title="Alexandra Rotan" label="Alexandra Rotan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720745" start="21377" end="21391" title="Alexandra Rout" label="Alexandra Rout"/>
<link wikidata="Q18115449" start="21433" end="21451" title="Alexandra Rozenman" label="Alexandra Rozenman"/>
<link wikidata="Q97932813" start="21532" end="21552" title="Alexandra Rutherford" label="Alexandra Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720741" start="21586" end="21604" title="Alexandra Rutlidge" label="Alexandra Rutlidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q113482826" start="21646" end="21668" title="Alexandra Saduakassova" label="Alexandra Saduakassova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720744" start="21705" end="21721" title="Alexandra Sahlen" label="Alexandra Sahlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11850788" start="21760" end="21777" title="Alexandra Salmela" label="Alexandra Salmela"/>
<link wikidata="Q20641433" start="21810" end="21828" title="Alexandra Salvador" label="Alexandra Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q24851869" start="21883" end="21899" title="Alexandra Savior" label="Alexandra Savior"/>
<link wikidata="Q16528511" start="21946" end="21964" title="Alexandra Schepisi" label="Alexandra Schepisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643673" start="21987" end="22008" title="Alexandra Schörghuber" label="Alexandra Schörghuber"/>
<link wikidata="Q101657706" start="22044" end="22059" title="Alexandra Sharp" label="Alexandra Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q13359795" start="22104" end="22124" title="Alexandra Shevchenko" label="Alexandra Shevchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666137" start="22176" end="22191" title="Alexandra Shimo" label="Alexandra Shimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914898" start="22211" end="22226" title="Alexandra Shipp" label="Alexandra Shipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q516486" start="22258" end="22278" title="Alexandra Shiryayeva" label="Alexandra Shiryayeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867648" start="22326" end="22341" title="Alexandra Shiva" label="Alexandra Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833316" start="22368" end="22385" title="Alexandra Shulman" label="Alexandra Shulman"/>
<link wikidata="Q30234352" start="22420" end="22435" title="Alexandra Sicoe" label="Alexandra Sicoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12720251" start="22469" end="22489" title="Alexandra Sidorovici" label="Alexandra Sidorovici"/>
<link wikidata="Q21155090" start="22525" end="22541" title="Alexandra Silber" label="Alexandra Silber"/>
<link wikidata="Q439716" start="22592" end="22606" title="Alexandra Silk" label="Alexandra Silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16223449" start="22652" end="22669" title="Alexandra Silocea" label="Alexandra Silocea"/>
<link wikidata="Q30573890" start="22714" end="22729" title="Alexandra Silva" label="Alexandra Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q108207980" start="22775" end="22790" title="Alexandra Slade" label="Alexandra Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11850674" start="22811" end="22829" title="Alexandra Smirnoff" label="Alexandra Smirnoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q22957143" start="22863" end="22877" title="Alexandra Sobo" label="Alexandra Sobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720753" start="22920" end="22935" title="Alexandra Socha" label="Alexandra Socha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720754" start="22968" end="22986" title="Alexandra Sokoloff" label="Alexandra Sokoloff"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222477" start="23025" end="23040" title="Alexandra Soler" label="Alexandra Soler"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601803" start="23080" end="23097" title="Alexandra Solnado" label="Alexandra Solnado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292840" start="23119" end="23135" title="Alexandra Sorina" label="Alexandra Sorina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833317" start="23170" end="23185" title="Alexandra Soumm" label="Alexandra Soumm"/>
<link wikidata="Q93719852" start="23231" end="23247" title="Alexandra Sourla" label="Alexandra Sourla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453" start="23280" end="23294" title="Alexandra Stan" label="Alexandra Stan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720760" start="23326" end="23345" title="Alexandra Stepanova" label="Alexandra Stepanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q241637" start="23380" end="23399" title="Alexandra Stevenson" label="Alexandra Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q451524" start="23438" end="23455" title="Alexandra Stewart" label="Alexandra Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q56070803" start="23488" end="23507" title="Alexandra Stréliski" label="Alexandra Stréliski"/>
<link wikidata="Q56678955" start="23553" end="23569" title="Alexandra Styron" label="Alexandra Styron"/>
<link wikidata="Q102555183" start="23603" end="23622" title="Alexandra Subțirică" label="Alexandra Subțirică"/>
<link wikidata="Q59660421" start="23658" end="23672" title="Alexandra Suda" label="Alexandra Suda"/>
<link wikidata="Q64233672" start="23711" end="23729" title="Alexandra Takounda" label="Alexandra Takounda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720764" start="23771" end="23788" title="Alexandra Talomaa" label="Alexandra Talomaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2833320" start="23823" end="23842" title="Alexandra Tavernier" label="Alexandra Tavernier"/>
<link wikidata="Q97657792" start="23881" end="23897" title="Alexandra Techet" label="Alexandra Techet"/>
<link wikidata="Q110657342" start="23926" end="23943" title="Alexandra Tegleva" label="Alexandra Tegleva"/>
<link wikidata="Q114353940" start="23977" end="23994" title="Alexandra Tessier" label="Alexandra Tessier"/>
<link wikidata="Q96439" start="24032" end="24047" title="Alexandra Thein" label="Alexandra Thein"/>
<link wikidata="Q18812302" start="24081" end="24097" title="Alexandra Tilley" label="Alexandra Tilley"/>
<link wikidata="Q444826" start="24139" end="24159" title="Alexandra Timoshenko" label="Alexandra Timoshenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609559" start="24202" end="24220" title="Alexandra Tolstaya" label="Alexandra Tolstaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="24281" end="24292" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26236435" start="24295" end="24314" title="Alexandra Touretski" label="Alexandra Touretski"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147242" start="24354" end="24369" title="Alexandra Trică" label="Alexandra Trică"/>
<link wikidata="Q107304773" start="24412" end="24430" title="Alexandra Trofimov" label="Alexandra Trofimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q37983439" start="24469" end="24486" title="Alexandra Trusova" label="Alexandra Trusova"/>
<link wikidata="Q129813554" start="24524" end="24540" title="Alexandra Truwit" label="Alexandra Truwit"/>
<link wikidata="Q467823" start="24584" end="24601" title="Alexandra Tsiavou" label="Alexandra Tsiavou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16751770" start="24629" end="24644" title="Alexandra Tüchi" label="Alexandra Tüchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665591" start="24680" end="24697" title="Alexandra Tydings" label="Alexandra Tydings"/>
<link wikidata="Q22074658" start="24730" end="24748" title="Alexandra Udženija" label="Alexandra Udženija"/>
<link wikidata="Q15634714" start="24789" end="24805" title="Alexandra Vafina" label="Alexandra Vafina"/>
<link wikidata="Q30339214" start="24847" end="24873" title="Alexandra Valetta-Ardisson" label="Alexandra Valetta-Ardisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q259169" start="24907" end="24927" title="Alexandra Vandernoot" label="Alexandra Vandernoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720770" start="24959" end="24978" title="Alexandra Vasilieva" label="Alexandra Vasilieva"/>
<link wikidata="Q16528519" start="25016" end="25030" title="Alexandra Vela" label="Alexandra Vela"/>
<link wikidata="Q16214666" start="25067" end="25084" title="Alexandra Verbeek" label="Alexandra Verbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q81443281" start="25113" end="25128" title="Alexandra Viney" label="Alexandra Viney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832598" start="25172" end="25193" title="Alexandra Vinogradova" label="Alexandra Vinogradova"/>
<link wikidata="Q18202415" start="25235" end="25251" title="Alexandra Völker" label="Alexandra Völker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643710" start="25286" end="25308" title="Alexandra von der Weth" label="Alexandra von der Weth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720791" start="25348" end="25367" title="Alexandra von Dyhrn" label="Alexandra von Dyhrn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720790" start="25413" end="25438" title="Alexandra von Fürstenberg" label="Alexandra von Fürstenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q21157946" start="25515" end="25532" title="Alexandra Voronin" label="Alexandra Voronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151364" start="25562" end="25577" title="Vidkun Quisling" label="Vidkun Quisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q109175982" start="25580" end="25597" title="Alexandra Vydrina" label="Alexandra Vydrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q100358609" start="25630" end="25645" title="Alexandra Wager" label="Alexandra Wager"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835172" start="25698" end="25711" title="Michael Wager" label="Michael Wager"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720772" start="25714" end="25731" title="Alexandra Wallace" label="Alexandra Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713143" start="25785" end="25802" title="Alexandra Walsham" label="Alexandra Walsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666351" start="25847" end="25868" title="Alexandra Waluszewski" label="Alexandra Waluszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q56948477" start="25930" end="25949" title="Alexandra Waterbury" label="Alexandra Waterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q28113162" start="25986" end="26004" title="Alexandra Wedgwood" label="Alexandra Wedgwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q91253584" start="26052" end="26070" title="Alexandra Wejchert" label="Alexandra Wejchert"/>
<link wikidata="Q74141" start="26108" end="26122" title="Alexandra Wenk" label="Alexandra Wenk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720774" start="26153" end="26171" title="Alexandra Wescourt" label="Alexandra Wescourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23090951" start="26203" end="26219" title="Alexandra Wester" label="Alexandra Wester"/>
<link wikidata="Q112701526" start="26267" end="26285" title="Alexandra Williams" label="Alexandra Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q95609436" start="26311" end="26325" title="Alexandra Wong" label="Alexandra Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720776" start="26360" end="26376" title="Alexandra Worden" label="Alexandra Worden"/>
<link wikidata="Q19578298" start="26442" end="26459" title="Alexandra Worisch" label="Alexandra Worisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q445334" start="26505" end="26523" title="Alexandra Zabelina" label="Alexandra Zabelina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720777" start="26553" end="26571" title="Alexandra Zaharias" label="Alexandra Zaharias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720780" start="26611" end="26629" title="Alexandra Zapruder" label="Alexandra Zapruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914714" start="26672" end="26690" title="Alexandra Zaretsky" label="Alexandra Zaretsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q106855688" start="26725" end="26741" title="Alexandra Zarini" label="Alexandra Zarini"/>
<link wikidata="Q99122082" start="26784" end="26798" title="Patricia Gucci" label="Patricia Gucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q509894" start="26801" end="26816" title="Alexandra Zazzi" label="Alexandra Zazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16222146" start="26896" end="26916" title="Alexandra Zertsalova" label="Alexandra Zertsalova"/>
<link wikidata="Q515770" start="26947" end="26968" title="Alexandra Zhukovskaya" label="Alexandra Zhukovskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q107419505" start="27015" end="27035" title="Alexandra Zimmermann" label="Alexandra Zimmermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784549" start="27070" end="27089" title="Alexandra Zvorigina" label="Alexandra Zvorigina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16283372" start="27144" end="27163" title="Aleksandra Antonova (disambiguation)" label="Aleksandra Antonova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832586" start="27182" end="27202" title="Aleksandra Avramović" label="Aleksandra Avramović"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832581" start="27244" end="27263" title="Aleksandra Crnčević" label="Aleksandra Crnčević"/>
<link wikidata="Q26236430" start="27305" end="27326" title="Aleksandra Crvendakić" label="Aleksandra Crvendakić"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832583" start="27368" end="27389" title="Aleksandra Cvetićanin" label="Aleksandra Cvetićanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28479817" start="27431" end="27451" title="Aleksandra Dimitrova" label="Aleksandra Dimitrova"/>
<link wikidata="Q60617247" start="27488" end="27509" title="Aleksandra Dulkiewicz" label="Aleksandra Dulkiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q236494" start="27539" end="27558" title="Aleksandra Fedoriva" label="Aleksandra Fedoriva"/>
<link wikidata="Q15206763" start="27590" end="27612" title="Aleksandra Izmailovich" label="Aleksandra Izmailovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q114817522" start="27653" end="27673" title="Aleksandra Klepaczka" label="Aleksandra Klepaczka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643793" start="27723" end="27762" title="Alexandrine von Hutten-Czapska" label="Aleksandra Adamovna Kolemina-Bacheracht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631763" start="27794" end="27811" title="Aleksandra Krunić" label="Aleksandra Krunić"/>
<link wikidata="Q47543969" start="27849" end="27872" title="Aleksandra Maltsevskaya" label="Aleksandra Maltsevskaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q15137788" start="27909" end="27931" title="Aleksandra Melnichenko" label="Aleksandra Melnichenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q502071" start="28034" end="28052" title="Andrey Melnichenko (industrialist)" label="Andrey Melnichenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q112109122" start="28055" end="28073" title="Aleksandra Perišić" label="Aleksandra Perišić"/>
<link wikidata="Q20820894" start="28120" end="28139" title="Aleksandra Prijović" label="Aleksandra Prijović"/>
<link wikidata="Q56648680" start="28179" end="28202" title="Aleksandra Przegalińska" label="Aleksandra Przegalińska"/>
<link wikidata="Q16221128" start="28234" end="28253" title="Aleksandra Ranković" label="Aleksandra Ranković"/>
<link wikidata="Q57561557" start="28295" end="28318" title="Aleksandra Shchekoldina" label="Aleksandra Shchekoldina"/>
<link wikidata="Q22957150" start="28358" end="28379" title="Aleksandra Stepanović" label="Aleksandra Stepanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q58836722" start="28421" end="28442" title="Aleksandra Vukajlović" label="Aleksandra Vukajlović"/>
<link wikidata="Q232626" start="28482" end="28500" title="Aleksandra Wozniak" label="Aleksandra Wozniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715596" start="28539" end="28566" title="Aleksandra Ziółkowska-Boehm" label="Aleksandra Ziółkowska-Boehm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742272" start="28667" end="28682" title="Mystic Defender" label="Mystic Defender"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900356" start="28691" end="28700" title="Alexandra (Nikita character)" label="Alexandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001555" start="28773" end="28796" title="Wildwood Chronicles" label="The Wildwood Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127386" start="28880" end="28893" title="Rainbow Magic" label="Rainbow Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745401" start="28983" end="29002" title="The Land of Stories" label="The Land of Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412109" start="29011" end="29027" title="Alexandra Borgia" label="Alexandra Borgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q607664" start="29138" end="29150" title="Lexie Carver" label="Lexie Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060973" start="29216" end="29231" title="Alexandra Cabot" label="Alexandra Cabot"/>
<link wikidata="Q426432" start="29416" end="29436" title="Walker, Texas Ranger" label="Walker, Texas Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q106824359" start="29526" end="29532" title="Chucky (TV series)" label="Chucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q53865444" start="29627" end="29639" title="Alex Danvers" label="Alex Danvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708998" start="29719" end="29730" title="Alex Dunphy" label="Alex Dunphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720636" start="29803" end="29818" title="Alexandra Eames" label="Alexandra Eames"/>
<link wikidata="Q212340" start="29958" end="29979" title="To Kill A Mockingbird" label="To Kill A Mockingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q482715" start="30054" end="30078" title="Kuroko&amp;#x27;s Basketball" label="Kuroko&amp;#x27;s Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467529" start="30110" end="30120" title="Lexie Grey" label="Lexie Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014320" start="30230" end="30246" title="Sanya V. Litvyak" label="Sanya V. Litvyak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500957" start="30417" end="30446" title="The Secret World of Alex Mack" label="The Secret World of Alex Mack"/>
<link wikidata="Q384512" start="30583" end="30593" title="Alex Russo" label="Alex Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145383" start="30732" end="30742" title="Alex Vause" label="Alex Vause"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099650" start="30841" end="30864" title="Orange Is The New Black" label="Orange Is The New Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715567" start="30873" end="30893" title="Aleksandra Billewicz" label="Aleksandra Billewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18515944" start="31055" end="31064" title="Overwatch (video game)" label="Overwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701640" start="31137" end="31149" title="Team StarKid" label="Team StarKid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701640" start="31163" end="31185" title="Black Friday (musical)" label="Black Friday (musical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q923" start="31204" end="31213" title="Alexander" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899021" start="31216" end="31239" title="Alexandria (given name)" label="Alexandria (given name)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2536" wikidata="Q712414" url="?curid=2536" title="Articolo 31">
<text>Articolo 31 is a band from Milan, Italy, formed in 1990 by J-Ax and DJ Jad, combining hip hop, funk, pop and traditional Italian musical forms. They are one of the most popular Italian hip hop groups.

==Band history==
Articolo 31 were formed by rapper J-Ax (real name Alessandro Aleotti) and DJ Jad (Vito Luca Perrini).
In the spoken intro of the album &quot;Strade di Città&quot; (&quot;City Streets&quot;), it is stated that the band is named after the article of the Irish constitution guaranteeing freedom of the press, although article 31 of the Irish constitution is not about the freedom of the press. They probably meant the Section 31 of the Broadcasting Authority Act.

Articolo 31 released one of the first Italian hip hop records, &quot;Strade di città&quot;, in 1993. Soon, they signed with BMG Ricordi and started to mix rap with pop music – a move that earned them great commercial success but that alienated the underground hip hop scene, who perceived them as traitors.
In 1997, DJ Gruff dissed Articolo 31 in a track titled &quot;1 vs 2&quot; on the first album of the beatmaker Fritz da Cat, starting a feud that would go on for years. 

In 2001, Articolo 31 collaborated with the American old school rapper Kurtis Blow on the album &quot;XChé SI!&quot;. In the same year, they made the film &quot;Senza filtro&quot; (in English, &quot;Without filter&quot;). Their producer was Franco Godi, who also produced the music for the &quot;Signor Rossi&quot; animated series.

Their 2002 album &quot;Domani smetto&quot; represented a further departure from hip hop, increasingly relying on the formula of rapping over pop music samples. Several of their songs rotate around the theme of soft drugs legalization in Italy (pointing strongly in favour).

Following their 2003 album &quot;Italiano medio&quot;, the band took a break. Both J-Ax and DJ Jad have been involved with solo projects. In 2006, the group declared an indefinite hiatus.

Their posse, &quot;Spaghetti Funk&quot;, includes other popular performers like Space One and pop rappers Gemelli DiVersi.

On 4 December 2022, it was officially announced Articolo 31 participation in the Sanremo Music Festival 2023. &quot;Un bel viaggio&quot; was later announced as their entry for the Sanremo Music Festival 2023.

==Band members==
*J-Ax – vocals
*DJ Jad – turntables

==Discography==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q712414" start="0" end="11" title="Articolo 31" label="Articolo 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="27" end="32" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="34" end="39" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749089" start="59" end="63" title="J-Ax" label="J-Ax"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="86" end="93" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="95" end="99" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="101" end="104" title="Pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749089" start="253" end="257" title="J-Ax" label="J-Ax"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="471" end="489" title="Irish constitution" label="Irish constitution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="634" end="678" title="Censorship_in_the_Republic_of_Ireland#The_Troubles" label="Section 31 of the Broadcasting Authority Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q770103" start="805" end="816" title="Bertelsmann Music Group" label="BMG Ricordi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700427" start="997" end="1005" title="DJ Gruff" label="DJ Gruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q868855" start="1210" end="1220" title="old school hip hop" label="old school"/>
<link wikidata="Q961447" start="1228" end="1239" title="Kurtis Blow" label="Kurtis Blow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955506" start="1318" end="1330" title="Senza filtro" label="Senza filtro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3955506" start="1356" end="1370" title="Without filter" label="Without filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q953620" start="1398" end="1409" title="Franco Godi" label="Franco Godi"/>
<link wikidata="Q176274" start="1945" end="1951" title="Recess (break)" label="hiatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965854" start="1973" end="1987" title="Spaghetti Funk" label="Spaghetti Funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431526" start="2060" end="2075" title="Gemelli DiVersi" label="Gemelli DiVersi"/>
<link wikidata="Q112221136" start="2159" end="2186" title="Sanremo Music Festival 2023" label="Sanremo Music Festival 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749089" start="2306" end="2310" title="J-Ax" label="J-Ax"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2543" wikidata="Q48211" url="?curid=2543" title="Alexander Kerensky">
<text>Alexander Fyodorovich Kerensky ( – 11 June 1970) was a Russian lawyer and revolutionary who led the Russian Provisional Government and the short-lived Russian Republic for three months from late July to early November 1917 (N.S.).

After the February Revolution of 1917, he joined the newly formed provisional government, first as Minister of Justice, then as Minister of War, and after July as the government&#x27;s second Minister-Chairman. He was the leader of the social-democratic Trudovik faction of the Socialist Revolutionary Party. Kerensky was also a vice-chairman of the Petrograd Soviet, a position that held a sizable amount of power. Kerensky became the prime minister of the Provisional Government, and his tenure was consumed with World War I. Despite mass opposition to the war, Kerensky chose to continue Russia&#x27;s participation. His government cracked down on anti-war sentiment and dissent in 1917, which made his administration even more unpopular.

Kerensky remained in power until the October Revolution. This revolution saw the Bolsheviks create a government led by them in a coalition with Left SRs, to replace Kerensky&#x27;s government. Kerensky fled Russia and lived the remainder of his life in exile. He divided his time between Paris and New York City. Kerensky worked for the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, California.

==Biography==
=== Early life and activism ===
Alexander Kerensky was born in Simbirsk (now Ulyanovsk) on the Volga river on 4 May 1881 and was the eldest son in the family. His father, Fyodor Mikhailovich Kerensky, was a teacher and director of the local gymnasium and was later promoted to be an inspector of public schools. His paternal grandfather Mikhail Ivanovich served as a priest in the village of Kerenka in the Gorodishchensky district of the Penza Governorate from 1830. The surname Kerensky comes from the name of this village. His maternal grandfather was head of the Topographical Bureau of the Kazan Military District. His mother, Nadezhda Aleksandrovna (née Adler), was the granddaughter of a former serf who had managed to purchase his freedom before serfdom was abolished in 1861. He subsequently embarked upon a mercantile career, in which he prospered. This allowed him to move his business to Moscow, where he continued his success and became a wealthy Moscow merchant.

Members of the Kerensky and Ulyanov families were friends; Kerensky&#x27;s father was the teacher of Vladimir Ulyanov (Lenin) and had even secured him acceptance into the University of Kazan. In 1889, when Kerensky was eight, the family moved to Tashkent, where his father had been appointed the main inspector of public schools (superintendent). Kerensky graduated with honours in 1899. The same year he entered St. Petersburg University, where he studied history and philology. The next year he switched to law. He earned his law degree in 1904 and married Olga Lvovna Baranovskaya, the daughter of a Russian general, the same year. Kerensky joined the Narodnik movement and worked as a legal counsel to victims of the Revolution of 1905. At the end of 1904, he was jailed on suspicion of belonging to a militant group. Afterwards, he gained a reputation for his work as a defence lawyer in a number of political trials of revolutionaries.

In 1912, Kerensky became widely known when he visited the goldfields at the Lena River and published material about the Lena massacre. In the same year, Kerensky was elected to the Fourth Duma as a member of the Trudoviks, a socialist, non-Marxist labour party founded by Alexis Aladin that was associated with the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, and joined a Freemason society uniting the anti-monarchy forces that strived for democratic renewal of Russia. In fact, the Socialist Revolutionary Party bought Kerensky a house, as he otherwise would not be eligible for election to the Duma, according to the Russian property-laws.

During the 4th Session of the Fourth Duma in spring 1915, Kerensky appealed to Mikhail Rodzianko with a request from the Council of elders to inform the tsar that to succeed in the war he must:
# change his domestic policy,
# proclaim a General Amnesty for political prisoners,
# restore the Constitution of Finland,
# declare autonomy of Poland,
# provide national minorities autonomy in the field of culture,
# abolish restrictions against Jews,
# end religious intolerance,
# stop the harassment of legal trade union organizations.

In August, he became a significant member of the Progressive Bloc, which included several socialist parties, Mensheviks, and Liberals – but not Bolsheviks. He was a brilliant orator and skilled parliamentary leader of the socialist opposition to the government of Tsar Nicholas II.

Kerensky was an active member of the irregular Freemasonic lodge, the Grand Orient of Russia&#x27;s Peoples, which derived from the Grand Orient of France. Kerensky was Secretary-General of the Grand Orient of Russia&#x27;s Peoples and stood down following his ascent to the government in July 1917. He was succeeded by a Menshevik, Alexander Halpern.

=== Rasputin ===
In response to bitter resentments held against the imperial favourite Grigori Rasputin in the midst of Russia&#x27;s failing effort in World War I, Kerensky, at the opening of the Duma on 2 November 1916, called the imperial ministers &quot;hired assassins&quot; and &quot;cowards&quot;, and alleged that they were &quot;guided by the contemptible Grishka Rasputin!&quot; Grand Duke Nicholas Mikhailovich, Prince Georgy Lvov, and General Mikhail Alekseyev attempted to persuade the Emperor Nicholas II to send away the Empress Alexandra Feodorovna, Rasputin&#x27;s steadfast patron, either to the Livadia Palace in Yalta or to Britain. Mikhail Rodzianko, Zinaida Yusupova (the mother of Felix Yusupov), Alexandra&#x27;s sister Elisabeth, Grand Duchess Victoria and the empress&#x27;s mother-in-law Maria Feodorovna also tried to influence and pressure the imperial couple to remove Rasputin from his position of influence within the imperial household, but without success. According to Kerensky, Rasputin had terrorised the empress by threatening to return to his native village.

Members of the nobility murdered Rasputin in December 1916, and he was buried near the imperial residence in Tsarskoye Selo. Shortly after the February Revolution of 1917, Kerensky ordered soldiers to re-bury the corpse at an unmarked spot in the countryside. However, the truck broke down or was forced to stop because of the snow on Lesnoe Road outside of St. Petersburg. It is likely the corpse was incinerated (between 3 and 7 in the morning) in the cauldrons of the nearby boiler shop of the Saint Petersburg State Polytechnical University, including the coffin, without leaving a single trace.

=== Russian Provisional Government of 1917 ===
When the February Revolution broke out in 1917, Kerensky – together with Pavel Milyukov – was one of its most prominent leaders. As one of the Duma&#x27;s most well-known speakers against the monarchy and as a lawyer and defender of many revolutionaries, Kerensky became a member of the Provisional Committee of the State Duma and was elected vice-chairman of the newly formed Petrograd Soviet. These two bodies, the Duma and the Petrograd Soviet, or – rather – their respective executive committees, soon became each other&#x27;s antagonists on most matters except regarding the end of the tsar&#x27;s autocracy.

The Petrograd Soviet grew to include 3000 to 4000 members, and their meetings could drown in a blur of everlasting orations. At the meeting of to the executive committee of the Petrograd Soviet, or Ispolkom, formed a self-appointed committee, with (eventually) three members from each of the parties represented in the Soviet. Kerensky became one of the members representing the Socialist Revolutionary Party (the SRs).

On , without any consultation with the government, the Ispolkom of the Soviet issued the infamous Order No. 1, intended only for the 160,000-strong Petrograd garrison, but soon interpreted as applicable to all soldiers at the front. The order stipulated that all military units should form committees like the Petrograd Soviet. This led to confusion and &quot;stripping of officers&#x27; authority&quot;; further, &quot;Order No. 3&quot; stipulated that the military was subordinate to Ispolkom in the political hierarchy. The ideas came from a group of socialists and aimed to limit the officers&#x27; power to military affairs. The socialist intellectuals believed the officers to be the most likely counterrevolutionary elements. Kerensky&#x27;s role in these orders is unclear, but he participated in the decisions. But just as before the revolution he had defended many who disliked the tsar, he now saved the lives of many of the tsar&#x27;s civil servants about to be lynched by mobs.

Additionally, the Duma formed an executive committee which eventually became the Russian Provisional Government. As there was little trust between Ispolkom and this government (and as he was about to accept the office of Attorney General in the Provisional Government), Kerensky gave a most passionate speech, not just to the Ispolkom, but to the entire Petrograd Soviet. He then swore, as minister, never to violate democratic values, and ended his speech with the words &quot;I cannot live without the people. In the moment you begin to doubt me, then kill me.&quot; The huge majority (workers and soldiers) gave him great applause, and Kerensky now became the first and &quot;the only one&quot; who participated in both the Provisional Government and the Ispolkom. As a link between Ispolkom and the Provisional Government, Kerensky stood to benefit from this position.

After the first government crisis over Pavel Milyukov&#x27;s secret note re-committing Russia to its original war-aims on 2–4 May, Kerensky became the Minister of War and the dominant figure in the newly formed socialist-liberal coalition government. On 10 May (Julian calendar), Kerensky started for the front and visited one division after another, urging the men to do their duty. His speeches were impressive and convincing for the moment, but had little lasting effect. Under Allied pressure to continue the war, he launched what became known as the Kerensky Offensive against the Austro-Hungarian/German South Army on . At first successful, the offensive soon met strong resistance and the Central Powers riposted with a strong counter-attack. The Russian army retreated and suffered heavy losses, and it became clear from many incidents of desertion, sabotage, and mutiny that the army was no longer willing to attack.

The military heavily criticised Kerensky for his liberal policies, which included stripping officers of their mandates and handing over control to revolutionary-inclined &quot;soldier committees&quot; () instead; abolition of the death penalty; and allowing revolutionary agitators to be present at the front. Many officers scornfully referred to commander-in-chief Kerensky as the &quot;persuader-in-chief&quot;.

On 2 July 1917 the Provisional Government&#x27;s first coalition collapsed over the question of Ukraine&#x27;s autonomy. Following the July Days unrest in Petrograd (3–7 July [16–20 July, N.S.] 1917) and the official suppression of the Bolsheviks, Kerensky succeeded Prince Georgy Lvov as Russia&#x27;s prime minister on . Following the Kornilov Affair, an attempted military coup d&#x27;état at the end of August, and the resignation of the other ministers, he appointed himself Supreme Commander-in-Chief, as well.

On 15 September Kerensky proclaimed Russia a republic, which was contrary to the non-socialists&#x27; understanding that the Provisional Government should hold power only until a Constituent Assembly should meet to decide Russia&#x27;s form of government, but which was in line with the long-proclaimed aim of the Socialist Revolutionary Party. He formed a five-member Directory, which consisted of himself, Minister of Foreign Affairs Mikhail Tereshchenko, Minister of War General Aleksandr Verkhovsky, Minister of the Navy Admiral Dmitry Verderevsky and Minister of Posts and Telegraphs . He retained his post in the final coalition government in October 1917 until the Bolsheviks overthrew it on .
Kerensky faced a major challenge: three years of participation in World War had exhausted Russia, while the provisional government offered little motivation for a victory outside of continuing Russia&#x27;s obligations towards its allies. Russia&#x27;s continued involvement in the war was not popular among the lower and middle classes, and especially not popular among the soldiers. They had all believed that Russia would stop fighting when the Provisional Government took power, and subsequently felt deceived. Furthermore, Vladimir Lenin and his Bolshevik party were promising &quot;peace, land, and bread&quot; under a communist system. The Russian army, war-weary, ill-equipped, dispirited and ill-disciplined, was disintegrating, with soldiers deserting in large numbers. By autumn 1917, an estimated two million men had unofficially left the army.

Kerensky and other political leaders continued Russia&#x27;s involvement in World War I, thinking that a glorious victory was the only way forward, and fearing that the economy, already under huge stress from the war effort, might become increasingly unstable if vital supplies from France and from the United Kingdom ceased flowing. The dilemma of whether to withdraw was a great one, and Kerensky&#x27;s inconsistent and impractical policies further destabilised the army and the country at large.

Furthermore, Kerensky adopted a policy that isolated the right-wing conservatives, both democratic and monarchist-oriented. His philosophy of &quot;no enemies to the left&quot; greatly empowered the Bolsheviks and gave them a free hand, allowing them to take over the military arm or &quot;voyenka&quot; () of the Petrograd and Moscow Soviets. His arrest of Lavr Kornilov and other officers left him without strong allies against the Bolsheviks, who ended up being Kerensky&#x27;s strongest and most determined adversaries, as opposed to the right wing, which evolved into the White movement.
=== October Revolution of 1917 ===

During the Kornilov Affair, Kerensky had distributed arms to the Petrograd workers, and by November most of these armed workers had gone over to the Bolsheviks. On 1917, the Bolsheviks launched the second Russian revolution of the year. Kerensky&#x27;s government in Petrograd had almost no support in the city. Only one small force, a subdivision of the 2nd company of the First Petrograd Women&#x27;s Battalion, also known as The Women&#x27;s Death Battalion, was willing to fight for the government against the Bolsheviks, but this force was overwhelmed by the numerically superior pro-Bolshevik forces, defeated, and captured. The Bolsheviks overthrew the government rapidly by seizing governmental buildings and the Winter Palace.

Kerensky escaped the Bolsheviks and fled to Pskov, where he rallied some loyal troops for an attempt to re-take the city. His troops managed to capture Tsarskoye Selo but were beaten the next day at Pulkovo. Kerensky narrowly escaped, and he spent the next few weeks in hiding before fleeing the country, eventually arriving in France. During the Russian Civil War, he supported neither side, as he opposed both the Bolshevik regime and the White Movement.

=== Personal life ===

Kerensky was married to Olga Lvovna Baranovskaya and they had two sons, Oleg (1905–1984) and Gleb (1907–1990), who both went on to become engineers. Kerensky&#x27;s grandson (also named Oleg), according to the Internet Movie Database, played his grandfather&#x27;s role in the 1981 film &quot;Reds&quot;. Kerensky and Olga were divorced in 1939 soon after he settled in Paris, and, in 1939, while visiting the United States he met and secretly married Lydia Ellen &quot;Nell&quot; Tritton (1899–1946), the Australian former journalist who had become his press secretary and translator. The marriage took place in Martins Creek, Pennsylvania.

When Germany invaded France in 1940, they emigrated to the United States. After the Axis invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, Kerensky offered his support to Joseph Stalin.

When his wife Nell became terminally ill in 1945, Kerensky travelled with her to Brisbane, Australia, and lived there with her family. She suffered a stroke in February 1946, and he remained there until her death on 10 April 1946. Kerensky then returned to the United States, where he spent the rest of his life.

Kerensky eventually settled in New York City, living on the Upper East Side on 91st Street near Central Park but spent much of his time at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University in California, where he both used and contributed to the Institution&#x27;s huge archive on Russian history, and where he taught graduate courses. He wrote and broadcast extensively on Russian politics and history. His last public lecture was delivered at Kalamazoo College in Kalamazoo, Michigan, in October 1967.

== Death ==

Kerensky died of arteriosclerotic heart disease at St. Luke&#x27;s Hospital in New York City on 11 June 1970, after being initially admitted for injuries sustained from a fall. At 89, he was one of the last surviving major participants in the turbulent events of 1917. The local Russian Orthodox Churches in New York City refused to grant Kerensky burial rites because of his association with Freemasonry, and because they saw him as largely responsible for the Bolsheviks&#x27; seizure of power. A Serbian Orthodox Church also refused burial rites. Kerensky&#x27;s body was flown to London, where his two sons resided; he was buried at the non-denominational Putney Vale Cemetery.

==Works==
* &quot;The Prelude to Bolshevism&quot; (1919). .
* &quot;The Catastrophe&quot; (1927)
* &quot;&quot; (1934)
* &quot;&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Memoirs&quot; (1966)

== Archives ==
Papers of the Kerensky family are held at the Cadbury Research Library, University of Birmingham.

==See also==
* Jailbirds of Kerensky

== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Alexander Kerensky Archive at marxists.org
* An account of Kerensky at Stanford in the 1950s</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48211" start="0" end="30" title="Alexander Kerensky" label="Alexander Fyodorovich Kerensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q239543" start="100" end="130" title="Russian Provisional Government" label="Russian Provisional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q139319" start="151" end="167" title="Russian Republic" label="Russian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="224" end="228" title="New Style" label="N.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="242" end="261" title="February Revolution" label="February Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413677" start="331" end="350" title="Justice ministry" label="Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788820" start="360" end="375" title="Minister of War" label="Minister of War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="417" end="423" title="List of heads of government of Russia#Russian Provisional Republic" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q842386" start="424" end="441" title="Prime Minister of Russia" label="Minister-Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="468" end="485" title="Social democracy" label="social-democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570527" start="486" end="494" title="Trudoviks" label="Trudovik"/>
<link wikidata="Q217009" start="510" end="539" title="Socialist Revolutionary Party" label="Socialist Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249009" start="582" end="598" title="Petrograd Soviet" label="Petrograd Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="747" end="758" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q690308" start="823" end="850" title="Kerensky offensive" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s participation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="1012" end="1030" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="1056" end="1066" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q919883" start="1119" end="1127" title="Left SRs" label="Left SRs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147088" start="1312" end="1330" title="Hoover Institution" label="Hoover Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1334" end="1353" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5627" start="1459" end="1468" title="Ulyanovsk" label="Ulyanovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="1477" end="1482" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="1623" end="1632" title="gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424567" start="1821" end="1838" title="Penza Governorate" label="Penza Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="1977" end="1982" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120420" start="1983" end="2000" title="Military district (Russian Empire)" label="Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="2084" end="2088" title="serf" label="serf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192212" start="2136" end="2165" title="Emancipation reform of 1861" label="serfdom was abolished in 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="2461" end="2485" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Ulyanov (Lenin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q269" start="2606" end="2614" title="Tashkent" label="Tashkent"/>
<link wikidata="Q27621" start="2773" end="2798" title="St. Petersburg University" label="St. Petersburg University"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="2829" end="2838" title="philology" label="philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q216741" start="3015" end="3023" title="Narodnik" label="Narodnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="3081" end="3099" title="Revolution of 1905" label="Revolution of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q46841" start="3379" end="3389" title="Lena River" label="Lena River"/>
<link wikidata="Q578858" start="3423" end="3436" title="Lena massacre" label="Lena massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146576" start="3484" end="3495" title="Fourth Duma" label="Fourth Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570527" start="3515" end="3524" title="Trudoviks" label="Trudoviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q208701" start="3551" end="3563" title="Labour movement" label="labour party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060434" start="3575" end="3588" title="Alexis Theodorovich Aladin" label="Alexis Aladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217009" start="3618" end="3647" title="Socialist-Revolutionary Party" label="Socialist-Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="3662" end="3671" title="Freemason" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q608740" start="4012" end="4029" title="Mikhail Rodzianko" label="Mikhail Rodzianko"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="4241" end="4248" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="4272" end="4278" title="Congress Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995589" start="4518" end="4534" title="Progressive Bloc (Russia)" label="Progressive Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q191515" start="4578" end="4588" title="Mensheviks" label="Mensheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="4613" end="4623" title="Bolsheviks" label="Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="4738" end="4749" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="4799" end="4810" title="Freemasonic" label="Freemasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625529" start="4822" end="4859" title="Grand Orient of Russia&amp;#x27;s Peoples" label="Grand Orient of Russia&amp;#x27;s Peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542667" start="4884" end="4906" title="Grand Orient of France" label="Grand Orient of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q42296908" start="5085" end="5102" title="Alexander Halpern" label="Alexander Halpern"/>
<link wikidata="Q43989" start="5192" end="5208" title="Grigori Rasputin" label="Grigori Rasputin"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5257" end="5268" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q535400" start="5505" end="5526" title="Grand Duke Nicholas Mikhailovich of Russia" label="Nicholas Mikhailovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q297032" start="5535" end="5546" title="Georgy Lvov" label="Georgy Lvov"/>
<link wikidata="Q354108" start="5560" end="5577" title="Mikhail Alekseyev" label="Mikhail Alekseyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="5612" end="5623" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152094" start="5649" end="5669" title="Alexandra Feodorovna (Alix of Hesse)" label="Alexandra Feodorovna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055311" start="5719" end="5733" title="Livadia Palace" label="Livadia Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q128499" start="5737" end="5742" title="Yalta" label="Yalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="5749" end="5756" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q608740" start="5758" end="5775" title="Mikhail Rodzianko" label="Mikhail Rodzianko"/>
<link wikidata="Q899088" start="5777" end="5793" title="Zinaida Yusupova" label="Zinaida Yusupova"/>
<link wikidata="Q312997" start="5809" end="5822" title="Felix Yusupov" label="Felix Yusupov"/>
<link wikidata="Q58063" start="5849" end="5858" title="Princess Elisabeth of Hesse and by Rhine (1864–1918)" label="Elisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q164500" start="5874" end="5882" title="Princess Victoria Melita of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q153601" start="5920" end="5936" title="Maria Feodorovna (Dagmar of Denmark)" label="Maria Feodorovna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621200" start="6313" end="6327" title="Tsarskoye Selo" label="Tsarskoye Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="6347" end="6366" title="February Revolution" label="February Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317634" start="6658" end="6666" title="cauldron" label="cauldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379834" start="6701" end="6748" title="Saint Petersburg State Polytechnical University" label="Saint Petersburg State Polytechnical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="6861" end="6880" title="February Revolution" label="February Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q380286" start="6925" end="6939" title="Pavel Milyukov" label="Pavel Milyukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q844793" start="6995" end="6999" title="Duma" label="Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972722" start="7139" end="7178" title="Provisional Committee of the State Duma" label="Provisional Committee of the State Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249009" start="7229" end="7245" title="Petrograd Soviet" label="Petrograd Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q122676953" start="7665" end="7673" title="Ispolkom" label="Ispolkom"/>
<link wikidata="Q217009" start="7846" end="7875" title="Socialist Revolutionary Party" label="Socialist Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q814162" start="7986" end="7997" title="Petrograd Soviet Order No. 1" label="Order No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q239543" start="8962" end="8992" title="Russian Provisional Government" label="Russian Provisional Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q380286" start="9794" end="9808" title="Pavel Milyukov" label="Pavel Milyukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788820" start="9906" end="9921" title="Minister of War" label="Minister of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="10017" end="10032" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="10236" end="10242" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q690308" start="10310" end="10328" title="Kerensky Offensive" label="Kerensky Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="10451" end="10465" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="11193" end="11200" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322251" start="11232" end="11241" title="July Days" label="July Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q297032" start="11371" end="11382" title="Georgy Lvov" label="Georgy Lvov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369584" start="11434" end="11449" title="Kornilov Affair" label="Kornilov Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="11473" end="11489" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="11585" end="11603" title="Commander-in-Chief" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468062" start="11794" end="11814" title="Russian Constituent Assembly" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468389" start="12051" end="12071" title="Mikhail Tereshchenko" label="Mikhail Tereshchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4109115" start="12097" end="12117" title="Aleksandr Verkhovsky" label="Aleksandr Verkhovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4107587" start="12148" end="12166" title="Dmitry Verderevsky" label="Dmitry Verderevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="12844" end="12858" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="12867" end="12876" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4157640" start="12963" end="12975" title="Russian Army (1917)" label="Russian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="13457" end="13463" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="13477" end="13491" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q276193" start="14033" end="14046" title="Lavr Kornilov" label="Lavr Kornilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="14252" end="14266" title="White movement" label="White movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369584" start="14315" end="14330" title="Kornilov Affair" label="Kornilov Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="14369" end="14378" title="Petrograd" label="Petrograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="14502" end="14527" title="October Revolution" label="second Russian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14678" end="14716" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Battalion#1st Petrograd Women&amp;#x27;s Battalion" label="First Petrograd Women&amp;#x27;s Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2214" start="15085" end="15090" title="Pskov" label="Pskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q597026" start="15134" end="15161" title="Kerensky–Krasnov uprising" label="attempt to re-take the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621200" start="15193" end="15207" title="Tsarskoye Selo" label="Tsarskoye Selo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117923" start="15240" end="15247" title="Pulkovo Heights" label="Pulkovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="15388" end="15405" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="15482" end="15496" title="White Movement" label="White Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019126" start="15594" end="15598" title="Oleg Kerensky" label="Oleg"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="15728" end="15755" title="IMDb.com" label="the Internet Movie Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q597239" start="15815" end="15819" title="Reds (film)" label="Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648472" start="15974" end="16010" title="Lydia Ellen Tritton" label="Lydia Ellen &amp;quot;Nell&amp;quot; Tritton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404052" start="16135" end="16162" title="Martins Creek, Pennsylvania" label="Martins Creek, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="16170" end="16200" title="Battle of France" label="Germany invaded France in 1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="16249" end="16282" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Axis invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="16324" end="16337" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="16421" end="16429" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q455587" start="16714" end="16729" title="Upper East Side" label="Upper East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278230" start="16733" end="16744" title="91st Street (Manhattan)" label="91st Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="16750" end="16762" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147088" start="16797" end="16815" title="Hoover Institution" label="Hoover Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="16819" end="16838" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q161414" start="16931" end="16946" title="Russian history" label="Russian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="17185" end="17215" title="arteriosclerotic heart disease" label="arteriosclerotic heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q41559830" start="17219" end="17243" title="Mount Sinai Morningside" label="St. Luke&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q912932" start="17441" end="17470" title="Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia" label="local Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="17561" end="17572" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188814" start="17667" end="17690" title="Serbian Orthodox Church" label="Serbian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114941" start="17828" end="17848" title="Putney Vale Cemetery" label="Putney Vale Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q223429" start="18109" end="18133" title="University of Birmingham" label="University of Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614833" start="18151" end="18172" title="Jailbirds of Kerensky" label="Jailbirds of Kerensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906210" start="18300" end="18312" title="marxists.org" label="marxists.org"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2544" wikidata="Q110299" url="?curid=2544" title="Ansgar">
<text>Ansgar (8 September 801 – 3 February 865), also known as Anskar, Saint Ansgar, Saint Anschar or Oscar, was Archbishop of Hamburg-Bremen in the northern part of the Kingdom of the East Franks. Ansgar became known as the &quot;Apostle of the North&quot; because of his travels and the See of Hamburg received the missionary mandate to bring Christianity to Northern Europe.

==Life==
Ansgar was the son of a noble Frankish family, born near Amiens (present day France). After his mother&#x27;s early death, Ansgar was brought up in Benedictine monastery of Corbie in Picardy. According to the &quot;Vita Ansgarii&quot; (&quot;Life of Ansgar&quot;), when the little boy learned in a vision that his mother was in the company of Mary, mother of Jesus, his careless attitude toward spiritual matters changed to seriousness. His pupil, successor, and eventual biographer Rimbert considered the visions (of which this was the first) to have been Ansgar&#x27;s main life motivator.

Ansgar acted in the context of the phase of Christianization of Saxony (present day Northern Germany) begun by Charlemagne and continued by Charlemagne&#x27;s son and successor, Louis the Pious. In 822 Ansgar became one of many missionaries sent to found the abbey of Corvey (New Corbie) in Westphalia, where he became a teacher and preacher. A group of monks including Ansgar were sent further north to Jutland with the king Harald Klak, who had received baptism during his exile. With Harald&#x27;s downfall in 827 and Ansgar&#x27;s companion Autbert having died, their school for the sons of courtiers closed and Ansgar returned to Germany. Then in 829, after the Swedish king Björn at Hauge requested missionaries for his Swedes, King Louis sent Ansgar, now accompanied by friar Witmar from New Corbie as his assistant. Ansgar preached and made converts, particularly during six months at Birka, on Lake Mälaren, where the wealthy widow Mor Frideborg extended hospitality. Ansgar organized a small congregation with her and the king&#x27;s steward, Hergeir, as its most prominent members.

In 831 Ansgar returned to Louis&#x27; court at Worms and was appointed to the Archbishopric of Hamburg-Bremen. This was a new archbishopric, incorporating the bishoprics of Bremen and Verden and with the right to send missions into all the northern lands, as well as to consecrate bishops for them. Ansgar received the mission of evangelizing pagan Denmark, Norway and Sweden. The King of Sweden decided to cast lots as to whether to admit the Christian missionaries into his kingdom. Ansgar recommended the issue to the care of God, and the lot was favorable. Ansgar was consecrated as a bishop in November 831, with the approval of Gregory IV. Before traveling north once again, Ansgar traveled to Rome to receive the pallium directly from the pope&#x27;s hands, and was formally named legate for the northern lands. Ebbo, Archbishop of Reims had previously received a similar commission, but would be deposed twice before his death in 851, and never actually traveled so far north, so the jurisdiction was divided by agreement, with Ebbo retaining Sweden for himself. For a time Ansgar devoted himself to the needs of his own diocese, which was still a missionary territory and had few churches. He founded a monastery and a school in Hamburg. Although intended to serve the Danish mission further north, it accomplished little.

After Louis the Pious died in 840, his empire was divided and Ansgar lost the abbey of Turholt, which Louis had given to endow Ansgar&#x27;s work. Then in 845, the Danes unexpectedly raided Hamburg, destroying all the church&#x27;s treasures and books. Ansgar now had neither see nor revenue, and many helpers deserted him. The new king, Louis&#x27; third son, Louis the German, did not re-endow Turholt to Ansgar, but in 847 he named the missionary to the vacant diocese of Bremen, where Ansgar moved in 848. However, since Bremen had been suffragan to the Bishop of Cologne, combining the sees of Bremen and Hamburg presented canonical difficulties. After prolonged negotiations, Pope Nicholas I would approve the union of the two dioceses in 864.

Through this political turmoil, Ansgar continued his northern mission. The Danish civil war compelled him to establish good relations with two kings, Horik the Elder and his son, Horik II. Both assisted him until his death; Ansgar was able to secure permission to build a church in Sleswick north of Hamburg and recognition of Christianity as a tolerated religion. Ansgar did not forget the Swedish mission, and spent two years there in person (848–850), averting a threatened pagan reaction. In 854, Ansgar returned to Sweden when king Olof ruled in Birka. According to Rimbert, he was well disposed to Christianity. On a Viking raid to Apuole (current village in Lithuania) in Courland, the Swedes plundered the Curonians.

==Death and legacy==

Ansgar was buried in Bremen in 865. His successor as archbishop, Rimbert, wrote the &quot;Vita Ansgarii&quot;. He noted that Ansgar wore a rough hair shirt, lived on bread and water, and showed great charity to the poor. Adam of Bremen attributed the &quot;Vita et miracula of Willehad&quot; (first bishop of Bremen) to Ansgar in &quot;Gesta Hammenburgensis ecclesiæ&quot;; Ansgar is also the reputed author of a collection of brief prayers &quot;Pigmenta&quot; (ed. J. M. Lappenberg, Hamburg, 1844). Pope Nicholas I declared Ansgar a saint shortly after the missionary&#x27;s death. The first actual missionary in Sweden and the Nordic countries (and organizer of the Catholic church therein), Ansgar was later declared &quot;Patron of Scandinavia&quot;.

Relics are located in Hamburg in two places: St. Mary&#x27;s Cathedral (Ger.: Domkirche St. Marien) and St. Ansgar&#x27;s and St. Bernard&#x27;s Church (Ger.: St. Ansgar und St. Bernhard Kirche).
Statues of Bishop Ansgar stand in Hamburg, Copenhagen and Ribe, as well as a stone cross at Birka. His feast day (Lesser Festival) is 3 February, as it is in the Church of England, the Episcopal Church, and the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America.

==Visions==

Although a historical document and primary source written by a man whose existence can be proven historically, the &quot;Vita Ansgarii&quot; (&quot;The Life of Ansgar&quot;) aims above all to demonstrate Ansgar&#x27;s sanctity. It is partly concerned with Ansgar&#x27;s visions, which, according to the author Rimbert, encouraged and assisted Ansgar&#x27;s remarkable missionary feats.

Through the course of this work, Ansgar repeatedly embarks on a new stage in his career following a vision. According to Rimbert, his early studies and ensuing devotion to the ascetic life of a monk were inspired by a vision of his mother in the presence of Mary, mother of Jesus. Again, when the Swedish people were left without a priest for some time, he begged King Horik to help him with this problem; then after receiving his consent, consulted with Bishop Gautbert to find a suitable man. The two together sought the approval of King Louis, which he granted when he learned that they were in agreement on the issue. Ansgar was convinced he was commanded by heaven to undertake this mission and was influenced by a vision he received when he was concerned about the journey, in which he met a man who reassured him of his purpose and informed him of a prophet that he would meet, the abbot Adalhard, who would instruct him in what was to happen. In the vision, he searched for and found Adalhard, who quoted to him &quot;Islands, listen to me, pay attention, remotest peoples&quot; (Isaiah 49:1). Ansgar interpreted this as showing God&#x27;s will that he go to the Scandinavian countries as &quot;most of that country consisted of islands, especially when Adalhard added &quot;I will make you the light of the nations so that my salvation may reach to the ends of the earth&quot; (Isaiah 49:6), since the end of the world in the north was in Swedish territory.

==See also==
*List of Eastern Orthodox saints
*Calendar of saints (Episcopal Church)
* Hochkirchlicher Apostolat St. Ansgar
* Priory of St. Ansgar
* Sankt-Ansgar-Schule
*&quot;Vita Ansgarii&quot;

==References==

==Further reading==
* Jakobsson, Sverrir. &quot;Mission Miscarried: The Narrators of the Ninth-Century Missions to Scandinavia and Central Europe&quot;. Bulgaria Medievalis 2 (2011), 49–69.
* Palmer, James T., &quot;Rimbert&#x27;s Vita Anskarii and the Scandinavian Mission in the Ninth Century&quot;. Journal of Ecclesiastical History 55/2 (2004), 235–56.
* Pryce, Mark. &quot;Literary Companion to the Festivals: A Poetic Gathering to Accompany Liturgical Celebrations of Commemorations and Festivals.&quot; Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 2003.
* Tschan, Francis J. &quot;History of the Archbishops of Hamburg-Bremen&quot;. New York: Columbia University Press, 1959.

==External links==

*Ansgar at Birka History of Birka
*Vita Ansgari, English translation from Medieval sourcebook
*German History Forum
*ANSKAR The Apostle of the North (801–865). Translated from the Vita Anskarii by Bishop Rimbert his fellow missionary and successor. BY CHARLES H. ROBINSON. Im BTM format
&lt;br&gt;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q110299" start="0" end="6" title="Ansgar" label="Ansgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q110299" start="57" end="63" title="Ansgar" label="Anskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q110299" start="65" end="77" title="Ansgar" label="Saint Ansgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q110299" start="79" end="92" title="Ansgar" label="Saint Anschar"/>
<link wikidata="Q110299" start="96" end="101" title="Ansgar" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q837128" start="107" end="135" title="Archbishopric of Bremen" label="Archbishop of Hamburg-Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q153080" start="164" end="190" title="Kingdom of the East Franks" label="Kingdom of the East Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q254336" start="283" end="297" title="See of Hamburg" label="See of Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="412" end="420" title="Franks" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q41604" start="439" end="445" title="Amiens" label="Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="530" end="551" title="Order of Saint Benedict" label="Benedictine monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q333888" start="555" end="561" title="Corbie Abbey" label="Corbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249603" start="565" end="572" title="Picardy" label="Picardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q487959" start="597" end="609" title="Vita Ansgari" label="Vita Ansgari"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="725" end="746" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary, mother of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q506140" start="865" end="872" title="Rimbert" label="Rimbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="1019" end="1035" title="Christianization" label="Christianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q164092" start="1039" end="1045" title="Duchy of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q46613" start="1059" end="1075" title="Northern Germany" label="Northern Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="1086" end="1097" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q43974" start="1153" end="1168" title="Louis the Pious" label="Louis the Pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q56004" start="1243" end="1249" title="Corvey" label="Corvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8614" start="1266" end="1276" title="Westphalia" label="Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389" start="1379" end="1386" title="Jutland" label="Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q714874" start="1401" end="1412" title="Harald Klak" label="Harald Klak"/>
<link wikidata="Q879088" start="1655" end="1669" title="Björn at Hauge" label="Björn at Hauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q165192" start="1701" end="1707" title="Swedes" label="Swedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208177" start="1868" end="1873" title="Birka" label="Birka"/>
<link wikidata="Q184492" start="1883" end="1890" title="Mälaren" label="Mälaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q21282397" start="1916" end="1929" title="Mor Frideborg" label="Mor Frideborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852" start="2116" end="2121" title="Worms, Germany" label="Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q837128" start="2147" end="2178" title="Prince-Archbishopric of Bremen" label="Archbishopric of Hamburg-Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q486551" start="2253" end="2259" title="Verden, Germany" label="Verden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="2418" end="2425" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="2427" end="2433" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="2438" end="2444" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q167052" start="2703" end="2713" title="Pope Gregory IV" label="Gregory IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q200691" start="2789" end="2796" title="pallium" label="pallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q819901" start="2888" end="2913" title="Ebbo, Archbishop of Reims" label="Ebbo, Archbishop of Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q43974" start="3408" end="3423" title="Louis the Pious" label="Louis the Pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q270633" start="3489" end="3496" title="Torhout" label="Turholt"/>
<link wikidata="Q164714" start="3566" end="3571" title="Danes" label="Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q152463" start="3763" end="3779" title="Louis the German" label="Louis the German"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426709" start="3943" end="3952" title="suffragan" label="suffragan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170503" start="4084" end="4099" title="Pope Nicholas I" label="Pope Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787996" start="4303" end="4318" title="Horik I" label="Horik the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667498" start="4332" end="4340" title="Horik II" label="Horik II"/>
<link wikidata="Q165414" start="4435" end="4443" title="Hedeby" label="Sleswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712699" start="4690" end="4694" title="Olof (I) of Sweden" label="Olof"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506125" start="4791" end="4797" title="Apuole" label="Apuole"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="4818" end="4827" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="4832" end="4840" title="Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q756922" start="4867" end="4876" title="Curonians" label="Curonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="4922" end="4928" title="Bremen (city)" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q506140" start="4966" end="4973" title="Rimbert" label="Rimbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q487959" start="4991" end="5003" title="Vita Ansgari" label="Vita Ansgari"/>
<link wikidata="Q170503" start="5402" end="5417" title="Pope Nicholas I" label="Pope Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="5531" end="5547" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="5638" end="5649" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="5680" end="5687" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="5888" end="5895" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="5897" end="5907" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q322361" start="5912" end="5916" title="Ribe" label="Ribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q208177" start="5946" end="5951" title="Birka" label="Birka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019506" start="5957" end="5966" title="Calendar of saints (Church of England)" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531487" start="5968" end="5983" title="Lesser Festival (Anglicanism)" label="Lesser Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315" start="5988" end="5998" title="February 3" label="3 February"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="6016" end="6033" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019509" start="6039" end="6055" title="Calendar of saints (Episcopal Church)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="6065" end="6103" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q487959" start="6240" end="6252" title="Vita Ansgari" label="Vita Ansgari"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="6780" end="6785" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="7395" end="7400" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q348198" start="7401" end="7409" title="Adalard of Corbie" label="Adalhard"/>
<link wikidata="Q131458" start="7594" end="7600" title="Book of Isaiah" label="Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569751" start="7988" end="8019" title="List of Eastern Orthodox saints" label="List of Eastern Orthodox saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019509" start="8021" end="8058" title="Calendar of saints (Episcopal Church)" label="Calendar of saints (Episcopal Church)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621913" start="8061" end="8097" title="Hochkirchlicher Apostolat St. Ansgar" label="Hochkirchlicher Apostolat St. Ansgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q258967" start="8100" end="8120" title="Nütschau Priory" label="Priory of St. Ansgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310244" start="8123" end="8142" title="Sankt-Ansgar-Schule" label="Sankt-Ansgar-Schule"/>
<link wikidata="Q487959" start="8150" end="8162" title="Vita Ansgari" label="Vita Ansgari"/>
<link wikidata="Q487959" start="8910" end="8922" title="Vita Ansgari" label="Vita Ansgari"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2546" wikidata="Q431667" url="?curid=2546" title="Automated theorem proving">
<text>Automated theorem proving (also known as ATP or automated deduction) is a subfield of automated reasoning and mathematical logic dealing with proving mathematical theorems by computer programs. Automated reasoning over mathematical proof was a major motivating factor for the development of computer science.

== Logical foundations ==
While the roots of formalized logic go back to Aristotle, the end of the 19th and early 20th centuries saw the development of modern logic and formalized mathematics. Frege&#x27;s &quot;Begriffsschrift&quot; (1879) introduced both a complete propositional calculus and what is essentially modern predicate logic. His &quot;Foundations of Arithmetic&quot;, published in 1884, expressed (parts of) mathematics in formal logic. This approach was continued by Russell and Whitehead in their influential &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot;, first published 1910–1913, and with a revised second edition in 1927. Russell and Whitehead thought they could derive all mathematical truth using axioms and inference rules of formal logic, in principle opening up the process to automation. In 1920, Thoralf Skolem simplified a previous result by Leopold Löwenheim, leading to the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem and, in 1930, to the notion of a Herbrand universe and a Herbrand interpretation that allowed (un)satisfiability of first-order formulas (and hence the validity of a theorem) to be reduced to (potentially infinitely many) propositional satisfiability problems.

In 1929, Mojżesz Presburger showed that the first-order theory of the natural numbers with addition and equality (now called Presburger arithmetic in his honor) is decidable and gave an algorithm that could determine if a given sentence in the language was true or false.

However, shortly after this positive result, Kurt Gödel published &quot;On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica and Related Systems&quot; (1931), showing that in any sufficiently strong axiomatic system, there are true statements that cannot be proved in the system. This topic was further developed in the 1930s by Alonzo Church and Alan Turing, who on the one hand gave two independent but equivalent definitions of computability, and on the other gave concrete examples of undecidable questions.

== First implementations ==

Shortly after World War II, the first general-purpose computers became available. In 1954, Martin Davis programmed Presburger&#x27;s algorithm for a JOHNNIAC vacuum-tube computer at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. According to Davis, &quot;Its great triumph was to prove that the sum of two even numbers is even&quot;. More ambitious was the Logic Theorist in 1956, a deduction system for the propositional logic of the &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot;, developed by Allen Newell, Herbert A. Simon and J. C. Shaw. Also running on a JOHNNIAC, the Logic Theorist constructed proofs from a small set of propositional axioms and three deduction rules: modus ponens, (propositional) variable substitution, and the replacement of formulas by their definition. The system used heuristic guidance, and managed to prove 38 of the first 52 theorems of the &quot;Principia&quot;.

The &quot;heuristic&quot; approach of the Logic Theorist tried to emulate human mathematicians, and could not guarantee that a proof could be found for every valid theorem even in principle. In contrast, other, more systematic algorithms achieved, at least theoretically, completeness for first-order logic. Initial approaches relied on the results of Herbrand and Skolem to convert a first-order formula into successively larger sets of propositional formulae by instantiating variables with terms from the Herbrand universe. The propositional formulas could then be checked for unsatisfiability using a number of methods. Gilmore&#x27;s program used conversion to disjunctive normal form, a form in which the satisfiability of a formula is obvious.

== Decidability of the problem ==

Depending on the underlying logic, the problem of deciding the validity of a formula varies from trivial to impossible. For the common case of propositional logic, the problem is decidable but co-NP-complete, and hence only exponential-time algorithms are believed to exist for general proof tasks. For a first-order predicate calculus, Gödel&#x27;s completeness theorem states that the theorems (provable statements) are exactly the semantically valid well-formed formulas, so the valid formulas are computably enumerable: given unbounded resources, any valid formula can eventually be proven. However, &quot;invalid&quot; formulas (those that are &quot;not&quot; entailed by a given theory), cannot always be recognized.

The above applies to first-order theories, such as Peano arithmetic. However, for a specific model that may be described by a first-order theory, some statements may be true but undecidable in the theory used to describe the model. For example, by Gödel&#x27;s incompleteness theorem, we know that any consistent theory whose axioms are true for the natural numbers cannot prove all first-order statements true for the natural numbers, even if the list of axioms is allowed to be infinite enumerable. It follows that an automated theorem prover will fail to terminate while searching for a proof precisely when the statement being investigated is undecidable in the theory being used, even if it is true in the model of interest. Despite this theoretical limit, in practice, theorem provers can solve many hard problems, even in models that are not fully described by any first-order theory (such as the integers).

== Related problems ==

A simpler, but related, problem is &quot;proof verification&quot;, where an existing proof for a theorem is certified valid. For this, it is generally required that each individual proof step can be verified by a primitive recursive function or program, and hence the problem is always decidable.

Since the proofs generated by automated theorem provers are typically very large, the problem of proof compression is crucial, and various techniques aiming at making the prover&#x27;s output smaller, and consequently more easily understandable and checkable, have been developed.

Proof assistants require a human user to give hints to the system. Depending on the degree of automation, the prover can essentially be reduced to a proof checker, with the user providing the proof in a formal way, or significant proof tasks can be performed automatically. Interactive provers are used for a variety of tasks, but even fully automatic systems have proved a number of interesting and hard theorems, including at least one that has eluded human mathematicians for a long time, namely the Robbins conjecture. However, these successes are sporadic, and work on hard problems usually requires a proficient user.

Another distinction is sometimes drawn between theorem proving and other techniques, where a process is considered to be theorem proving if it consists of a traditional proof, starting with axioms and producing new inference steps using rules of inference. Other techniques would include model checking, which, in the simplest case, involves brute-force enumeration of many possible states (although the actual implementation of model checkers requires much cleverness, and does not simply reduce to brute force).

There are hybrid theorem proving systems that use model checking as an inference rule. There are also programs that were written to prove a particular theorem, with a (usually informal) proof that if the program finishes with a certain result, then the theorem is true. A good example of this was the machine-aided proof of the four color theorem, which was very controversial as the first claimed mathematical proof that was essentially impossible to verify by humans due to the enormous size of the program&#x27;s calculation (such proofs are called non-surveyable proofs). Another example of a program-assisted proof is the one that shows that the game of Connect Four can always be won by the first player.

== Applications ==
Commercial use of automated theorem proving is mostly concentrated in integrated circuit design and verification. Since the Pentium FDIV bug, the complicated floating point units of modern microprocessors have been designed with extra scrutiny. AMD, Intel and others use automated theorem proving to verify that division and other operations are correctly implemented in their processors.

Other uses of theorem provers include program synthesis, constructing programs that satisfy a formal specification. Automated theorem provers have been integrated with proof assistants, including Isabelle/HOL.

Applications of theorem provers are also found in natural language processing and formal semantics, where they are used to analyze discourse representations.

==First-order theorem proving==
In the late 1960s agencies funding research in automated deduction began to emphasize the need for practical applications. One of the first fruitful areas was that of program verification whereby first-order theorem provers were applied to the problem of verifying the correctness of computer programs in languages such as Pascal, Ada, etc. Notable among early program verification systems was the Stanford Pascal Verifier developed by David Luckham at Stanford University. This was based on the Stanford Resolution Prover also developed at Stanford using John Alan Robinson&#x27;s resolution principle. This was the first automated deduction system to demonstrate an ability to solve mathematical problems that were announced in the &quot;Notices of the American Mathematical Society&quot; before solutions were formally published.

First-order theorem proving is one of the most mature subfields of automated theorem proving. The logic is expressive enough to allow the specification of arbitrary problems, often in a reasonably natural and intuitive way. On the other hand, it is still semi-decidable, and a number of sound and complete calculi have been developed, enabling &quot;fully&quot; automated systems. More expressive logics, such as higher-order logics, allow the convenient expression of a wider range of problems than first-order logic, but theorem proving for these logics is less well developed.

===Relationship with SMT===

There is substantial overlap between first-order automated theorem provers and SMT solvers. Generally, automated theorem provers focus on supporting full first-order logic with quantifiers, whereas SMT solvers focus more on supporting various theories (interpreted predicate symbols). ATPs excel at problems with lots of quantifiers, whereas SMT solvers do well on large problems without quantifiers. The line is blurry enough that some ATPs participate in SMT-COMP, while some SMT solvers participate in CASC.

==Benchmarks, competitions, and sources ==
The quality of implemented systems has benefited from the existence of a large library of standard benchmark examples—the Thousands of Problems for Theorem Provers (TPTP) Problem Library—as well as from the CADE ATP System Competition (CASC), a yearly competition of first-order systems for many important classes of first-order problems.

Some important systems (all have won at least one CASC competition division) are listed below.
* E is a high-performance prover for full first-order logic, but built on a purely equational calculus, originally developed in the automated reasoning group of Technical University of Munich under the direction of Wolfgang Bibel, and now at Baden-Württemberg Cooperative State University in Stuttgart.
* Otter, developed at the Argonne National Laboratory, is based on first-order resolution and paramodulation. Otter has since been replaced by Prover9, which is paired with Mace4.
* SETHEO is a high-performance system based on the goal-directed model elimination calculus, originally developed by a team under direction of Wolfgang Bibel. E and SETHEO have been combined (with other systems) in the composite theorem prover E-SETHEO.
* Vampire was originally developed and implemented at Manchester University by Andrei Voronkov and Kryštof Hoder. It is now developed by a growing international team. It has won the FOF division (among other divisions) at the CADE ATP System Competition regularly since 2001.
* Waldmeister is a specialized system for unit-equational first-order logic developed by Arnim Buch and Thomas Hillenbrand. It won the CASC UEQ division for fourteen consecutive years (1997–2010).
* SPASS is a first-order logic theorem prover with equality. This is developed by the research group Automation of Logic, Max Planck Institute for Computer Science.

The Theorem Prover Museum is an initiative to conserve the sources of theorem prover systems for future analysis, since they are important cultural/scientific artefacts. It has the sources of many of the systems mentioned above.

== Popular techniques ==

*First-order resolution with unification
*Model elimination
*Method of analytic tableaux
*Superposition and term rewriting
*Model checking
*Mathematical induction
*Binary decision diagrams
*DPLL
*Higher-order unification
*Quantifier elimination

== Software systems ==

=== Free software ===
* Alt-Ergo
* Automath
* CVC
* E
* IsaPlanner
* LCF
* Mizar
* NuPRL
* Paradox
* Prover9
* PVS
* SPARK (programming language)
* Twelf
* Z3 Theorem Prover

=== Proprietary software ===
* CARINE
* Wolfram Mathematica
* ResearchCyc

== See also ==

* Curry–Howard correspondence
* Symbolic computation
* Ramanujan machine
* Computer-aided proof
* Formal verification
* Logic programming
* Proof checking
* Model checking
* Proof complexity
* Computer algebra system
* Program analysis (computer science)
* General Problem Solver
* Metamath language for formalized mathematics
* De Bruijn factor

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* II .


==External links==
* A list of theorem proving tools</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q431667" start="0" end="25" title="Automated theorem proving" label="Automated theorem proving"/>
<link wikidata="Q431667" start="41" end="44" title="Automated theorem proving" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q431667" start="48" end="67" title="Automated theorem proving" label="automated deduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555318" start="86" end="105" title="automated reasoning" label="automated reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="110" end="128" title="mathematical logic" label="mathematical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65943" start="150" end="170" title="mathematical theorem" label="mathematical theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="175" end="191" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="219" end="237" title="mathematical proof" label="mathematical proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="291" end="307" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q845691" start="366" end="371" title="Logicism" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q237125" start="383" end="392" title="Aristotelian logic" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q60028" start="503" end="508" title="Gottlob Frege" label="Frege"/>
<link wikidata="Q814390" start="522" end="537" title="Begriffsschrift" label="Begriffsschrift"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="578" end="600" title="propositional logic" label="propositional calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="632" end="647" title="predicate logic" label="predicate logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q732146" start="659" end="684" title="The Foundations of Arithmetic" label="Foundations of Arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="792" end="799" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q183372" start="804" end="813" title="Alfred North Whitehead" label="Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q163335" start="841" end="862" title="Principia Mathematica" label="Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="1017" end="1022" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068763" start="1028" end="1042" title="inference rule" label="inference rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q548080" start="1121" end="1135" title="Thoralf Skolem" label="Thoralf Skolem"/>
<link wikidata="Q77504" start="1168" end="1185" title="Leopold Löwenheim" label="Leopold Löwenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068283" start="1202" end="1226" title="Löwenheim–Skolem theorem" label="Löwenheim–Skolem theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609475" start="1260" end="1277" title="Herbrand universe" label="Herbrand universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035432" start="1284" end="1307" title="Herbrand interpretation" label="Herbrand interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350299" start="1321" end="1339" title="satisfiability" label="(un)satisfiability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047000" start="1379" end="1387" title="Validity (logic)" label="validity"/>
<link wikidata="Q473841" start="1498" end="1516" title="Mojżesz Presburger" label="Mojżesz Presburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859910" start="1533" end="1551" title="first-order theory" label="first-order theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="1559" end="1574" title="natural numbers" label="natural numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q956059" start="1614" end="1635" title="Presburger arithmetic" label="Presburger arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q430001" start="1653" end="1662" title="Decidability (logic)" label="decidable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509500" start="1717" end="1725" title="sentence (logic)" label="sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="1733" end="1741" title="language (logic)" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="1807" end="1817" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090984" start="1834" end="1915" title="On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica and Related Systems" label="On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica and Related Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q92741" start="2100" end="2113" title="Alonzo Church" label="Alonzo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="2118" end="2129" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q818888" start="2202" end="2215" title="computability" label="computability"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502995" start="2260" end="2280" title="Undecidable problem" label="undecidable question"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2327" end="2339" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239172" start="2404" end="2416" title="Martin Davis (mathematician)" label="Martin Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293447" start="2462" end="2470" title="JOHNNIAC" label="JOHNNIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202298" start="2471" end="2491" title="vacuum-tube computer" label="vacuum-tube computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="2499" end="2527" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391896" start="2682" end="2696" title="Logic Theorist" label="Logic Theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="2733" end="2752" title="propositional logic" label="propositional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q439245" start="2808" end="2820" title="Allen Newell" label="Allen Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q181529" start="2822" end="2838" title="Herbert A. Simon" label="Herbert A. Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391903" start="2843" end="2853" title="Cliff Shaw" label="J. C. Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q655742" start="2989" end="3001" title="modus ponens" label="modus ponens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522579" start="3019" end="3040" title="Substitution_(logic)" label="variable substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981968" start="3111" end="3120" title="Heuristic (computer science)" label="heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846555" start="3483" end="3495" title="completeness (logic)" label="completeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q448086" start="3563" end="3571" title="Jacques Herbrand" label="Herbrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q548080" start="3576" end="3582" title="Thoralf Skolem" label="Skolem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372900" start="3649" end="3670" title="propositional formula" label="propositional formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318370" start="3704" end="3708" title="term (logic)" label="term"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609475" start="3719" end="3736" title="Herbrand universe" label="Herbrand universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q903789" start="3877" end="3900" title="disjunctive normal form" label="disjunctive normal form"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="4141" end="4160" title="propositional logic" label="propositional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142354" start="4191" end="4205" title="co-NP-complete" label="co-NP-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393193" start="4222" end="4238" title="exponential time" label="exponential-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="4303" end="4333" title="first-order logic" label="first-order predicate calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q902052" start="4335" end="4368" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s completeness theorem" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s completeness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q655328" start="4451" end="4470" title="well-formed formula" label="well-formed formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q676835" start="4499" end="4520" title="computably enumerable" label="computably enumerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q842755" start="4773" end="4789" title="Peano axioms" label="Peano arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="4970" end="5005" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorem" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="5626" end="5633" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387554" start="5703" end="5721" title="proof verification" label="proof verification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570472" start="5875" end="5903" title="primitive recursive function" label="primitive recursive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250001" start="6057" end="6074" title="proof compression" label="proof compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387554" start="6242" end="6257" title="Proof assistant" label="Proof assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341067" start="6745" end="6763" title="Robbins conjecture" label="Robbins conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569697" start="7155" end="7169" title="model checking" label="model checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q184410" start="7710" end="7728" title="four color theorem" label="four color theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907339" start="7934" end="7955" title="non-surveyable proofs" label="non-surveyable proofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17254" start="8041" end="8053" title="Connect Four" label="Connect Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074539" start="8183" end="8208" title="integrated circuit design" label="integrated circuit design"/>
<link wikidata="Q668011" start="8237" end="8253" title="Pentium FDIV bug" label="Pentium FDIV bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q733507" start="8271" end="8290" title="floating point unit" label="floating point unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="8358" end="8361" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="8363" end="8368" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117718" start="8541" end="8558" title="program synthesis" label="program synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437424" start="8597" end="8617" title="formal specification" label="formal specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387554" start="8671" end="8687" title="Proof assistant" label="proof assistants"/>
<link wikidata="Q460340" start="8699" end="8711" title="Isabelle (proof assistant)" label="Isabelle/HOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q30642" start="8764" end="8791" title="natural language processing" label="natural language processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469969" start="8796" end="8812" title="formal semantics (natural language)" label="formal semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526815" start="8845" end="8870" title="Discourse representation theory" label="discourse representations"/>
<link wikidata="Q173326" start="9072" end="9092" title="program verification" label="program verification"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="9228" end="9234" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154755" start="9236" end="9239" title="Ada (programming language)" label="Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236809" start="9341" end="9354" title="David Luckham" label="David Luckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="9358" end="9377" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q327981" start="9461" end="9479" title="John Alan Robinson" label="John Alan Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051925" start="9487" end="9497" title="Resolution (logic)" label="resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q24158" start="9645" end="9689" title="Notices of the American Mathematical Society" label="Notices of the American Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="9739" end="9750" title="First-order logic" label="First-order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644136" start="10152" end="10170" title="higher-order logic" label="higher-order logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067766" start="10428" end="10438" title="satisfiability modulo theories" label="SMT solver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008555" start="10854" end="10858" title="CADE ATP System Competition" label="CASC"/>
<link wikidata="Q816747" start="11003" end="11012" title="Benchmark (computing)" label="benchmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353804" start="11026" end="11067" title="Thousands of Problems for Theorem Provers" label="Thousands of Problems for Theorem Provers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008555" start="11111" end="11138" title="CADE ATP System Competition" label="CADE ATP System Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324845" start="11341" end="11342" title="E theorem prover" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644107" start="11415" end="11441" title="superposition calculus" label="purely equational calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q157808" start="11500" end="11530" title="Technical University of Munich" label="Technical University of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q92897" start="11554" end="11568" title="Wolfgang Bibel" label="Wolfgang Bibel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262605" start="11581" end="11627" title="Baden-Württemberg Cooperative State University" label="Baden-Württemberg Cooperative State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="11631" end="11640" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109350" start="11644" end="11649" title="Otter (theorem prover)" label="Otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q649120" start="11668" end="11695" title="Argonne National Laboratory" label="Argonne National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051925" start="11709" end="11731" title="first-order resolution" label="first-order resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051925" start="11736" end="11750" title="paramodulation" label="paramodulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252336" start="11785" end="11792" title="Prover9" label="Prover9"/>
<link wikidata="Q16905864" start="11815" end="11820" title="Mace4" label="Mace4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11824" end="11830" title="SETHEO" label="SETHEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888321" start="11887" end="11904" title="model elimination" label="model elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q92897" start="11965" end="11979" title="Wolfgang Bibel" label="Wolfgang Bibel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912960" start="12078" end="12085" title="Vampire theorem prover" label="Vampire"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="12130" end="12151" title="University of Manchester" label="Manchester University"/>
<link wikidata="Q502611" start="12155" end="12170" title="Andrei Voronkov" label="Andrei Voronkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392459" start="12551" end="12556" title="SPASS" label="SPASS"/>
<link wikidata="Q565400" start="12671" end="12712" title="Max Planck Institute for Computer Science" label="Max Planck Institute for Computer Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051925" start="12972" end="12994" title="First-order resolution" label="First-order resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q609057" start="13000" end="13011" title="unification (computing)" label="unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888321" start="13013" end="13030" title="Model elimination" label="Model elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q811591" start="13032" end="13059" title="Method of analytic tableaux" label="Method of analytic tableaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644107" start="13061" end="13074" title="Superposition calculus" label="Superposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668499" start="13084" end="13093" title="rewriting" label="rewriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569697" start="13095" end="13109" title="Model checking" label="Model checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q178377" start="13111" end="13133" title="Mathematical induction" label="Mathematical induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q864155" start="13135" end="13158" title="Binary decision diagram" label="Binary decision diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030088" start="13161" end="13165" title="DPLL algorithm" label="DPLL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13167" end="13191" title="Unification (computing)#Higher-order unification" label="Higher-order unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849020" start="13193" end="13215" title="Quantifier elimination" label="Quantifier elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q19599372" start="13265" end="13273" title="Alt-Ergo" label="Alt-Ergo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872609" start="13276" end="13284" title="Automath" label="Automath"/>
<link wikidata="Q123808036" start="13287" end="13290" title="CVC (theorem prover)" label="CVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324845" start="13293" end="13294" title="E theorem prover" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="Q6075663" start="13297" end="13307" title="IsaPlanner" label="IsaPlanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667462" start="13310" end="13313" title="LCF (theorem prover)" label="LCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609529" start="13316" end="13321" title="Mizar system" label="Mizar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907407" start="13324" end="13329" title="NuPRL" label="NuPRL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134438" start="13332" end="13339" title="Paradox (theorem prover)" label="Paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252336" start="13342" end="13349" title="Prover9" label="Prover9"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408184" start="13352" end="13355" title="Prototype Verification System" label="PVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493345" start="13358" end="13386" title="SPARK (programming language)" label="SPARK (programming language)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7666857" start="13389" end="13394" title="Twelf" label="Twelf"/>
<link wikidata="Q85816952" start="13397" end="13414" title="Z3 Theorem Prover" label="Z3 Theorem Prover"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008821" start="13447" end="13453" title="CARINE" label="CARINE"/>
<link wikidata="Q81294" start="13456" end="13475" title="Wolfram Mathematica" label="Wolfram Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147294" start="13478" end="13489" title="ResearchCyc" label="ResearchCyc"/>
<link wikidata="Q975734" start="13509" end="13536" title="Curry–Howard correspondence" label="Curry–Howard correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670846" start="13539" end="13559" title="Symbolic computation" label="Symbolic computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q108444510" start="13562" end="13579" title="Ramanujan machine" label="Ramanujan machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150675" start="13582" end="13602" title="Computer-aided proof" label="Computer-aided proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q173326" start="13605" end="13624" title="Formal verification" label="Formal verification"/>
<link wikidata="Q275603" start="13627" end="13644" title="Logic programming" label="Logic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387554" start="13647" end="13661" title="Proof checking" label="Proof checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569697" start="13664" end="13678" title="Model checking" label="Model checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249999" start="13681" end="13697" title="Proof complexity" label="Proof complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q830340" start="13700" end="13723" title="Computer algebra system" label="Computer algebra system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112188" start="13726" end="13761" title="Program analysis (computer science)" label="Program analysis (computer science)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387212" start="13764" end="13786" title="General Problem Solver" label="General Problem Solver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822975" start="13789" end="13797" title="Metamath" label="Metamath"/>
<link wikidata="Q110692573" start="13836" end="13852" title="De Bruijn factor" label="De Bruijn factor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2547" wikidata="Q215946" url="?curid=2547" title="Agent Orange">
<text>Agent Orange is a chemical herbicide and defoliant, one of the tactical use Rainbow Herbicides. It was used by the U.S. military as part of its herbicidal warfare program, Operation Ranch Hand, during the Vietnam War from 1961 to 1971. The U.S. was strongly influenced by the British who used Agent Orange during the Malayan Emergency. It is a mixture of equal parts of two herbicides, 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D.

Agent Orange was produced in the United States beginning in the late 1940s and was used in industrial agriculture, and was also sprayed along railroads and power lines to control undergrowth in forests. During the Vietnam War, the U.S. military procured over , consisting of a fifty-fifty mixture of 2,4-D and dioxin-contaminated 2,4,5-T. Nine chemical companies produced it: Dow Chemical Company, Monsanto Company, Diamond Shamrock Corporation, Hercules Inc., Thompson Hayward Chemical Co., United States Rubber Company (Uniroyal), Thompson Chemical Co., Hoffman-Taff Chemicals, Inc., and Agriselect.

The government of Vietnam says that up to four million people in Vietnam were exposed to the defoliant, and as many as three million people have suffered illness because of Agent Orange, while the Vietnamese Red Cross estimates that up to one million people were disabled or have health problems as a result of exposure to Agent Orange. While the United States government has described these figures as unreliable, it has documented cases of leukemia, Hodgkin&#x27;s lymphoma, and various kinds of cancer in exposed U.S. military veterans. The US Government has not conclusively found either a causal relationship or a plausible biological carcinogenic mechanism for cancers. An epidemiological study done by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention showed that there was an increase in the rate of birth defects of the children of military personnel who were exposed to Agent Orange. Agent Orange has also caused enormous environmental damage in Vietnam. Over or of forest were defoliated. Defoliants eroded tree cover and seedling forest stock, making reforestation difficult in numerous areas. Animal species diversity is sharply reduced in contrast with unsprayed areas. The environmental destruction caused by this defoliation has been described by Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme, lawyers, historians and other academics as an ecocide.

The use of Agent Orange in Vietnam resulted in numerous legal actions. The United Nations ratified United Nations General Assembly Resolution 31/72 and the Environmental Modification Convention. Lawsuits filed on behalf of both U.S. and Vietnamese veterans sought compensation for damages.

Agent Orange was first used by British Commonwealth forces in Malaya during the Malayan Emergency. It was also used by the U.S. military in Laos and Cambodia during the Vietnam War because forests near the border with Vietnam were used by the Viet Cong.
==Chemical composition==


The active ingredient of Agent Orange was an equal mixture of two phenoxy herbicides – 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) and 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T) – in iso-octyl ester form, which contained traces of the dioxin 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-&quot;p&quot;-dioxin (TCDD). TCDD was a trace (typically 2–3 ppm, ranging from 50 ppb to 50 ppm) - but significant - contaminant of Agent Orange.

===Toxicology===
TCDD is the most toxic of the dioxins and is classified as a human carcinogen by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The fat-soluble nature of TCDD causes it to accumulate easily in the food chain, and can enter the body readily through physical contact or ingestion. When TCDD binds to cytoplasmic aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a transcription factor, the protein translocates to the cell nucleus, where it influences gene expression.

According to U.S. government reports, if not bound chemically to a biological surface such as soil, leaves or grass, Agent Orange dries quickly after spraying and breaks down within hours to days when exposed to sunlight and is no longer harmful.

==Development==
Several herbicides were developed as part of efforts by the United States and the United Kingdom to create herbicidal weapons for use during World War II. These included 2,4-D, 2,4,5-T, MCPA (2-methyl-4-chlorophenoxyacetic acid, 1414B and 1414A, recoded LN-8 and LN-32), and isopropyl phenylcarbamate (1313, recoded LN-33).

In 1943, the United States Department of the Army contracted botanist (and later bioethicist) Arthur Galston, who discovered the defoliants later used in Agent Orange, and his employer University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign to study the effects of 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T on cereal grains (including rice) and broadleaf crops. While a graduate and post-graduate student at the University of Illinois, Galston&#x27;s research and dissertation focused on finding a chemical means to make soybeans flower and fruit earlier. He discovered both that 2,3,5-triiodobenzoic acid (TIBA) would speed up the flowering of soybeans and that in higher concentrations it would defoliate the soybeans. From these studies arose the concept of using aerial applications of herbicides to destroy enemy crops to disrupt their food supply. In early 1945, the U.S. Army ran tests of various 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T mixtures at the Bushnell Army Airfield in Florida. As a result, the U.S. began a full-scale production of 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T and would have used it against Japan in 1946 during Operation Downfall if the war had continued.

In the years after the war, the U.S. tested 1,100 compounds, and field trials of the more promising ones were done at British stations in India and Australia, in order to establish their effects in tropical conditions, as well as at the U.S. testing ground in Florida. Between 1950 and 1952, trials were conducted in Tanganyika, at Kikore and Stunyansa, to test arboricides and defoliants under tropical conditions. The chemicals involved were 2,4-D, 2,4,5-T, and endothall (3,6-endoxohexahydrophthalic acid). During 1952–53, the unit supervised the aerial spraying of 2,4,5-T in Kenya to assess the value of defoliants in the eradication of tsetse fly.

==Early use==
In Malaya, the local unit of Imperial Chemical Industries researched defoliants as weed killers for rubber plantations. Roadside ambushes by the Malayan National Liberation Army were a danger to the British Commonwealth forces during the Malayan Emergency, several trials were made to defoliate vegetation that might hide ambush sites, but hand removal was found cheaper. A detailed account of how the British experimented with the spraying of herbicides was written by two scientists, E. K. Woodford of Agricultural Research Council&#x27;s Unit of Experimental Agronomy and H. G. H. Kearns of the University of Bristol.

After the Malayan Emergency ended in 1960, the U.S. considered the British precedent in deciding that the use of defoliants was a legal tactic of warfare. Secretary of State Dean Rusk advised President John F. Kennedy that the British had established a precedent for warfare with herbicides in Malaya.

==Use in the Vietnam War==
In mid-1961, President Ngo Dinh Diem of South Vietnam asked the United States to help defoliate the lush jungle that was providing cover to his enemies. In August of that year, the Republic of Vietnam Air Force conducted herbicide operations with American help. Diem&#x27;s request launched a policy debate in the White House and the State and Defense Departments. Many U.S. officials supported herbicide operations, pointing out that the British had already used herbicides and defoliants in Malaya during the 1950s. In November 1961, Kennedy authorized the start of Operation Ranch Hand, the codename for the United States Air Force&#x27;s herbicide program in Vietnam. The herbicide operations were formally directed by the government of South Vietnam.

During the Vietnam War, between 1962 and 1971, the United States military sprayed nearly of various chemicals – the &quot;rainbow herbicides&quot; and defoliants – in Vietnam, eastern Laos, and parts of Cambodia as part of Operation Ranch Hand, reaching its peak from 1967 to 1969. For comparison purposes, an olympic size pool holds approximately . As the British did in Malaya, the goal of the U.S. was to defoliate rural/forested land, depriving guerrillas of food and concealment and clearing sensitive areas such as around base perimeters and possible ambush sites along roads and canals. Samuel P. Huntington argued that the program was also a part of a policy of forced draft urbanization, which aimed to destroy the ability of peasants to support themselves in the countryside, forcing them to flee to the U.S.-dominated cities, depriving the guerrillas of their rural support base.

Agent Orange was usually sprayed from helicopters or from low-flying C-123 Provider aircraft, fitted with sprayers and &quot;MC-1 Hourglass&quot; pump systems and chemical tanks. Spray runs were also conducted from trucks, boats, and backpack sprayers. Altogether, over of Agent Orange were applied.

The first batch of herbicides was unloaded at Tan Son Nhut Air Base in South Vietnam, on January 9, 1962. U.S. Air Force records show at least 6,542 spraying missions took place over the course of Operation Ranch Hand. By 1971, 12 percent of the total area of South Vietnam had been sprayed with defoliating chemicals, at an average concentration of 13 times the recommended U.S. Department of Agriculture application rate for domestic use. In South Vietnam alone, an estimated of agricultural land was ultimately destroyed. In some areas, TCDD concentrations in soil and water were hundreds of times greater than the levels considered safe by the EPA.

The campaign destroyed of upland and mangrove forests and thousands of square kilometres of crops. Overall, more than 20% of South Vietnam&#x27;s forests were sprayed at least once over the nine-year period. 3.2% of South Vietnam&#x27;s cultivated land was sprayed at least once between 1965 and 1971. 90% of herbicide use was directed at defoliation.

The U.S. military began targeting food crops in October 1962, primarily using Agent Blue; the American public was not made aware of the crop destruction programs until 1965 (and it was then believed that crop spraying had begun that spring). In 1965, 42% of all herbicide spraying was dedicated to food crops. In 1965, members of the U.S. Congress were told, &quot;crop destruction is understood to be the more important purpose ... but the emphasis is usually given to the jungle defoliation in public mention of the program.&quot; The first official acknowledgment of the programs came from the State Department in March 1966.

When crops were destroyed, the Viet Cong would compensate for the loss of food by confiscating more food from local villages. Some military personnel reported being told they were destroying crops used to feed guerrillas, only to later discover, most of the destroyed food was actually produced to support the local civilian population. For example, according to Wil Verwey, 85% of the crop lands in Quang Ngai province were scheduled to be destroyed in 1970 alone. He estimated this would have caused famine and left hundreds of thousands of people without food or malnourished in the province. According to a report by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the herbicide campaign had disrupted the food supply of more than 600,000 people by 1970.
Many experts at the time, including plant physiologist and bioethicist Arthur Galston, opposed herbicidal warfare because of concerns about the side effects to humans and the environment by indiscriminately spraying the chemical over a wide area. As early as 1966, resolutions were introduced to the United Nations charging that the U.S. was violating the 1925 Geneva Protocol, which regulated the use of chemical and biological weapons in international conflicts. The U.S. defeated most of the resolutions, arguing that Agent Orange was not a chemical or a biological weapon as it was considered a herbicide and a defoliant and it was used in effort to destroy plant crops and to deprive the enemy of concealment and not meant to target human beings. The U.S. delegation argued that a weapon, by definition, is any device used to injure, defeat, or destroy living beings, structures, or systems, and Agent Orange did not qualify under that definition. It also argued that if the U.S. were to be charged for using Agent Orange, then the United Kingdom and its Commonwealth nations should be charged since they also used it widely during the Malayan Emergency in the 1950s. In 1969, the United Kingdom commented on the draft Resolution 2603 (XXIV):The evidence seems to us to be notably inadequate for the assertion that the use in war of chemical substances specifically toxic to plants is prohibited by international law. The environmental destruction caused by this defoliation has been described by Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme, lawyers, historians and other academics as an ecocide.

A study carried out by the Bionetic Research Laboratories between 1965 and 1968 found malformations in test animals caused by 2,4,5-T, a component of Agent Orange. The study was later brought to the attention of the White House in October 1969. Other studies reported similar results and the Department of Defense began to reduce the herbicide operation. On April 15, 1970, it was announced that the use of Agent Orange was suspended. Two brigades of the Americal Division in the summer of 1970 continued to use Agent Orange for crop destruction in violation of the suspension. An investigation led to disciplinary action against the brigade and division commanders because they had falsified reports to hide its use. Defoliation and crop destruction were completely stopped by June 30, 1971.

==Health effects==
There are various types of cancer associated with Agent Orange, including chronic B-cell leukemia, Hodgkin&#x27;s lymphoma, multiple myeloma, non-Hodgkin&#x27;s lymphoma, prostate cancer, respiratory cancer, lung cancer, and soft tissue sarcomas. However, these associations are spurious, and a review of the literature indicates that neither Agent Orange nor its contaminants are carcinogenic in humans.

===Vietnamese people===
The government of Vietnam states that 4 million of its citizens were exposed to Agent Orange, and as many as 3 million have suffered illnesses because of it; these figures include their children who were exposed. The Red Cross of Vietnam estimates that up to 1 million people are disabled or have health problems due to Agent Orange contamination. The United States government has challenged these figures as being unreliable.

According to a study by Dr. Nguyen Viet Nhan, children in the areas where Agent Orange was used have been affected and have multiple health problems, including cleft palate, mental disabilities, hernias, and extra fingers and toes. In the 1970s, high levels of dioxin were found in the breast milk of South Vietnamese women, and in the blood of U.S. military personnel who had served in Vietnam. The most affected zones are the mountainous area along Truong Son (Long Mountains) and the border between Vietnam and Cambodia. The affected residents are living in substandard conditions with many genetic diseases.

In 2006, Anh Duc Ngo and colleagues of the University of Texas Health Science Center published a meta-analysis that exposed a large amount of heterogeneity (different findings) between studies, a finding consistent with a lack of consensus on the issue. Despite this, statistical analysis of the studies they examined resulted in data that the increase in birth defects/relative risk (RR) from exposure to agent orange/dioxin &quot;appears&quot; to be on the order of 3 in Vietnamese-funded studies, but 1.29 in the rest of the world. There is data near the threshold of statistical significance suggesting Agent Orange contributes to still-births, cleft palate, and neural tube defects, with spina bifida being the most statistically significant defect. The large discrepancy in RR between Vietnamese studies and those in the rest of the world has been ascribed to bias in the Vietnamese studies.

Twenty-eight of the former U.S. military bases in Vietnam where the herbicides were stored and loaded onto airplanes may still have high levels of dioxins in the soil, posing a health threat to the surrounding communities. Extensive testing for dioxin contamination has been conducted at the former U.S. airbases in Da Nang, Phù Cát District and Biên Hòa. Some of the soil and sediment on the bases have extremely high levels of dioxin requiring remediation. The Da Nang Air Base has dioxin contamination up to 350 times higher than international recommendations for action. The contaminated soil and sediment continue to affect the citizens of Vietnam, poisoning their food chain and causing illnesses, serious skin diseases and a variety of cancers in the lungs, larynx, and prostate.
===Vietnam veterans===

While in Vietnam, U.S. and Free World Military Assistance Forces soldiers were told not to worry about Agent Orange and were persuaded the chemical was harmless. After returning home, Vietnam veterans from all countries that served began to suspect their ill health or the instances of their wives having miscarriages or children born with birth defects might be related to Agent Orange and the other toxic herbicides to which they had been exposed in Vietnam.

====U.S veterans====
U.S. Veterans began to file claims in 1977 to the Department of Veterans Affairs for disability payments for health care for conditions they believed were associated with exposure to Agent Orange, or more specifically, dioxin, but their claims were denied unless they could prove the condition began when they were in the service or within one year of their discharge.
In order to qualify for compensation, U.S. veterans must have served on or near the perimeters of military bases in Thailand during the Vietnam Era, where herbicides were tested and stored outside of Vietnam, veterans who were crew members on C-123 planes flown after the Vietnam War, or were associated with Department of Defense (DoD) projects to test, dispose of, or store herbicides in the U.S.

By April 1993, the Department of Veterans Affairs had compensated only 486 victims, although it had received disability claims from 39,419 soldiers who had been exposed to Agent Orange while serving in Vietnam.

In a November 2004 Zogby International poll of 987 people, 79% of respondents thought the U.S. chemical companies which produced Agent Orange defoliant should compensate U.S. soldiers who were affected by the toxic chemical used during the war in Vietnam and 51% said they supported compensation for Vietnamese Agent Orange victims.

====Australian and New Zealand veterans====
Several official investigations in Australia failed to prove otherwise even though extant American investigations had already established that defoliants were sprayed at U.S. airbases including Bien Hoa Air Base where Australian and New Zealand forces first served before being given their own Tactical area of responsibility (TAOR.) Even then, Australian and New Zealand non-military and military contributions saw personnel from both countries spread over Vietnam such as the hospitals at Bong Son and Qui Nhon, on secondments at various bases, and as flight crew and ground crew for flights into and out of Da Nang Air Base - all areas that were well-documented as having been sprayed.

It wasn&#x27;t until a group of Australian veterans produced official military records, maps, and mission data as proof that the TAOR controlled by Australian and New Zealand forces in Vietnam had been sprayed with the chemicals in the presence of personnel that the Australian government was forced to change their stance. Only in 1994 did the Australian government finally admit that it was true that defoliants had been used in areas of Vietnam where Australian forces operated and the effects of these may have been detrimental to some Vietnam veterans and their children.

It was only in 2015 that the official Australian War Memorial accepted rewriting the official history of Australia&#x27;s involvement in the Vietnam War to acknowledge that Australian soldiers were exposed to defoliants used in Vietnam.

New Zealand was even slower to correct their error, with the government going as far as to deny the legitimacy of the Australian reports in a report called the &quot;McLeod Report&quot; published by Veterans Affairs NZ in 2001 thus infuriating New Zealand veterans and those associated with their cause.

In 2006 progress was made in the form of a Memorandum of Understanding signed between the New Zealand government, representatives of New Zealand Vietnam veterans, and the Royal New Zealand Returned and Services&#x27; Association (RSA) for monetary compensation for New Zealand Vietnam veterans who have conditions as evidence of association with exposure to Agent Orange, as determined by the United States National Academy of Sciences. In 2008 the New Zealand government finally admitted that New Zealanders had in fact been exposed to Agent Orange while serving in Vietnam and the experience was responsible for detrimental health conditions in veterans and their children. Amendments to the memorandum made in 2021 meant that more veterans were eligible for an ex gratia payment of NZ$40,000.

====National Academy of Medicine (Institute of Medicine)====
Starting in the early 1990s, the federal government directed the Institute of Medicine (IOM), now known as the National Academy of Medicine, to issue reports every 2 years on the health effects of Agent Orange and similar herbicides. First published in 1994 and titled &quot;Veterans and Agent Orange&quot;, the IOM reports assess the risk of both cancer and non-cancer health effects. Each health effect is categorized by evidence of association based on available research data. The last update was published in 2016, entitled &quot;Veterans and Agent Orange: Update 2014&quot;.

The report shows sufficient evidence of an association with soft tissue sarcoma; non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL); Hodgkin disease; Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL); including hairy cell leukemia and other chronic B-cell leukemias. Limited or suggested evidence of an association was linked with respiratory cancers (lung, bronchus, trachea, larynx); prostate cancer; multiple myeloma; and bladder cancer. Numerous other cancers were determined to have inadequate or insufficient evidence of links to Agent Orange.

The National Academy of Medicine has repeatedly concluded that any evidence suggestive of an association between Agent Orange and prostate cancer is, &quot;limited because chance, bias, and confounding could not be ruled out with confidence.&quot;

At the request of the Veterans Administration, the Institute Of Medicine evaluated whether service in these C-123 aircraft could have plausibly exposed soldiers and been detrimental to their health. Their report &quot;Post-Vietnam Dioxin Exposure in Agent Orange-Contaminated C-123 Aircraft&quot; confirmed it.

====U.S. Public Health Service====
Publications by the United States Public Health Service have shown that Vietnam veterans, overall, have increased rates of cancer, and nerve, digestive, skin, and respiratory disorders. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention notes that in particular, there are higher rates of acute/chronic leukemia, Hodgkin&#x27;s lymphoma and non-Hodgkin&#x27;s lymphoma, throat cancer, prostate cancer, lung cancer, colon cancer, Ischemic heart disease, soft tissue sarcoma, and liver cancer. With the exception of liver cancer, these are the same conditions the U.S. Veterans Administration has determined may be associated with exposure to Agent Orange/dioxin and are on the list of conditions eligible for compensation and treatment.

Military personnel who were involved in storage, mixture and transportation (including aircraft mechanics), and actual use of the chemicals were probably among those who received the heaviest exposures. Military members who served on Okinawa also claim to have been exposed to the chemical, but there is no verifiable evidence to corroborate these claims.

Some studies have suggested that veterans exposed to Agent Orange may be more at risk of developing prostate cancer and potentially more than twice as likely to develop higher-grade, more lethal prostate cancers. However, a critical analysis of these studies and 35 others consistently found that there was no significant increase in prostate cancer incidence or mortality in those exposed to Agent Orange or 2,3,7,8-tetracholorodibenzo-&quot;p&quot;-dioxin.

====U.S. Veterans of Laos and Cambodia====
During the Vietnam War, the United States fought the North Vietnamese, and their allies, in Laos and Cambodia, including heavy bombing campaigns. They also sprayed large quantities of Agent Orange in each of those countries. According to one estimate, the U.S. dropped in Laos and in Cambodia. Because Laos and Cambodia were both officially neutral during the Vietnam War, the U.S. attempted to keep secret its military operations in those countries, from the American population and has largely avoided compensating American veterans and CIA personnel stationed in Cambodia and Laos who suffered permanent injuries as a result of exposure to Agent Orange there.

One noteworthy exception, according to the U.S. Department of Labor, is a claim filed with the CIA by an employee of &quot;a self-insured contractor to the CIA that was no longer in business.&quot; The CIA advised the Department of Labor that it &quot;had no objections&quot; to paying the claim and Labor accepted the claim for payment:

==Ecological impact==

About 17.8% or of the total forested area of Vietnam was sprayed during the war, which disrupted the ecological equilibrium. The persistent nature of dioxins, erosion caused by loss of tree cover, and loss of seedling forest stock meant that reforestation was difficult (or impossible) in many areas. Many defoliated forest areas were quickly invaded by aggressive pioneer species (such as bamboo and cogon grass), making forest regeneration difficult and unlikely. Animal species diversity was also impacted; in one study a Harvard biologist found 24 species of birds and 5 species of mammals in a sprayed forest, while in two adjacent sections of unsprayed forest there were, respectively, 145 and 170 species of birds and 30 and 55 species of mammals.

Dioxins from Agent Orange have persisted in the Vietnamese environment since the war, settling in the soil and sediment and entering the food chain through animals and fish which feed in the contaminated areas. The movement of dioxins through the food web has resulted in bioconcentration and biomagnification. The areas most heavily contaminated with dioxins are former U.S. air bases.

==Sociopolitical impact==
American policy during the Vietnam War was to destroy crops, accepting the sociopolitical impact that that would have. The RAND Corporation&#x27;s &quot;Memorandum 5446-ISA/ARPA&quot; states: &quot;the fact that the VC [the Vietcong] obtain most of their food from the neutral rural population dictates the destruction of civilian crops ... if they are to be hampered by the crop destruction program, it will be necessary to destroy large portions of the rural economy – probably 50% or more&quot;. Crops were deliberately sprayed with Agent Orange and areas were bulldozed clear of vegetation forcing many rural civilians to cities.

==Legal and diplomatic proceedings==
===International===
The extensive environmental damage that resulted from usage of the herbicide prompted the United Nations to pass Resolution 31/72 and ratify the Environmental Modification Convention. Many states do not regard this as a complete ban on the use of herbicides and defoliants in warfare, but it does require case-by-case consideration. Article 2(4) of Protocol III of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons contains the &quot;Jungle Exception&quot;, which prohibits states from attacking forests or jungles &quot;except if such natural elements are used to cover, conceal or camouflage combatants or military objectives or are military objectives themselves&quot;. This exception voids any protection of any military and civilian personnel from a napalm attack or something like Agent Orange, and it has been argued that it was clearly designed to cover situations like U.S. tactics in Vietnam.

=== Class action lawsuit ===
Since at least 1978, several lawsuits have been filed against the companies which produced Agent Orange, among them Dow Chemical, Monsanto, and Diamond Shamrock. In 1978, army veteran Paul Reutershan sued Dow Chemical for $10 million, after he was diagnosed with terminal cancer that he believed was a result of Agent Orange exposure. After Reutershan died in December 1978, his attorneys added additional plaintiffs and refiled the lawsuit as a class action. That lawsuit would eventually represent thousands of veterans, and was considered one of the largest and most complex lawsuits ever brought in the US at that time.

Attorney Hy Mayerson was an early pioneer in Agent Orange litigation, working with environmental attorney Victor Yannacone in 1980 on the first class-action suits against wartime manufacturers of Agent Orange. In meeting Dr. Ronald A. Codario, one of the first civilian doctors to see affected patients, Mayerson, so impressed by the fact a physician would show so much interest in a Vietnam veteran, forwarded more than a thousand pages of information on Agent Orange and the effects of dioxin on animals and humans to Codario&#x27;s office the day after he was first contacted by the doctor. The corporate defendants sought to escape culpability by blaming everything on the U.S. government.

In 1980, Mayerson, with Sgt. Charles E. Hartz as their principal client, filed the first U.S. Agent Orange class-action lawsuit in Pennsylvania, for the injuries military personnel in Vietnam suffered through exposure to toxic dioxins in the defoliant. Attorney Mayerson co-wrote the brief that certified the Agent Orange Product Liability action as a class action, the largest ever filed as of its filing. Hartz&#x27;s deposition was one of the first ever taken in America, and the first for an Agent Orange trial, for the purpose of preserving testimony at trial, as it was understood that Hartz would not live to see the trial because of a brain tumor that began to develop while he was a member of Tiger Force, special forces, and LRRPs in Vietnam. The firm also located and supplied critical research to the veterans&#x27; lead expert, Dr. Codario, including about 100 articles from toxicology journals dating back more than a decade, as well as data about where herbicides had been sprayed, what the effects of dioxin had been on animals and humans, and every accident in factories where herbicides were produced or dioxin was a contaminant of some chemical reaction.

The chemical companies involved denied that there was a link between Agent Orange and the veterans&#x27; medical problems. However, on May 7, 1984, seven chemical companies settled the class-action suit out of court just hours before jury selection was to begin. The companies agreed to pay $180 million as compensation if the veterans dropped all claims against them. Slightly over 45% of the sum was ordered to be paid by Monsanto alone. Many veterans who were victims of Agent Orange exposure were outraged the case had been settled instead of going to court and felt they had been betrayed by the lawyers. &quot;Fairness Hearings&quot; were held in five major American cities, where veterans and their families discussed their reactions to the settlement and condemned the actions of the lawyers and courts, demanding the case be heard before a jury of their peers. Federal Judge Jack B. Weinstein refused the appeals, claiming the settlement was &quot;fair and just&quot;. By 1989, the veterans&#x27; fears were confirmed when it was decided how the money from the settlement would be paid out. A totally disabled Vietnam veteran would receive a maximum of $12,000 spread out over the course of 10 years. Furthermore, by accepting the settlement payments, disabled veterans would become ineligible for many state benefits that provided far more monetary support than the settlement, such as food stamps, public assistance, and government pensions. A widow of a Vietnam veteran who died of Agent Orange exposure would receive $3,700.

In 2004, Monsanto spokesman Jill Montgomery said Monsanto should not be liable at all for injuries or deaths caused by Agent Orange, saying: &quot;We are sympathetic with people who believe they have been injured and understand their concern to find the cause, but reliable scientific evidence indicates that Agent Orange is not the cause of serious long-term health effects.&quot;

On 22 August 2024, the Court of Appeal of Paris dismissed an appeal filed by Tran To Nga against 14 US corporations that supplied Agent Orange for the US army during the war in Vietnam. The lawyers said that Nga will take her case to France&#x27;s highest appeals court. Only military veterans from the United States and its allies in the war have won compensation so far. Some of the agrochemical companies in the U.S. have compensated U.S. veterans, but not to Vietnamese victims.

===New Jersey Agent Orange Commission===
In 1980, New Jersey created the New Jersey Agent Orange Commission, the first state commission created to study its effects. The commission&#x27;s research project in association with Rutgers University was called &quot;The Pointman Project&quot;. It was disbanded by Governor Christine Todd Whitman in 1996. During the first phase of the project, commission researchers devised ways to determine trace dioxin levels in blood. Prior to this, such levels could only be found in the adipose (fat) tissue. The project studied dioxin (TCDD) levels in blood as well as in adipose tissue in a small group of Vietnam veterans who had been exposed to Agent Orange and compared them to those of a matched control group; the levels were found to be higher in the exposed group. The second phase of the project continued to examine and compare dioxin levels in various groups of Vietnam veterans, including Soldiers, Marines, and Brownwater Naval personnel.

===U.S. Congress===
In 1991, Congress enacted the Agent Orange Act, giving the Department of Veterans Affairs the authority to declare certain conditions &quot;presumptive&quot; to exposure to Agent Orange/dioxin, making these veterans who served in Vietnam eligible to receive treatment and compensation for these conditions. The same law required the National Academy of Sciences to periodically review the science on dioxin and herbicides used in Vietnam to inform the Secretary of Veterans Affairs about the strength of the scientific evidence showing association between exposure to Agent Orange/dioxin and certain conditions. The authority for the National Academy of Sciences reviews and addition of any new diseases to the presumptive list by the VA expired in 2015 under the sunset clause of the Agent Orange Act of 1991. Through this process, the list of &#x27;presumptive&#x27; conditions has grown since 1991, and currently the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs has listed prostate cancer, respiratory cancers, multiple myeloma, type II diabetes mellitus, Hodgkin&#x27;s disease, non-Hodgkin&#x27;s lymphoma, soft tissue sarcoma, chloracne, porphyria cutanea tarda, peripheral neuropathy, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and spina bifida in children of veterans exposed to Agent Orange as conditions associated with exposure to the herbicide. This list now includes B cell leukemias, such as hairy cell leukemia, Parkinson&#x27;s disease and ischemic heart disease, these last three having been added on August 31, 2010. Several highly placed individuals in government are voicing concerns about whether some of the diseases on the list should, in fact, actually have been included.

In 2011, an appraisal of the 20-year long &quot;Air Force Health Study&quot; that began in 1982 indicates that the results of the AFHS as they pertain to Agent Orange, do not provide evidence of disease in the Operation Ranch Hand veterans caused by &quot;their elevated levels of exposure to Agent Orange&quot;.

The VA initially denied the applications of post-Vietnam C-123 aircrew veterans because as veterans without &quot;boots on the ground&quot; service in Vietnam, they were not covered under VA&#x27;s interpretation of &quot;exposed&quot;. In June 2015, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs issued an Interim final rule providing presumptive service connection for post-Vietnam C-123 aircrews, maintenance staff and aeromedical evacuation crews. The VA now provides medical care and disability compensation for the recognized list of Agent Orange illnesses.

===U.S.–Vietnamese government negotiations===
In 2002, Vietnam and the U.S. held a joint conference on Human Health and Environmental Impacts of Agent Orange. Following the conference, the U.S. National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) began scientific exchanges between the U.S. and Vietnam, and began discussions for a joint research project on the human health impacts of Agent Orange. These negotiations broke down in 2005, when neither side could agree on the research protocol and the research project was canceled. More progress has been made on the environmental front. In 2005, the first U.S.-Vietnam workshop on remediation of dioxin was held.

Starting in 2005, the EPA began to work with the Vietnamese government to measure the level of dioxin at the Da Nang Air Base. Also in 2005, the Joint Advisory Committee on Agent Orange, made up of representatives of Vietnamese and U.S. government agencies, was established. The committee has been meeting yearly to explore areas of scientific cooperation, technical assistance and environmental remediation of dioxin.

A breakthrough in the diplomatic stalemate on this issue occurred as a result of United States President George W. Bush&#x27;s state visit to Vietnam in November 2006. In the joint statement, President Bush and President Triet agreed &quot;further joint efforts to address the environmental contamination near former dioxin storage sites would make a valuable contribution to the continued development of their bilateral relationship.&quot; On May 25, 2007, President Bush signed the U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans&#x27; Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act, 2007 into law for the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan that included an earmark of $3 million specifically for funding for programs for the remediation of dioxin &#x27;hotspots&#x27; on former U.S. military bases, and for public health programs for the surrounding communities; some authors consider this to be completely inadequate, pointing out that the Da Nang Airbase alone will cost $14 million to clean up, and that three others are estimated to require $60 million for cleanup. The appropriation was renewed in the fiscal year 2009 and again in FY 2010. An additional $12 million was appropriated in the fiscal year 2010 in the Supplemental Appropriations Act and a total of $18.5 million appropriated for fiscal year 2011.

Secretary of State Hillary Clinton stated during a visit to Hanoi in October 2010 that the U.S. government would begin work on the clean-up of dioxin contamination at the Da Nang Airbase. In June 2011, a ceremony was held at Da Nang airport to mark the start of U.S.-funded decontamination of dioxin hotspots in Vietnam. Thirty-two million dollars has so far been allocated by the U.S. Congress to fund the program. A $43 million project began in the summer of 2012, as Vietnam and the U.S. forge closer ties to boost trade and counter China&#x27;s rising influence in the disputed South China Sea.

===Vietnamese victims class action lawsuit in U.S. courts===
On January 31, 2004, a victim&#x27;s rights group, the Vietnam Association for Victims of Agent Orange/dioxin (VAVA), filed a lawsuit in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York in Brooklyn, against several U.S. companies for liability in causing personal injury, by developing, and producing the chemical, and claimed that the use of Agent Orange violated the 1907 Hague Convention on Land Warfare, 1925 Geneva Protocol, and the 1949 Geneva Conventions. Dow Chemical and Monsanto were the two largest producers of Agent Orange for the U.S. military and were named in the suit, along with the dozens of other companies (Diamond Shamrock, Uniroyal, Thompson Chemicals, Hercules, etc.). On March 10, 2005, Judge Jack B. Weinstein of the Eastern District – who had presided over the 1984 U.S. veterans class-action lawsuit – dismissed the lawsuit, ruling there was no legal basis for the plaintiffs&#x27; claims. He concluded Agent Orange was not considered a poison under international humanitarian law at the time of its use by the U.S.; the U.S. was not prohibited from using it as a herbicide; and the companies which produced the substance were not liable for the method of its use by the government. In the dismissal statement issued by Weinstein, he wrote &quot;The prohibition extended only to gases deployed for their asphyxiating or toxic effects on man, not to herbicides designed to affect plants that may have unintended harmful side-effects on people.&quot;

Author and activist George Jackson had written previously that:If the Americans were guilty of war crimes for using Agent Orange in Vietnam, then the British would be also guilty of war crimes as well since they were the first nation to deploy the use of herbicides and defoliants in warfare and used them on a large scale throughout the Malayan Emergency. Not only was there no outcry by other states in response to the United Kingdom&#x27;s use, but the U.S. viewed it as establishing a precedent for the use of herbicides and defoliants in jungle warfare.The U.S. government was also not a party in the lawsuit because of sovereign immunity, and the court ruled the chemical companies, as contractors of the U.S. government, shared the same immunity. The case was appealed and heard by the Second Circuit Court of Appeals in Manhattan on June 18, 2007. Three judges on the court upheld Weinstein&#x27;s ruling to dismiss the case. They ruled that, though the herbicides contained a dioxin (a known poison), they were not intended to be used as a poison on humans. Therefore, they were not considered a chemical weapon and thus not a violation of international law. A further review of the case by the entire panel of judges of the Court of Appeals also confirmed this decision. The lawyers for the Vietnamese filed a petition to the U.S. Supreme Court to hear the case. On March 2, 2009, the Supreme Court denied certiorari and declined to reconsider the ruling of the Court of Appeals.

===Help for those affected in Vietnam===
To assist those who have been affected by Agent Orange/dioxin, the Vietnamese have established &quot;peace villages&quot;, which each host between 50 and 100 victims, giving them medical and psychological help. As of 2006, there were 11 such villages, thus granting some social protection to fewer than a thousand victims. U.S. veterans of the war in Vietnam and individuals who are aware and sympathetic to the impacts of Agent Orange have supported these programs in Vietnam. An international group of veterans from the U.S. and its allies during the Vietnam War working with their former enemy—veterans from the Vietnam Veterans Association—established the Vietnam Friendship Village outside of Hanoi.

The center provides medical care, rehabilitation and vocational training for children and veterans from Vietnam who have been affected by Agent Orange. In 1998, The Vietnam Red Cross established the Vietnam Agent Orange Victims Fund to provide direct assistance to families throughout Vietnam that have been affected. In 2003, the Vietnam Association of Victims of Agent Orange (VAVA) was formed. In addition to filing the lawsuit against the chemical companies, VAVA provides medical care, rehabilitation services and financial assistance to those injured by Agent Orange.

The Vietnamese government provides small monthly stipends to more than 200,000 Vietnamese believed affected by the herbicides; this totaled $40.8 million in 2008. The Vietnam Red Cross has raised more than $22 million to assist the ill or disabled, and several U.S. foundations, United Nations agencies, European governments and nongovernmental organizations have given a total of about $23 million for site cleanup, reforestation, health care and other services to those in need.

Vuong Mo of the Vietnam News Agency described one of the centers:

May is 13, but she knows nothing, is unable to talk fluently, nor walk with ease due to for her bandy legs. Her father is dead and she has four elder brothers, all mentally retarded ... The students are all disabled, retarded and of different ages. Teaching them is a hard job. They are of the 3rd grade but many of them find it hard to do the reading. Only a few of them can. Their pronunciation is distorted due to their twisted lips and their memory is quite short. They easily forget what they&#x27;ve learned ... In the Village, it is quite hard to tell the kids&#x27; exact ages. Some in their twenties have a physical statures as small as the 7- or 8-years-old. They find it difficult to feed themselves, much less have mental ability or physical capacity for work. No one can hold back the tears when seeing the heads turning round unconsciously, the bandy arms managing to push the spoon of food into the mouths with awful difficulty ... Yet they still keep smiling, singing in their great innocence, at the presence of some visitors, craving for something beautiful.

On June 16, 2010, members of the U.S.-Vietnam Dialogue Group on Agent Orange/Dioxin unveiled a comprehensive 10-year Declaration and Plan of Action to address the toxic legacy of Agent Orange and other herbicides in Vietnam. The Plan of Action was released as an Aspen Institute publication and calls upon the U.S. and Vietnamese governments to join with other governments, foundations, businesses, and nonprofits in a partnership to clean up dioxin &quot;hot spots&quot; in Vietnam and to expand humanitarian services for people with disabilities there. On September 16, 2010, Senator Patrick Leahy acknowledged the work of the Dialogue Group by releasing a statement on the floor of the United States Senate. The statement urges the U.S. government to take the Plan of Action&#x27;s recommendations into account in developing a multi-year plan of activities to address the Agent Orange/dioxin legacy.

==Use outside of Vietnam==
===Australia===
In 2008, Australian researcher Jean Williams claimed that cancer rates in Innisfail, Queensland, were 10 times higher than the state average because of secret testing of Agent Orange by the Australian military scientists during the Vietnam War. Williams, who had won the Order of Australia medal for her research on the effects of chemicals on U.S. war veterans, based her allegations on Australian government reports found in the Australian War Memorial&#x27;s archives. A former soldier, Ted Bosworth, backed up the claims, saying that he had been involved in the secret testing. Neither Williams nor Bosworth have produced verifiable evidence to support their claims. The Queensland health department determined that cancer rates in Innisfail were no higher than those in other parts of the state.

===Canada===
The U.S. military, with the permission of the Canadian government, tested herbicides, including Agent Orange, in the forests near Canadian Forces Base Gagetown in New Brunswick. In 2007, the government of Canada offered a one-time ex gratia payment of $20,000 as compensation for Agent Orange exposure at CFB Gagetown. On July 12, 2005, Merchant Law Group, on behalf of over 1,100 Canadian veterans and civilians who were living in and around CFB Gagetown, filed a lawsuit to pursue class action litigation concerning Agent Orange and Agent Purple with the Federal Court of Canada. On August 4, 2009, the case was rejected by the court, citing lack of evidence.
In 2007, the Canadian government announced that a research and fact-finding program initiated in 2005 had found the base was safe. A legislative commission in the State of Maine found in 2024 that the Canadian investigation was &quot;incorrect, biased, and based upon, in some cases, incomplete data and poor study design—at times exacerbated by the rapid period in which these reports were required to be conducted and issued.&quot;

On February 17, 2011, the &quot;Toronto Star&quot; revealed that Agent Orange had been employed to clear extensive plots of Crown land in Northern Ontario. The &quot;Toronto Star&quot; reported that, &quot;records from the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s show forestry workers, often students and junior rangers, spent weeks at a time as human markers holding red, helium-filled balloons on fishing lines while low-flying planes sprayed toxic herbicides including an infamous chemical mixture known as Agent Orange on the brush and the boys below.&quot; In response to the &quot;Toronto Star&quot; article, the Ontario provincial government launched a probe into the use of Agent Orange.

===Guam===
An analysis of chemicals present in the island&#x27;s soil, together with resolutions passed by Guam&#x27;s legislature, suggest that Agent Orange was among the herbicides routinely used on and around Andersen Air Force Base and Naval Air Station Agana. Despite the evidence, the Department of Defense continues to deny that Agent Orange was stored or used on Guam. Several Guam veterans have collected evidence to assist in their disability claims for direct exposure to dioxin containing herbicides such as 2,4,5-T which are similar to the illness associations and disability coverage that has become standard for those who were harmed by the same chemical contaminant of Agent Orange used in Vietnam.

===South Korea===
Agent Orange was used in South Korea in the late 1960s and in 1999, about 20,000 South Koreans filed two separated lawsuits against U.S. companies, seeking more than $5 billion in damages. After losing a decision in 2002, they filed an appeal. In January 2006, the South Korean Appeals Court ordered Dow Chemical and Monsanto to pay $62 million in compensation to about 6,800 people. The ruling acknowledged that &quot;the defendants failed to ensure safety as the defoliants manufactured by the defendants had higher levels of dioxins than standard&quot;, and, quoting the U.S. National Academy of Science report, declared that there was a &quot;causal relationship&quot; between Agent Orange and a range of diseases, including several cancers. The judges failed to acknowledge &quot;the relationship between the chemical and peripheral neuropathy, the disease most widespread among Agent Orange victims&quot;.

In 2011, the United States local press KPHO-TV in Phoenix, Arizona, alleged that in 1978 that the United States Army had buried 250 55-gallon drums () of Agent Orange in Camp Carroll, the U.S. Army base located in Gyeongsangbuk-do, South Korea.

Currently, veterans who provide evidence meeting VA requirements for service in Vietnam and who can medically establish that anytime after this &#x27;presumptive exposure&#x27; they developed any medical problems on the list of presumptive diseases, may receive compensation from the VA. Certain veterans who served in South Korea and are able to prove they were assigned to certain specified around the Korean Demilitarized Zone, during a specific time frame are afforded similar presumption.

===New Zealand===
The use of Agent Orange has been controversial in New Zealand, because of the exposure of New Zealand troops in Vietnam and because of the production of herbicide used in Agent Orange which has been alleged at various times to have been exported for use in the Vietnam War and to other users by the Ivon Watkins-Dow chemical plant in Paritutu, New Plymouth. What is fact is that from 1962 until 1987, 2,4,5T herbicide was manufactured at the Ivon Watkins-Dow plant for domestic use in New Zealand. It was widely used by farmers and in New Zealand agriculture as a weed killer. This fact was the basis of a 2005 New Zealand Media story that claimed that the herbicide had been allegedly exported to U.S. military bases in South East Asia. However the claim was not proven, a fact which the Media did not subsequently report. There have been continuing claims, as yet unproven, that the suburb of Paritutu has also been polluted. However, the agriscience company Corteva (which split from DowDupont in 2019) agreed to clean up the Paritutu site in September 2022.

===Philippines===
Herbicide persistence studies of Agents Orange and White were conducted in the Philippines.

===Johnston Atoll===
The U.S. Air Force operation to remove Herbicide Orange from Vietnam in 1972 was named Operation Pacer IVY, while the operation to destroy the Agent Orange stored at Johnston Atoll in 1977 was named Operation Pacer HO. Operation Pacer IVY collected Agent Orange in South Vietnam and removed it in 1972 aboard the ship MV Transpacific for storage on Johnston Atoll. The EPA reports that of Herbicide Orange was stored at Johnston Island in the Pacific and at Gulfport, Mississippi.

Research and studies were initiated to find a safe method to destroy the materials, and it was discovered they could be incinerated safely under special conditions of temperature and dwell time. However, these herbicides were expensive, and the Air Force wanted to resell its surplus instead of dumping it at sea. Among many methods tested, a possibility of salvaging the herbicides by reprocessing and filtering out the TCDD contaminant with carbonized (charcoaled) coconut fibers. This concept was then tested in 1976 and a pilot plant constructed at Gulfport.

From July to September 1977 during Operation Pacer HO, the entire stock of Agent Orange from both Herbicide Orange storage sites at Gulfport and Johnston Atoll was subsequently incinerated in four separate burns in the vicinity of Johnston Island aboard the Dutch-owned waste incineration ship .
As of 2004, some records of the storage and disposition of Agent Orange at Johnston Atoll have been associated with the historical records of Operation Red Hat.

===Okinawa, Japan===
There have been dozens of reports in the press about use and/or storage of military formulated herbicides on Okinawa that are based upon statements by former U.S. service members that had been stationed on the island, photographs, government records, and unearthed storage barrels. The U.S. Department of Defense has denied these allegations with statements by military officials and spokespersons, as well as a January 2013 report authored by Dr. Alvin Young that was released in April 2013.

In particular, the 2013 report rebuts articles written by journalist Jon Mitchell as well as a statement from &quot;An Ecological Assessment of Johnston Atoll&quot; a 2003 publication produced by the United States Army Chemical Materials Agency that states, &quot;in 1972, the U.S. Air Force also brought about 25,000 200L drums () of the chemical, Herbicide Orange (HO) to Johnston Island that originated from Vietnam and was stored on Okinawa.&quot; The 2013 report states: &quot;The authors of the [2003] report were not DoD employees, nor were they likely familiar with the issues surrounding Herbicide Orange or its actual history of transport to the Island.&quot; and detailed the transport phases and routes of Agent Orange from Vietnam to Johnston Atoll, none of which included Okinawa.

Further official confirmation of restricted (dioxin containing) herbicide storage on Okinawa appeared in a 1971 Fort Detrick report titled &quot;Historical, Logistical, Political and Technical Aspects of the Herbicide/Defoliant Program&quot;, which mentions that the environmental statement should consider &quot;Herbicide stockpiles elsewhere in PACOM (Pacific Command) U.S. Government restricted materials Thailand and Okinawa (Kadena AFB).&quot; The 2013 DoD report says that the environmental statement urged by the 1971 report was published in 1974 as &quot;The Department of Air Force Final Environmental Statement&quot;, and that the latter did not find Agent Orange was held in either Thailand or Okinawa.

===Thailand===
Agent Orange was tested by the United States in Thailand during the Vietnam War. In 1999, buried drums were uncovered and confirmed to be Agent Orange. Workers who uncovered the drums fell ill while upgrading the airport near Hua Hin District, 100 km south of Bangkok. Vietnam-era veterans whose service involved duty on or near the perimeters of military bases in Thailand anytime between February 28, 1961, and May 7, 1975, may have been exposed to herbicides and may qualify for VA benefits.
A declassified Department of Defense report written in 1973, suggests that there was a significant use of herbicides on the fenced-in perimeters of military bases in Thailand to remove foliage that provided cover for enemy forces. In 2013, the VA determined that herbicides used on the Thailand base perimeters may have been tactical and procured from Vietnam, or a strong, commercial type resembling tactical herbicides.

===United States===
The University of Hawaiʻi has acknowledged extensive testing of Agent Orange on behalf of the United States Department of Defense in Hawaii along with mixtures of Agent Orange on Hawaii Island in 1966 and on Kaua&#x27;i Island in 1967–1968; testing and storage in other U.S. locations has been documented by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs.

In 1971, the C-123 aircraft used for spraying Agent Orange were returned to the United States and assigned various East Coast USAF Reserve squadrons, and then employed in traditional airlift missions between 1972 and 1982. In 1994, testing by the Air Force identified some former spray aircraft as &quot;heavily contaminated&quot; with dioxin residue. Inquiries by aircrew veterans in 2011 brought a decision by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs opining that not enough dioxin residue remained to injure these post-Vietnam War veterans. On 26 January 2012, the U.S. Center For Disease Control&#x27;s Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry challenged this with their finding that former spray aircraft were indeed contaminated and the aircrews exposed to harmful levels of dioxin. In response to veterans&#x27; concerns, the VA in February 2014 referred the C-123 issue to the Institute of Medicine for a special study, with results released on January 9, 2015.

In 1978, the EPA suspended spraying of Agent Orange in national forests.
Agent Orange was sprayed on thousands of acres of brush in the Tennessee Valley for 15 years before scientists discovered the herbicide was dangerous. Monroe County, Tennessee, is one of the locations known to have been sprayed according to the Tennessee Valley Authority. Forty-four remote acres were sprayed with Agent Orange along power lines throughout the National Forest.

In 1983, New Jersey declared a Passaic River production site to be a state of emergency. The dioxin pollution in the Passaic River dates back to the Vietnam era, when Diamond Alkali manufactured it in a factory along the river. The tidal river carried dioxin upstream and down, contaminating a stretch of riverbed in one of New Jersey&#x27;s most populous areas.

A December 2006 Department of Defense report listed Agent Orange testing, storage, and disposal sites at 32 locations throughout the United States, Canada, Thailand, Puerto Rico, Korea, and in the Pacific Ocean. The Veteran Administration has also acknowledged that Agent Orange was used domestically by U.S. forces in test sites throughout the United States. Eglin Air Force Base in Florida was one of the primary testing sites throughout the 1960s.

==Cleanup programs==
In February 2012, Monsanto agreed to settle a case covering dioxin contamination around a plant in Nitro, West Virginia, that had manufactured Agent Orange. Monsanto agreed to pay up to $9 million for cleanup of affected homes, $84 million for medical monitoring of people affected, and the community&#x27;s legal fees.

On 9 August 2012, the United States and Vietnam began a cooperative cleaning up of the toxic chemical on part of Da Nang International Airport, marking the first time the U.S. government has been involved in cleaning up Agent Orange in Vietnam. Danang was the primary storage site of the chemical. Two other cleanup sites the United States and Vietnam are looking at is Biên Hòa, in the southern province of Đồng Nai is a hotspot for dioxin and so is Phù Cát airport in the central province of Bình Định, says U.S. Ambassador to Vietnam David Shear. According to the Vietnamese newspaper &quot;Nhân Dân&quot;, the U.S. government provided $41 million to the project. As of 2017, some of soil have been cleaned.

The Naval Construction Battalion Center at Gulfport, Mississippi was the largest storage site in the United States for Agent Orange. It was about in size and was still being cleaned up in 2013.

In 2016, the EPA laid out its plan for cleaning up an stretch of the Passaic River in New Jersey, with an estimated cost of $1.4 billion. The contaminants reached to Newark Bay and other waterways, according to the EPA, which has designated the area a Superfund site. Since destruction of the dioxin requires high temperatures over , the destruction process is energy intensive.

==See also==
* Environmental impact of war
* Orange Crush (song)
* Rainbow herbicides
* Scorched earth
* Teratology
* Vietnam Syndrome

==References==
===Citations===
=== General and cited references ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* NTP (National Toxicology Program); &quot;Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in Female Harlan Sprague-Dawley Rats (Gavage Studies)&quot;, CASRN 1746–01–6, April 2006.
* 
* 
* 
* – both of Young&#x27;s books were commissioned by the U.S. Department of Defense, Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Installations and Environment)
==Further reading==
===Books===

* see pages 245–252.
* with a foreword by Howard Zinn.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Government/NGO reports===
* &quot;Agent Orange in Vietnam: Recent Developments in Remediation: Testimony of Ms. Tran Thi Hoan&quot;, &quot;Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific and the Global Environment&quot;, U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Foreign Affairs. July 15, 2010
* &quot;Agent Orange in Vietnam: Recent Developments in Remediation: Testimony of Dr. Nguyen Thi Ngoc Phuong&quot;, &quot;Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific and the Global Environment&quot;, U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Foreign Affairs. July 15, 2010
* Agent Orange Policy, &quot;American Public Health Association&quot;, 2007
* &quot;Assessment of the health risk of dioxins&quot;, World Health Organization/International Programme on Chemical Safety, 1998
* Operation Ranch Hand: Herbicides In Southeast Asia History of Operation Ranch Hand, 1983
* &quot;Agent Orange Dioxin Contamination in the Environment and Food Chain at Key Hotspots in Viet Nam&quot; Boivin, TG, &quot;et al.&quot;, 2011

===News===
* Fawthrop, Tom; Agent of suffering, &quot;Guardian&quot;, February 10, 2008
* Cox, Paul; &quot;The Legacy of Agent Orange is a Continuing Focus of VVAW&quot;, &quot;The Veteran&quot;, Vietnam Veterans Against the War, Volume 38, Number 2, Fall 2008.
* Barlett, Donald P. and Steele, James B.; &quot;Monsanto&#x27;s Harvest of Fear&quot;, &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; May 2008
* Quick, Ben &quot;The Boneyard&quot; &quot;Orion Magazine&quot;, March/April 2008
* Cheng, Eva; &quot;Vietnam&#x27;s Agent Orange victims call for solidarity&quot;, &quot;Green Left Weekly&quot;, September 28, 2005
* Children and the Vietnam War 30–40 years after the use of Agent Orange
* Tokar, Brian; &quot;Monsanto: A Checkered History&quot;, &quot;Z Magazine&quot;, March 1999

===Video===
* &quot;Agent Orange: The Last Battle&quot;. Dir. Stephanie Jobe, Adam Scholl. DVD. 2005
* &quot;HADES&quot;. Dir. Caroline Delerue, screenplay by Mauro Bellanova, 2011
* Short film by James Nguyen.
* &quot;Vietnam: The Secret Agent&quot;. Dir. Jacki Ochs, 1984

===Photojournalism===
* CNN 
* Al Jazeera America

==External links==

* U.S. Environmental Protection Agency – Dioxin Web site
* Agent Orange &quot;Office of Public Health and Environmental Hazards&quot;, U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs
* Report from the National Birth Defects Registry - Birth Defects in Vietnam Veterans&#x27; Children
* &quot;An Ecological Assessment of Johnston Atoll&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215946" start="0" end="12" title="Agent Orange" label="Agent Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="27" end="36" title="herbicide" label="herbicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q53744" start="41" end="50" title="defoliant" label="defoliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q867182" start="76" end="94" title="Rainbow Herbicides" label="Rainbow Herbicides"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="115" end="128" title="U.S. military" label="U.S. military"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736070" start="144" end="162" title="herbicidal warfare" label="herbicidal warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q485875" start="172" end="192" title="Operation Ranch Hand" label="Operation Ranch Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="205" end="216" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354629" start="317" end="334" title="Malayan Emergency" label="Malayan Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q209188" start="386" end="393" title="2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid" label="2,4,5-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q209222" start="398" end="403" title="2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid" label="2,4-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="782" end="802" title="Dow Chemical Company" label="Dow Chemical Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q207983" start="804" end="820" title="Monsanto Company" label="Monsanto Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973722" start="822" end="850" title="Diamond Shamrock" label="Diamond Shamrock Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q766486" start="852" end="865" title="Hercules Inc." label="Hercules Inc."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="867" end="892" title="Thompson Hayward Chemical" label="Thompson Hayward Chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296074" start="898" end="926" title="United States Rubber Company" label="United States Rubber Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="939" end="960" title="Thompson Chemical Co." label="Thompson Chemical Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q85846100" start="962" end="974" title="Hoffman-Taff" label="Hoffman-Taff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="996" end="1006" title="Agriselect" label="Agriselect"/>
<link wikidata="Q10772254" start="1206" end="1226" title="Vietnamese Red Cross" label="Vietnamese Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="1451" end="1459" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209369" start="1461" end="1484" title="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma" label="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="1722" end="1764" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="1814" end="1827" title="birth defects" label="birth defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q815818" start="2069" end="2082" title="reforestation" label="reforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q706937" start="2119" end="2136" title="species diversity" label="species diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q53713" start="2292" end="2302" title="Olof Palme" label="Olof Palme"/>
<link wikidata="Q296486" start="2350" end="2357" title="ecocide" label="ecocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="2435" end="2449" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15204125" start="2459" end="2507" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 31/72" label="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 31/72"/>
<link wikidata="Q488546" start="2516" end="2553" title="Environmental Modification Convention" label="Environmental Modification Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2682" end="2702" title="British Commonwealth" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="2713" end="2719" title="British Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354629" start="2731" end="2748" title="Malayan Emergency" label="Malayan Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="2791" end="2795" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="2800" end="2808" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174423" start="2894" end="2903" title="Viet Cong" label="Viet Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181399" start="2998" end="3015" title="phenoxy herbicide" label="phenoxy herbicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q209222" start="3019" end="3049" title="2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid" label="2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q209188" start="3062" end="3095" title="2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid" label="2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="3121" end="3126" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522" start="3163" end="3169" title="Dioxins and dioxin-like compounds" label="dioxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q52822" start="3170" end="3217" title="2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin" label="2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-dioxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="3258" end="3261" title="Parts-per notation" label="ppm"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="3428" end="3438" title="carcinogen" label="carcinogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="3446" end="3482" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="U.S. Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q155750" start="3672" end="3697" title="aryl hydrocarbon receptor" label="aryl hydrocarbon receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="3761" end="3773" title="cell nucleus" label="cell nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4218" end="4230" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q149413" start="4263" end="4267" title="MCPA" label="MCPA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4352" end="4377" title="isopropyl phenylcarbamate" label="isopropyl phenylcarbamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328562" start="4415" end="4451" title="United States Department of the Army" label="United States Department of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798779" start="4496" end="4510" title="Arthur Galston" label="Arthur Galston"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="4587" end="4626" title="University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign" label="University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="4826" end="4838" title="dissertation" label="dissertation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4948" end="4967" title="triiodobenzoic acid" label="triiodobenzoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001545" start="5300" end="5322" title="Bushnell Army Airfield" label="Bushnell Army Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q300879" start="5460" end="5478" title="Operation Downfall" label="Operation Downfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q158725" start="5823" end="5833" title="Tanganyika (territory)" label="Tanganyika"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406355" start="5838" end="5844" title="Kikore" label="Kikore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054030" start="5970" end="5979" title="endothall" label="endothall"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="6086" end="6091" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q205256" start="6148" end="6158" title="tsetse fly" label="tsetse fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479726" start="6178" end="6184" title="Federation of Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q899151" start="6204" end="6232" title="Imperial Chemical Industries" label="Imperial Chemical Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="6258" end="6269" title="weed killer" label="weed killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="6275" end="6292" title="rubber plantation" label="rubber plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862904" start="6320" end="6352" title="Malayan National Liberation Army" label="Malayan National Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="6374" end="6394" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354629" start="6413" end="6430" title="Malayan Emergency" label="Malayan Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693945" start="6679" end="6708" title="Agricultural and Food Research Council" label="Agricultural Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q459506" start="6773" end="6794" title="University of Bristol" label="University of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833880" start="6927" end="6950" title="Law of war" label="legal tactic of warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="6952" end="6970" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q313258" start="6971" end="6980" title="Dean Rusk" label="Dean Rusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="6989" end="6998" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="6999" end="7014" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192502" start="7150" end="7163" title="Ngo Dinh Diem" label="Ngo Dinh Diem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535173" start="7308" end="7337" title="Republic of Vietnam Air Force" label="Republic of Vietnam Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="7441" end="7452" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="7461" end="7466" title="State Department" label="State"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="7471" end="7490" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Defense Departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q485875" start="7695" end="7715" title="Operation Ranch Hand" label="Operation Ranch Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="7738" end="7761" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q867182" start="8006" end="8024" title="rainbow herbicides" label="rainbow herbicides"/>
<link wikidata="Q19074" start="8478" end="8498" title="Samuel P. Huntington" label="Samuel P. Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467526" start="8554" end="8579" title="forced draft urbanization" label="forced draft urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q631411" start="8845" end="8859" title="C-123 Provider" label="C-123 Provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115006" start="9123" end="9144" title="Tan Son Nhut Air Base" label="Tan Son Nhut Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="9452" end="9482" title="U.S. Department of Agriculture" label="U.S. Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q392668" start="10162" end="10172" title="Agent Blue" label="Agent Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="10418" end="10431" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q185973" start="11518" end="11536" title="plant physiologist" label="plant physiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q194294" start="11541" end="11552" title="Bioethics" label="bioethicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798779" start="11553" end="11567" title="Arthur Galston" label="Arthur Galston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="11782" end="11796" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q605626" start="11843" end="11858" title="Geneva Protocol" label="Geneva Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639228" start="11887" end="11895" title="chemical weapon" label="chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742406" start="11900" end="11918" title="biological agent" label="biological weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354629" start="12623" end="12640" title="Malayan Emergency" label="Malayan Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="12886" end="12903" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="12909" end="12934" title="environmental destruction" label="environmental destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q53713" start="13007" end="13017" title="Olof Palme" label="Olof Palme"/>
<link wikidata="Q296486" start="13065" end="13072" title="ecocide" label="ecocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q215790" start="13530" end="13547" title="Americal Division" label="Americal Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227277" start="14167" end="14175" title="Data dredging" label="spurious"/>
<link wikidata="Q10772254" start="14535" end="14555" title="Red Cross of Vietnam" label="Red Cross of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14774" end="14790" title="Nguyen Viet Nhan" label="Nguyen Viet Nhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q222634" start="14906" end="14918" title="cleft palate" label="cleft palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q133076" start="14941" end="14947" title="hernia" label="hernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q371520" start="14954" end="14976" title="Polydactyly" label="extra fingers and toes"/>
<link wikidata="Q22728" start="15032" end="15043" title="breast milk" label="breast milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q842139" start="15197" end="15207" title="Truong Son Mountains" label="Truong Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="15340" end="15356" title="genetic diseases" label="genetic diseases"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15368" end="15379" title="Anh Duc Ngo" label="Anh Duc Ngo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140391" start="15402" end="15443" title="University of Texas Health Science Center" label="University of Texas Health Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="15456" end="15469" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142611" start="15729" end="15742" title="relative risk" label="relative risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q425265" start="15930" end="15954" title="statistical significance" label="statistical significance"/>
<link wikidata="Q548213" start="16026" end="16045" title="neural tube defects" label="neural tube defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q844717" start="16052" end="16064" title="spina bifida" label="spina bifida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656800" start="16574" end="16581" title="Da Nang Air Base" label="Da Nang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188237" start="16583" end="16599" title="Phù Cát Air Base" label="Phù Cát District"/>
<link wikidata="Q619905" start="16604" end="16612" title="Bien Hoa Air Base" label="Biên Hòa"/>
<link wikidata="Q563112" start="17096" end="17133" title="Free World Military Assistance Forces" label="Free World Military Assistance Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q592576" start="17602" end="17632" title="United States Department of Veterans Affairs" label="Department of Veterans Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265340" start="18552" end="18571" title="Zogby International" label="Zogby International"/>
<link wikidata="Q619905" start="19105" end="19122" title="Bien Hoa Air Base" label="Bien Hoa Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674069" start="19205" end="19236" title="Tactical area of responsibility" label="Tactical area of responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276503" start="19402" end="19410" title="Bong Son" label="Bong Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q36081" start="19415" end="19423" title="Qui Nhon" label="Qui Nhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656800" start="19521" end="19537" title="Da Nang Air Base" label="Da Nang Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q782783" start="20217" end="20240" title="Australian War Memorial" label="Australian War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374588" start="20893" end="20950" title="Royal New Zealand Returned and Services&amp;#x27; Association" label="Royal New Zealand Returned and Services&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352382" start="21691" end="21719" title="National Academy of Medicine" label="National Academy of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q476322" start="23290" end="23325" title="United States Public Health Service" label="United States Public Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="23460" end="23502" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="23695" end="23717" title="Ischemic heart disease" label="Ischemic heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q592576" start="23828" end="23856" title="U.S. Veterans Administration" label="U.S. Veterans Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="24916" end="24932" title="North Vietnamese" label="North Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q877450" start="24955" end="24959" title="Laotian Civil War" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q683271" start="24964" end="24972" title="Operation Menu" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="26279" end="26285" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q693409" start="26290" end="26301" title="cogon grass" label="cogon grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="26370" end="26379" title="biodiversity" label="diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="26414" end="26421" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q159462" start="26782" end="26792" title="food chain" label="food chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775153" start="26892" end="26900" title="food web" label="food web"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904036" start="26917" end="26933" title="bioconcentration" label="bioconcentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304799" start="26938" end="26954" title="biomagnification" label="biomagnification"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="27182" end="27198" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="27841" end="27855" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15204125" start="27864" end="27880" title="United Nations Convention on Environmental Modification" label="Resolution 31/72"/>
<link wikidata="Q488546" start="27896" end="27933" title="Environmental Modification Convention" label="Environmental Modification Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q925836" start="28120" end="28162" title="Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons" label="Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q181822" start="28503" end="28509" title="napalm" label="napalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q855639" start="28797" end="28809" title="Dow Chemical Company" label="Dow Chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q207983" start="28811" end="28819" title="Monsanto Company" label="Monsanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q16973722" start="28825" end="28841" title="Diamond Shamrock" label="Diamond Shamrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="29389" end="29411" title="environmentalism" label="environmental attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926465" start="29412" end="29428" title="Victor Yannacone" label="Victor Yannacone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783852" start="29450" end="29467" title="class-action suit" label="class-action suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260784" start="30421" end="30431" title="Deposition (law)" label="deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196258" start="30547" end="30556" title="testimony" label="testimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520826" start="30703" end="30714" title="Tiger Force" label="Tiger Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="30716" end="30730" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673153" start="30736" end="30741" title="LRRPs" label="LRRPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111094" start="32060" end="32077" title="Jack B. Weinstein" label="Jack B. Weinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q556318" start="32572" end="32583" title="Food Stamps" label="food stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="32585" end="32602" title="public assistance" label="public assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q156223" start="32608" end="32626" title="government pension" label="government pension"/>
<link wikidata="Q69496556" start="33175" end="33186" title="Tran To Nga" label="Tran To Nga"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="33807" end="33825" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q435267" start="33900" end="33922" title="Christine Todd Whitman" label="Christine Todd Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="34104" end="34124" title="adipose tissue" label="adipose (fat) tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="34519" end="34527" title="United States Army" label="Soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="34529" end="34536" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746796" start="34542" end="34558" title="Brownwater Navy" label="Brownwater Naval"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712725" start="34621" end="34637" title="Agent Orange Act of 1991" label="Agent Orange Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q592576" start="34650" end="34680" title="United States Department of Veterans Affairs" label="Department of Veterans Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="34924" end="34952" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658460" start="35043" end="35072" title="Secretary of Veterans Affairs" label="Secretary of Veterans Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="35558" end="35573" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q467635" start="35596" end="35612" title="multiple myeloma" label="multiple myeloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="35614" end="35639" title="type II diabetes mellitus" label="type II diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209369" start="35641" end="35663" title="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138590" start="35665" end="35692" title="non-Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma" label="non-Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q426955" start="35715" end="35724" title="chloracne" label="chloracne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479497" start="35726" end="35749" title="porphyria cutanea tarda" label="porphyria cutanea tarda"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="35751" end="35772" title="peripheral neuropathy" label="peripheral neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088156" start="35774" end="35802" title="chronic lymphocytic leukemia" label="chronic lymphocytic leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q844717" start="35808" end="35820" title="spina bifida" label="spina bifida"/>
<link wikidata="Q201299" start="35975" end="35994" title="hairy cell leukemia" label="hairy cell leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="35996" end="36020" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="36025" end="36047" title="ischemic heart disease" label="ischemic heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284039" start="37328" end="37379" title="National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences" label="National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019586" start="38189" end="38214" title="environmental remediation" label="environmental remediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="38332" end="38346" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q57400" start="38438" end="38453" title="President Triet" label="President Triet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863437" start="38711" end="38820" title="U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans&amp;#x27; Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act, 2007" label="U.S. Troop Readiness, Veterans&amp;#x27; Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability Appropriations Act, 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="38838" end="38850" title="Iraq War" label="wars in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="38855" end="38866" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q245016" start="39010" end="39024" title="military bases" label="military bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="39563" end="39578" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="40126" end="40141" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925604" start="40228" end="40254" title="victim&amp;#x27;s rights group" label="victim&amp;#x27;s rights group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215769" start="40346" end="40411" title="United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York" label="United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="40415" end="40423" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566316" start="40595" end="40632" title="Hague Convention of 1907" label="1907 Hague Convention on Land Warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q605626" start="40639" end="40654" title="Geneva Protocol" label="Geneva Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q133536" start="40669" end="40687" title="Geneva Conventions" label="Geneva Conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111094" start="40944" end="40961" title="Jack B. Weinstein" label="Jack B. Weinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q381148" start="41204" end="41234" title="international humanitarian law" label="international humanitarian law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507656" start="41724" end="41738" title="George Jackson (activist)" label="George Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190467" start="42247" end="42261" title="jungle warfare" label="jungle warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457196" start="42329" end="42347" title="sovereign immunity" label="sovereign immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q250479" start="42497" end="42528" title="Second Circuit Court of Appeals" label="Second Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="42532" end="42541" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227103" start="42689" end="42695" title="dioxin" label="dioxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639228" start="42809" end="42824" title="chemical weapon" label="chemical weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="43040" end="43058" title="U.S. Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056352" start="43120" end="43130" title="certiorari" label="certiorari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="43934" end="43939" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10772254" start="44107" end="44124" title="Vietnam Red Cross" label="Vietnam Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862995" start="46173" end="46227" title="the U.S.-Vietnam Dialogue Group on Agent Orange/Dioxin" label="the U.S.-Vietnam Dialogue Group on Agent Orange/Dioxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q59315" start="46730" end="46743" title="Patrick Leahy" label="Patrick Leahy"/>
<link wikidata="Q690795" start="47165" end="47186" title="Innisfail, Queensland" label="Innisfail, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="47362" end="47380" title="Order of Australia" label="Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023449" start="48036" end="48065" title="Canadian Forces Base Gagetown" label="Canadian Forces Base Gagetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="48097" end="48117" title="government of Canada" label="government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q144027" start="48137" end="48146" title="ex gratia" label="ex gratia"/>
<link wikidata="Q392759" start="48441" end="48453" title="Agent Purple" label="Agent Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440167" start="48463" end="48486" title="Federal Court of Canada" label="Federal Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067299" start="49035" end="49047" title="Toronto Star" label="Toronto Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473816" start="49127" end="49137" title="Crown land" label="Crown land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066392" start="49141" end="49157" title="Northern Ontario" label="Northern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809086" start="49605" end="49634" title="Legislative Assembly of Ontario" label="Ontario provincial government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563896" start="49790" end="49813" title="Legislature of Guam" label="Guam&amp;#x27;s legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q491372" start="49895" end="49918" title="Anderson Air Force Base" label="Andersen Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015976" start="49923" end="49946" title="Naval Air Station Agana" label="Naval Air Station Agana"/>
<link wikidata="Q498272" start="51500" end="51512" title="Camp Carroll, South Korea" label="Camp Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q41154" start="51544" end="51560" title="Gyeongsangbuk-do" label="Gyeongsangbuk-do"/>
<link wikidata="Q331990" start="51980" end="52005" title="Korean Demilitarized Zone" label="Korean Demilitarized Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q212984" start="52433" end="52445" title="New Plymouth" label="New Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="52653" end="52664" title="weed killer" label="weed killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="52810" end="52825" title="South East Asia" label="South East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097365" start="53371" end="53390" title="Operation Pacer IVY" label="Operation Pacer IVY"/>
<link wikidata="Q131008" start="53450" end="53464" title="Johnston Atoll" label="Johnston Atoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097364" start="53483" end="53501" title="Operation Pacer HO" label="Operation Pacer HO"/>
<link wikidata="Q16884884" start="53602" end="53617" title="Transpacific (ships)" label="MV Transpacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q490587" start="53742" end="53763" title="Gulfport, Mississippi" label="Gulfport, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097448" start="54768" end="54785" title="Operation Red Hat" label="Operation Red Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889459" start="55503" end="55547" title="United States Army Chemical Materials Agency" label="United States Army Chemical Materials Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q608289" start="56529" end="56539" title="Kadena AFB" label="Kadena AFB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666491" start="57055" end="57071" title="Hua Hin District" label="Hua Hin District"/>
<link wikidata="Q217439" start="57771" end="57792" title="University of Hawaiʻi" label="University of Hawaiʻi"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="57946" end="57959" title="Hawaii Island" label="Hawaii Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q201026" start="57975" end="57993" title="Kauaʻi" label="Kaua&amp;#x27;i Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q612741" start="59159" end="59175" title="U.S. National Forest" label="national forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554094" start="59240" end="59256" title="Tennessee Valley" label="Tennessee Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q495006" start="59328" end="59352" title="Monroe County, Tennessee" label="Monroe County, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367577" start="59422" end="59448" title="Tennessee Valley Authority" label="Tennessee Valley Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055835" start="59587" end="59600" title="Passaic River" label="Passaic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026082" start="59723" end="59737" title="Diamond Alkali" label="Diamond Alkali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298115" start="60280" end="60300" title="Eglin Air Force Base" label="Eglin Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211711" start="60492" end="60512" title="Nitro, West Virginia" label="Nitro, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q773330" start="60827" end="60856" title="Da Nang International Airport" label="Da Nang International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q19316" start="61084" end="61092" title="Biên Hòa" label="Biên Hòa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33271" start="61122" end="61130" title="Đồng Nai Province" label="Đồng Nai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188238" start="61165" end="61172" title="Phù Cát" label="Phù Cát"/>
<link wikidata="Q36693" start="61208" end="61217" title="Bình Định" label="Bình Định"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231001" start="61251" end="61262" title="David Shear" label="David Shear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227318" start="61308" end="61316" title="Nhân Dân" label="Nhân Dân"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063608" start="61430" end="61465" title="Naval Construction Battalion Center (Gulfport, Mississippi)" label="Naval Construction Battalion Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504641" start="61873" end="61882" title="Superfund" label="Superfund"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381260" start="62016" end="62043" title="Environmental impact of war" label="Environmental impact of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419711" start="62046" end="62065" title="Orange Crush (song)" label="Orange Crush (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q867182" start="62068" end="62086" title="Rainbow herbicides" label="Rainbow herbicides"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="62089" end="62103" title="Scorched earth" label="Scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q631521" start="62106" end="62116" title="Teratology" label="Teratology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408490" start="62119" end="62135" title="Vietnam Syndrome" label="Vietnam Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="62505" end="62531" title="U.S. Department of Defense" label="U.S. Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="63405" end="63430" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4288237" start="63431" end="63473" title="International Programme on Chemical Safety" label="International Programme on Chemical Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928558" start="63915" end="63947" title="Vietnam Veterans Against the War" label="Vietnam Veterans Against the War"/>
<link wikidata="Q592576" start="64967" end="65001" title="U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs" label="U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2551" wikidata="Q751976" url="?curid=2551" title="Astronomical year numbering">
<text>Astronomical year numbering is based on AD/CE year numbering, but follows normal decimal integer numbering more strictly. Thus, it has a year 0; the years before that are designated with negative numbers and the years after that are designated with positive numbers. Astronomers use the Julian calendar for years before 1582, including the year 0, and the Gregorian calendar for years after 1582, as exemplified by Jacques Cassini (1740), Simon Newcomb (1898) and Fred Espenak (2007).

The prefix AD and the suffixes CE, BC or BCE (Common Era, Before Christ or Before Common Era) are dropped. The year 1 BC/BCE is numbered 0, the year 2 BC is numbered −1, and in general the year &quot;n&quot; BC/BCE is numbered &quot;−(&quot;n&quot; − 1)&quot; (a negative number equal to 1 − &quot;n&quot;). The numbers of AD/CE years are not changed and are written with either no sign or a positive sign; thus in general &quot;n&quot; AD/CE is simply &quot;n&quot; or +&quot;n&quot;. For normal calculation a number zero is often needed, here most notably when calculating the number of years in a period that spans the epoch; the end years need only be subtracted from each other.

The system is so named due to its use in astronomy. Few other disciplines outside history deal with the time before year 1, some exceptions being dendrochronology, archaeology and geology, the latter two of which use &#x27;years before the present&#x27;. Although the absolute numerical values of astronomical and historical years only differ by one before year 1, this difference is critical when calculating astronomical events like eclipses or planetary conjunctions to determine when historical events which mention them occurred.

==Usage of the year zero==

In his Rudolphine Tables (1627), Johannes Kepler used a prototype of year zero which he labeled &quot;Christi&quot; (Christ&#x27;s) between years labeled &quot;Ante Christum&quot; (Before Christ) and &quot;Post Christum&quot; (After Christ) on the mean motion tables for the Sun, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury. In 1702, the French astronomer Philippe de la Hire used a year he labeled at the end of years labeled &quot;ante Christum&quot; (BC), and immediately before years labeled &quot;post Christum&quot; (AD) on the mean motion pages in his &quot;Tabulæ Astronomicæ&quot;, thus adding the designation &quot;0&quot; to Kepler&#x27;s &quot;Christi&quot;. Finally, in 1740 the French astronomer Jacques Cassini , who is traditionally credited with the invention of year zero, completed the transition in his &quot;Tables astronomiques&quot;, simply labeling this year &quot;0&quot;, which he placed at the end of Julian years labeled &quot;avant Jesus-Christ&quot; (before Jesus Christ or BC), and immediately before Julian years labeled &quot;après Jesus-Christ&quot; (after Jesus Christ or AD).

Cassini gave the following reasons for using a year 0: 
Fred Espenak of NASA lists 50 phases of the Moon within year 0, showing that it is a full year, not an instant in time. Jean Meeus gives the following explanation:
==Signed years without the year zero==
Although he used the usual French terms &quot;avant J.-C.&quot; (before Jesus Christ) and &quot;après J.-C.&quot; (after Jesus Christ) to label years elsewhere in his book, the Byzantine historian Venance Grumel (1890–1967) used negative years (identified by a minus sign, −) to label BC years and unsigned positive years to label AD years in a table. He may have done so to save space and he put no year 0 between them.

Version 1.0 of the XML Schema language, often used to describe data interchanged between computers in XML, includes built-in primitive datatypes date and dateTime. Although these are defined in terms of ISO 8601 which uses the proleptic Gregorian calendar and therefore should include a year 0, the XML Schema specification states that there is no year zero. Version 1.1 of the defining recommendation realigned the specification with ISO 8601 by including a year zero, despite the problems arising from the lack of backward compatibility.

==See also==
* Julian day, another calendar commonly used by astronomers
* Astronomical chronology
* Holocene calendar
* ISO 8601

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q751976" start="0" end="27" title="Astronomical year numbering" label="Astronomical year numbering"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="40" end="42" title="Anno Domini" label="AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="43" end="45" title="Common Era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="81" end="88" title="decimal" label="decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="89" end="96" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23104" start="137" end="143" title="0 (year)" label="year 0"/>
<link wikidata="Q200227" start="187" end="202" title="negative number" label="negative number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="287" end="302" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="356" end="374" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q315037" start="415" end="430" title="Jacques Cassini" label="Jacques Cassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q164401" start="439" end="452" title="Simon Newcomb" label="Simon Newcomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801230" start="464" end="476" title="Fred Espenak" label="Fred Espenak"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="997" end="1008" title="0 (number)" label="number zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703" start="1108" end="1113" title="epoch (astronomy)" label="epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="1212" end="1221" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="1253" end="1260" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q80205" start="1317" end="1333" title="dendrochronology" label="dendrochronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="1335" end="1346" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="1351" end="1358" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="1394" end="1418" title="Before Present" label="years before the present"/>
<link wikidata="Q141022" start="1606" end="1614" title="eclipses" label="eclipses"/>
<link wikidata="Q191536" start="1618" end="1639" title="planetary conjunction" label="planetary conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q611853" start="1742" end="1759" title="Rudolphine Tables" label="Rudolphine Tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="1768" end="1783" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q371890" start="2094" end="2113" title="Philippe de la Hire" label="Philippe de la Hire"/>
<link wikidata="Q315037" start="2448" end="2463" title="Jacques Cassini" label="Jacques Cassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2923" end="2927" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="2937" end="2955" title="Lunar phase" label="phases of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15970892" start="3307" end="3321" title="Venance Grumel" label="Venance Grumel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16342" start="3551" end="3570" title="XML Schema (W3C)" label="XML Schema language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="3634" end="3637" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q50101" start="3735" end="3743" title="ISO 8601" label="ISO 8601"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985727" start="3759" end="3787" title="proleptic Gregorian calendar" label="proleptic Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="3919" end="3933" title="W3C recommendation" label="recommendation"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="4048" end="4070" title="backward compatibility" label="backward compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q14267" start="4088" end="4098" title="Julian day" label="Julian day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3698490" start="4148" end="4171" title="Astronomical chronology" label="Astronomical chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q723716" start="4174" end="4191" title="Holocene calendar" label="Holocene calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q50101" start="4194" end="4202" title="ISO 8601" label="ISO 8601"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2552" wikidata="Q109244" url="?curid=2552" title="Adam of Bremen">
<text>Adam of Bremen (; ; before 1050 – 12 October 1081/1085) was a German medieval chronicler. He lived and worked in the second half of the eleventh century. Adam is most famous for his chronicle &quot;Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum&quot; (&quot;Deeds of Bishops of the Hamburg Church&quot;). He was &quot;one of the foremost historians and early ethnographers of the medieval period&quot;.

In his chronicle, he included a chapter mentioning the Norse outpost of Vinland, and was thus the first continental European to write about the New World.

==Life==
Little is known of his life other than hints from his own chronicles. He is believed to have come from Meissen, then its own margravate. The dates of his birth and death are uncertain, but he was probably born before 1050 and died on 12 October of an unknown year (possibly 1081, at the latest 1085). From his chronicles, it is apparent that he was familiar with a number of authors. The honorary name of &quot;Magister Adam&quot; shows that he had passed through all the stages of a higher education. It is probable that he was taught at the &quot;Magdeburger Domschule&quot;.

In 1066 or 1067, he was invited by Archbishop Adalbert von Hamburg-Bremen to join the Church of Bremen. Adam was accepted among the capitulars of Bremen, and by 1069 he appeared as director of the Bremen Cathedral&#x27;s school. Soon thereafter he began to write the history of Bremen/Hamburg and of the northern lands in his &quot;Gesta&quot;.

His position and the missionary activity of the church of Bremen allowed him to gather information on the history and the geography of Northern Germany. A stay at the court of Sweyn II of Denmark gave him the opportunity to find information about the history and geography of Denmark and the other Scandinavian countries. Among other things he wrote about in Scandinavia were the sailing passages across Øresund such as today&#x27;s Helsingør–Helsingborg ferry route.

== References ==
== Further reading ==
*Chłopacka Hanna: Adam Bremeński. In: Słownik Starożytności Słowiańskich. Vol. 1. 1961, p. 3-4.

== External links ==
* 
* Adamus Bremensis: &quot;Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum&quot; (Lat.)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q109244" start="0" end="14" title="Adam of Bremen" label="Adam of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="69" end="77" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q185363" start="78" end="88" title="chronicler" label="chronicler"/>
<link wikidata="Q698513" start="198" end="239" title="Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum" label="Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="354" end="367" title="Ethnography" label="ethnographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="454" end="459" title="Norsemen" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q192823" start="471" end="478" title="Vinland" label="Vinland"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="543" end="552" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q8738" start="667" end="674" title="Meissen" label="Meissen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170180" start="689" end="699" title="Margravate of Meissen" label="margravate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733" start="1113" end="1122" title="Magdeburg" label="Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q347852" start="1189" end="1216" title="Adalbert von Hamburg-Bremen" label="Adalbert von Hamburg-Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q837128" start="1229" end="1245" title="Archdiocese of Bremen" label="Church of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q695038" start="1340" end="1356" title="Bremen Cathedral" label="Bremen Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="1421" end="1427" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="1428" end="1435" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q46613" start="1624" end="1640" title="Northern Germany" label="Northern Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q246812" start="1665" end="1684" title="Sweyn II of Denmark" label="Sweyn II of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1765" end="1772" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="1848" end="1859" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104662" start="1893" end="1900" title="Øresund" label="Øresund"/>
<link wikidata="Q10513062" start="1922" end="1955" title="Helsingør–Helsingborg ferry route" label="Helsingør–Helsingborg ferry route"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2553" wikidata="Q26805" url="?curid=2553" title="Ab urbe condita">
<text>Ab urbe condita (; &#x27;from the founding of the City&#x27;), or  (; &#x27;in the year since the city&#x27;s founding&#x27;), abbreviated as AUC or AVC, expresses a date in years since 753 BC, the traditional founding of Rome. It is an expression used in antiquity and by classical historians to refer to a given year in Ancient Rome. In reference to the traditional year of the foundation of Rome, the year 1 BC would be written AUC 753, whereas AD 1 would be AUC 754. The foundation of the Roman Empire in 27 BC would be AUC 727. The current year AD 2025 would be AUC .

Usage of the term was more common during the Renaissance, when editors sometimes added AUC to Roman manuscripts they published, giving the false impression that the convention was commonly used in antiquity. In reality, the dominant method of identifying years in Roman times was to name the two consuls who held office that year. In late antiquity, regnal years were also in use, as in Roman Egypt during the Diocletian era after AD 293, and in the Byzantine Empire from AD 537, following a decree by Justinian.

==Use==

Prior to the Roman state&#x27;s adoption of the Varronian chronology – created by Titus Pomponius Atticus and Marcus Terentius Varro – there were many different dates posited for when the city was founded. This state of confusion required, for one to use an AUC date, one to pick a date as canonical. The Varronian chronology, constructed from fragmentary sources and demonstrably about four years off of absolute events , placed the founding of the city on 21 April 753 BC. This date, likely arrived at by mechanical calculation but accepted with a variance of one year by the Augustan-era , has become the traditional date.

From the time of Claudius () onward, this calculation superseded other contemporary calculations. Celebrating the anniversary of the city became part of imperial propaganda. Claudius was the first to hold magnificent celebrations in honor of the anniversary of the city, in AD 47, the eight hundredth year from the founding of the city. Hadrian, in AD 121, and Antoninus Pius, in AD 147 and AD 148, held similar celebrations respectively.

In AD 248, Philip the Arab celebrated Rome&#x27;s first millennium, together with Ludi saeculares for Rome&#x27;s alleged tenth saeculum. Coins from his reign commemorate the celebrations. A coin by a contender for the imperial throne, Pacatianus, explicitly states &quot;[y]ear one thousand and first&quot;, which is an indication that the citizens of the empire had a sense of the beginning of a new era, a &quot;Sæculum Novum&quot;.

==Calendar era==

The Anno Domini (AD) year numbering was developed by a monk named Dionysius Exiguus in Rome in , as a result of his work on calculating the date of Easter. Dionysius did not use the AUC convention, but instead based his calculations on the Diocletian era. This convention had been in use since AD 293, the year of the tetrarchy, as it became impractical to use regnal years of the current emperor. In his Easter table, the year was equated with the 248th regnal year of Diocletian. The table counted the years starting from the presumed birth of Christ, rather than the accession of the emperor Diocletian on 20 November AD 284 or, as stated by Dionysius: &quot;sed magis elegimus ab incarnatione Domini nostri Jesu Christi annorum tempora praenotare&quot; (&quot;but rather we choose to name the times of the years from the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ&quot;). Blackburn and Holford-Strevens review interpretations of Dionysius which place the Incarnation in 2 BC, 1 BC, or AD 1.

The year AD 1 corresponds to AUC 754, based on the epoch of Varro. Thus:

==See also==

* Calendar era
* History of Italy
* List of Latin phrases
* Roman calendar

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1247524" start="34" end="54" title="founding of Rome" label="founding of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q26805" start="66" end="66" title="Ab urbe condita" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q26805" start="142" end="145" title="Ab urbe condita" label="AUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q26805" start="149" end="152" title="Ab urbe condita" label="AVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q493878" start="186" end="192" title="753 BC" label="753 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="273" end="293" title="Classicist" label="classical historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="322" end="334" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q25299" start="409" end="413" title="1 BC" label="1 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414645" start="448" end="452" title="AD 1" label="AD 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="493" end="505" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q39695" start="509" end="514" title="27 BC" label="27 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="619" end="630" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="870" end="876" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150160" start="924" end="936" title="regnal years" label="regnal years"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="961" end="972" title="Roman Egypt" label="Roman Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q256376" start="984" end="998" title="Diocletian era" label="Diocletian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q33318" start="1005" end="1011" title="293" label="AD 293"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1024" end="1040" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="1076" end="1085" title="Justinian" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131277397" start="1145" end="1165" title="Varronian chronology" label="Varronian chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q311733" start="1179" end="1202" title="Titus Pomponius Atticus" label="Titus Pomponius Atticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q206119" start="1207" end="1229" title="Marcus Terentius Varro" label="Marcus Terentius Varro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="1741" end="1749" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="1886" end="1896" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="2061" end="2068" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429" start="2085" end="2099" title="Antoninus Pius" label="Antoninus Pius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817" start="2175" end="2190" title="Philip the Arab" label="Philip the Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q36507" start="2220" end="2230" title="millennium" label="millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q739680" start="2246" end="2261" title="Ludi saeculares" label="Ludi saeculares"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274161" start="2292" end="2300" title="saeculum" label="saeculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q263444" start="2400" end="2410" title="Pacatianus" label="Pacatianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="2623" end="2634" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q274091" start="2685" end="2702" title="Dionysius Exiguus" label="Dionysius Exiguus"/>
<link wikidata="Q256376" start="2859" end="2873" title="Diocletian era" label="Diocletian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q174450" start="2937" end="2946" title="tetrarchy" label="tetrarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150160" start="3074" end="3085" title="regnal year" label="regnal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="3089" end="3099" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="3214" end="3224" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q616175" start="3572" end="3583" title="Incarnation (Christianity)" label="Incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q206119" start="3669" end="3674" title="Marcus Terentius Varro" label="Varro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="3699" end="3711" title="Calendar era" label="Calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791" start="3714" end="3730" title="History of Italy" label="History of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q87248" start="3733" end="3754" title="List of Latin phrases" label="List of Latin phrases"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="3757" end="3771" title="Roman calendar" label="Roman calendar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2559" wikidata="Q626154" url="?curid=2559" title="Arapaoa Island">
<text>Arapaoa Island (formerly spelled Arapawa Island) is the second-largest island in the Marlborough Sounds, at the north-east tip of the South Island of New Zealand. The island has a land area of . Queen Charlotte Sound defines its western side, while to the south lies Tory Channel, which is on the sea route between Wellington in the North Island to Picton. Cook Strait&#x27;s narrowest point is between Arapaoa Island&#x27;s Perano Head and Cape Terawhiti in the North Island.

==History==
According to Māori oral tradition, the island was where the great navigator Kupe killed the octopus Te Wheke-a-Muturangi.

It was from a hill on Arapaoa Island in 1770 that Captain James Cook first saw the sea passage from the Pacific Ocean to the Tasman Sea, and confirmed that what the indigenous people had told him was correct – Aotearoa is composed of two main islands. Cook is not known for naming places after himself, and it is speculated that Joseph Banks bestowed the name Cook Strait. This discovery banished the fond notion of geographers that there existed a great southern continent, Terra Australis. A monument at Cook&#x27;s Lookout was erected in 1970.

From the late 1820s until the mid-1960s, Arapaoa Island was a base for whaling in the Sounds. John Guard established a shore station at Te Awaiti in 1827, however initially could only salvage baleen until the station was equipped to process whale oil from 1830 onwards, targeting right whales. Later, the station at Perano Head on the east coast of the island was used to hunt humpback whales from 1911 to 1964 (see Whaling in New Zealand). The houses built by the Perano family are now operated as tourist accommodation. In the 2000s the former whalers from the Perano and Heberley families, who live on Arapawa, joined a Department of Conservation whale spotting programme to assess how the humpback whale population has recovered since the end of whaling.

An Air Albatross Cessna 402 commuter aircraft struck the 11,000-volt power lines linking the island and the mainland over Tory Channel in 1985. The crash was witnessed by many passengers on an inter-island Cook Strait ferry. The ferry immediately stopped to dispatch a rescue lifeboat. Along with the two pilots, one entire family died, and all but a young girl from the other. No bodies were ever found. The sole survivor (Cindy Mosey) was travelling with her family and the other family from Nelson to Wellington to attend a gymnastics competition. The Arapaoa Island crash caused public confidence in Air Albatross to falter, contributing to the company going into liquidation in December of that year.

In August 2014, the spelling of the island&#x27;s name was officially changed from &quot;Arapawa&quot; to &quot;Arapaoa&quot;.

==Conservation==
Parts of the island have been heavily cleared of native vegetation in the past through burning and logging, A number of pine forests were planted on the island. Wilding pines, an invasive species in some parts of New Zealand, are being poisoned on the island to allow the regenerating native vegetation to grow. About at Ruaomoko Point on the south-eastern portion of the island will be killed by drilling holes into the trees and injecting poison.

Arapaoa Island is known for the breeds of domestic animals found only on the island – the Arapawa pig, Arapawa sheep and Arapawa goat. They became established in the 19th century, but the origin of the breeds is uncertain, and a matter of some speculation. Common suggestions are that they are old English breeds introduced by the early whalers, or by Captain Cook or other early explorers. These breeds are now extinct in England, and the goats surviving in a sanctuary on the island are now also bred in other parts of New Zealand and in the northern hemisphere.

The small Brothers Islands, which lie off the northeast coast of Arapaoa Island, are a sanctuary for the rare Brothers Island tuatara.

== See also ==
* List of islands of New Zealand

==References==
== Further reading ==

* Philp, Matt. 2011. The Sound of the Sea. &quot;New Zealand Geographic,&quot; 110.
* Heberley, Heather. 1996. &quot;Weather permitting&quot;. Whatamango Bay, N.Z. : Cape Catley. 
* Heberley, Heather. 1997. &quot;Flood tide.&quot; Whatamango Bay, N.Z. : Cape Catley. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q626154" start="0" end="14" title="Arapaoa Island" label="Arapaoa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q626154" start="33" end="47" title="Arapaoa Island" label="Arapawa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476914" start="56" end="77" title="List of islands of New Zealand" label="second-largest island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25455" start="85" end="103" title="Marlborough Sounds" label="Marlborough Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="134" end="146" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25473" start="195" end="216" title="Queen Charlotte Sound / Tōtaranui" label="Queen Charlotte Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491641" start="267" end="279" title="Tory Channel" label="Tory Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23661" start="315" end="325" title="Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q118863" start="333" end="345" title="North Island" label="North Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362879" start="349" end="355" title="Picton, New Zealand" label="Picton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023" start="357" end="368" title="Cook Strait" label="Cook Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035080" start="441" end="455" title="Cape Terawhiti" label="Cape Terawhiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q546879" start="503" end="523" title="Māori mythology" label="Māori oral tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792784" start="566" end="570" title="Kupe" label="Kupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691031" start="590" end="610" title="Te Wheke-a-Muturangi" label="Te Wheke-a-Muturangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="671" end="681" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="717" end="730" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q33254" start="738" end="748" title="Tasman Sea" label="Tasman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q153785" start="823" end="831" title="Aotearoa" label="Aotearoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q153408" start="942" end="954" title="Joseph Banks" label="Joseph Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023" start="973" end="984" title="Cook Strait" label="Cook Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q323750" start="1088" end="1103" title="Terra Australis" label="Terra Australis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="1232" end="1239" title="whaling" label="whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236523" start="1255" end="1265" title="John Guard" label="John Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q275426" start="1353" end="1359" title="baleen" label="baleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053334" start="1402" end="1411" title="whale oil" label="whale oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527843" start="1441" end="1453" title="right whales" label="right whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="1538" end="1553" title="humpback whales" label="humpback whales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990566" start="1577" end="1599" title="Whaling in New Zealand" label="Whaling in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191417" start="1784" end="1810" title="Department of Conservation (New Zealand)" label="Department of Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057203" start="1938" end="1948" title="Cessna 402" label="Cessna 402"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491641" start="2043" end="2055" title="Tory Channel" label="Tory Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001272" start="2934" end="2947" title="Wilding conifer" label="Wilding pines"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="2952" end="2968" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784217" start="3313" end="3324" title="Arapawa pig" label="Arapawa pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784220" start="3326" end="3339" title="Arapawa sheep" label="Arapawa sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784215" start="3344" end="3356" title="Arapawa goat" label="Arapawa goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q830112" start="3799" end="3815" title="The Brothers (New Zealand)" label="Brothers Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q163283" start="3899" end="3922" title="Brothers Island tuatara" label="Brothers Island tuatara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476914" start="3942" end="3972" title="List of islands of New Zealand" label="List of islands of New Zealand"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2560" wikidata="Q171251" url="?curid=2560" title="Administrative law">
<text>Administrative law is a division of law governing the activities of executive branch agencies of government. Administrative law includes executive branch rulemaking (executive branch rules are generally referred to as &quot;regulations&quot;), adjudication, and the enforcement of laws. Administrative law is considered a branch of public law.

Administrative law deals with the decision-making of administrative units of government that are part of the executive branch in such areas as international trade, manufacturing, the environment, taxation, broadcasting, immigration, and transport.

Administrative law expanded greatly during the 20th century, as legislative bodies worldwide created more government agencies to regulate the social, economic and political spheres of human interaction.

Civil law countries often have specialized administrative courts that review these decisions.

In the last fifty years, administrative law, in many countries of the civil law tradition, has opened itself to the influence of rules posed by supranational legal orders, in which judicial principles have strong importance: it has led, for one, to changes in some traditional concepts of the administrative law model, as has happened with the public procurements or with judicial control of administrative activity and, for another, has built a supranational or international public administration, as in the environmental sector or with reference to education, for which, within the United Nations&#x27; system, it has been possible to assist to a further increase of administrative structure devoted to coordinate the States&#x27; activity in that sector.

== In civil law countries ==

Unlike most common law jurisdictions, most civil law jurisdictions have specialized courts or sections to deal with administrative cases that as a rule apply procedural rules that are specifically designed for such cases and distinct from those applied in private law proceedings, such as contract or tort claims.

=== Brazil ===
In Brazil, administrative cases are typically heard either by the Federal Courts (in matters concerning the Federal Union) or by the Public Treasury divisions of State Courts (in matters concerning the States). In 1998 a constitutional reform led by the government of President Fernando Henrique Cardoso introduced regulatory agencies as a part of the executive branch. Since 1988, Brazilian administrative law has been strongly influenced by the judicial interpretations of the constitutional principles of public administration (Art. 37 of the Federal Constitution): legality, impersonality, publicity of administrative acts, morality and efficiency.

=== Chile ===
In Chile, the President of the Republic exercises the administrative function, in collaboration with several ministries or other authorities with &quot;ministerial rank&quot;. Each ministry has one or more under-secretaries that act through public service to meet public needs. There is no single specialized court to deal with actions against the administrative entities, but there are several specialized courts and procedures of review.

=== China ===
Administrative law in China was virtually non-existent before the economic reform era initiated by Deng Xiaoping. Since the 1980s China has constructed a new legal framework for administrative law, establishing control mechanisms for overseeing the bureaucracy, and disciplinary committees for the Chinese Communist Party.

In 1989, China established its Administrative Litigation Law, which provides and avenue for people to challenge government action. In 2014, it was amended to lower the burdens on those challenging administrative actions.

In 1990, the Administrative Supervision Regulations (行政检查条例) and the Administrative Reconsideration Regulations (行政复议条例) were passed. The 1993 State Civil Servant Provisional Regulations (国家公务员暂行条例) changed the way government officials were selected and promoted, requiring that they pass exams and yearly appraisals, and introducing a rotation system. The three regulations have been amended and upgraded into laws. In 1994, the State Compensation Law (国家赔偿法) was passed, followed by the Administrative Penalties Law (行政处罚法) in 1996. Administrative Compulsory Law was enforced in 2012. The General Administrative Procedure Law is underway.

=== France ===

In France, there is a dual jurisdictional system with the judiciary branch responsible for civil law and criminal law, and the administrative branch having jurisdiction when a government institution is involved. 
Most claims against the national or local governments as well as claims against private bodies providing public services are handled by administrative courts, which use the &quot;Conseil d&#x27;État&quot; (Council of State) as a court of last resort for both ordinary and special courts. The main administrative courts are the &quot;tribunaux administratifs&quot; and appeal courts are the &quot;cours administratives d&#x27;appel&quot;. Special administrative courts include the National Court of Asylum Right as well as military, medical and judicial disciplinary bodies. The French body of administrative law is called &quot;droit administratif&quot;.

Over the course of their history, France&#x27;s administrative courts have developed an extensive and coherent case law (&quot;jurisprudence constante&quot;) and legal doctrine (&#x27; and &#x27;), often before similar concepts were enshrined in constitutional and legal texts. These principes include:

*Right to fair trial (&quot;droit à la défense&quot;), including for internal disciplinary bodies
*Right to challenge any administrative decision before an administrative court (&quot;droit au recours&quot;)
*Equal treatment of public service users (&quot;égalité devant le service public&quot;)
*Equal access to government employment (&quot;égalité d&#x27;accès à la fonction publique&quot;) without regard for political opinions
*Freedom of association (&quot;liberté d&#x27;association&quot;)
*Right to entrepreneurship (&quot;Liberté du Commerce et de l&#x27;industrie&quot;, lit. freedom of commerce and industry)
*Right to legal certainty (&quot;Droit à la sécurité juridique&quot;)

French administrative law, the basis of continental administrative law, has had a strong influence on administrative laws in several other countries such as Belgium, Greece, Turkey and Tunisia.

=== Germany ===
In Germany, administrative law () includes all law that specifically governs the legal relationships between public authorities and private persons, and that is not more precisely described as constitutional law. It sets out the tasks, aims and powers, as well as the organization and procedure, for all public authorities (). As a field of legal study, administrative law has been differentiated from other branches of public law since the late 19th century in Germany; the precise delimitations of &quot;administration&quot; as a concept, however, are in contention. Administrative law defines all aspects of public administration in the modern German state, whose legal culture emphasizes private persons&#x27; subjective rights (also, pursuant to art. 19 of the current German Constitution of 1949, such rights must be fully justiciable). The final say on the interpretation of the law lies with the courts of administrative jurisdiction (), and the law usually permits close judicial scrutiny of public authorities&#x27; exercise of discretion.

==== Constitutional context ====
Central legal principles of the &quot;Rechtsstaat&quot; (rule of law) that pervade administration ‒ mostly developed before the adoption of the modern 1949 Constitution, but strengthened and expanded after its advent by their new conceptual foundation ‒ include:
* The principle of the lawfulness of the executive (): administrative authorities are bound to act where a law (of parliament, or of delegated legislation) prescribes it, and to not violate any laws (artt. 1 and 20 of the Constitution). Where its actions may burden or comparatively disadvantage a person, they must rest on a grant of authority by the legislature: this concept is called the or , meaning that limiting interference with (fundamental) rights is a sphere of action that is reserved to statute.
* The principle of legal security, which includes a principle of legal certainty and the principle of non-retroactivity.
* The principle of proportionality, which means that an act of an authority has to be suitable, necessary and appropriate.

The vast majority of public administration in Germany is performed by its component federal entities (), which are responsible for the execution both of federal laws and their own laws (execution of the laws directly by authorities of the Federal Republic being the exceptional case, as established by artt. 83 et seqq. of the Constitution).

==== Scope of administrative law ====
German legal scholarship does not have an agreed-upon definition for public administration.

In one sense, administration – more precisely, everything that is subject to administrative law – is conceptualized as being all state activity of a certain type (material definition of public administration). This approach leads to disputes about whether to treat acts of public authority as acts of administration (and therefore executive) even when they are performed by component parts of the state (that is to say, the government) that the law formally classifies as a legislative or a judicial body: For instance, the parliament may impose a fine on one of its members for misbehavior, or a presiding judge may direct a disruptive member of the public to be removed from the viewing gallery.

The opposite approach – the formalist definition of public administration – begins its examination by considering all those public authorities intended (judging by their lawful charter, organizational context, internal structure, and performed tasks) to do the work of public administration, and equates their functioning with public administration. There is some danger of circular reasoning, since the formal categorization of the organizational unit may, in turn, derive from some material conception of its function. Some functions that might, in the material view, be seen as not of the executive type, and thus not as belonging to the field of administration (such as the creation of rules with the force of law, which are usually thought of as legislative), would then be held to the standards of administrative law, and not another field of law.

This discussion is of seen as being of particular importance when considering the role of administrative law in maintaining the division of government powers. For this purpose, a traditional approach tries negatively to define administration by subtracting those operations of the state which cannot be called administration, namely law-making and adjudication. Using this negative definition, though, requires law-making and adjudication to be defined first, and leaves some activities that are a poor fit for the term &quot;administration&quot;, such as the cabinet government&#x27;s political leadership decisions, within the bounds of the definition.

Positive definitions abound, but none has won out over the others, or been entirely convincing to scholars of German administrative law. Nevertheless, certain features may be seen as being characteristic of administration: According to Maurer and Waldhoff, administration is social engineering (exerting influence on the non-state, societal domain) (1), oriented towards some conception of the (ever-changing) public interest (2), that consists of taking action in the present, with a view to engineering the future (3), and that comprises concrete measures to regulate individual cases and to realize particular plans (4).

Scholarly treatises of German administrative law are almost always split into two parts: doctrines and rules that can be found across-the-board (); and doctrines and rules that exist only in certain parts of administrative law () – e.g. police law, urban planning law, or local government law.

==== General administrative law ====
Germany&#x27;s principal piece of legislation concerning the legal forms and principles common to most fields of its public administration is the Law on Administrative Procedure (, abbreviated VwVfG); before the enactment of this law in 1977, these rules had only been general principles developed in the scholarly literature and the courts. The VwVfG is not a full codification of the generally applicable ground rules of German administrative law, since it mostly only determines the procedure to be followed by public authorities in the fulfillment of their tasks, rather than mandating the substance of public administration. The VwVfG is a federal law that only applies to administration carried out by the German federal authorities. All 16 German have, however, enacted a Law on Administrative Procedure of their own that is nearly word-for-word identical with the federal VwVfG.

The standard form of administrative action is the (administrative ordinance). Pursuant to VwVfG § 35, an administrative ordinance exists where: a public authority (1) issues any decree, decision, or other official measure (2), in a matter of public law (3), with immediate legal effects outside the administration (4), to put in place a rule for an individual case (5).

==== Specialized administrative law ====
German legal scholarship traditionally organizes the body of German administration-related law into the following fields, each with its particular legal doctrines and written rules:
* the law governing preventative measures against hazards to common goods (or, if civil process cannot be timely availed to remedy the hazard, against individual goods), especially public safety and order ( or );
* environmental protection law (, including protection against emissions () and wildlife protection ());
* Urban and land use planning law ( and );
* the law regulating commerce and trades ().

==== Judicial application ====
The law governing the adjudication of questions of administrative law before the courts of general administrative jurisdiction () is the Code on Administrative Courts (, abbreviated VwGO), which was enacted in 1960. Though the VwGO was not conceived as a full codification of court process for the courts of general administrative jurisdiction, and VwGO § 173 directs these courts to apply Germany&#x27;s Code of Civil Procedure wherever the VwGO lacks special rules, proceedings before the courts of general administrative jurisdiction are mostly distinct from civil proceedings before the courts of general jurisdiction. The VwGO also does not apply to the courts of special administrative jurisdiction over tax disputes () or over social benefits disputes ().

=== Italy ===

In Italy, administrative law is known as , a branch of public law whose rules govern the organization of the public administration and the activities of the pursuit of the public interest of the public administration and the relationship between this and the citizens.
Its genesis is related to the principle of division of powers of the State. The administrative power, originally called &quot;executive&quot;, is to organize resources and people whose function is devolved to achieve the public interest objectives as defined by the law.

=== Netherlands ===
In the Netherlands administrative law provisions are usually contained in the various laws about public services and regulations. There is however also a single General Administrative Law Act ( or Awb), which is a rather good sample of procedural laws in Europe. It applies both to the making of administrative decisions and the judicial review of these decisions in courts. Another act about judicial procedures in general is the (General time provisions act), with general provisions about time schedules in procedures.

On the basis of the Awb, citizens can oppose a decision () made by an administrative agency () within the administration and apply for judicial review in courts if unsuccessful. Before going to court, citizens must usually first object to the decision with the administrative body that made it. This is called . This procedure allows for the administrative body to correct possible mistakes themselves and is used to filter cases before going to court. Sometimes, instead of , a different system is used called (administrative appeal). The difference with is that is filed with a different administrative body, usually a higher ranking one, than the administrative body that made the primary decision. is available only if the law on which the primary decision is based specifically provides for it. An example involves objecting to a traffic ticket with the district attorney (), after which the decision can be appealed in court.

Unlike France or Germany, there are no special administrative courts of first instance in the Netherlands, but regular courts have an administrative &quot;chamber&quot; which specializes in administrative appeals. The courts of appeal in administrative cases however are specialized depending on the case, (for instance the Central Appeals Tribunal for social security or Trade and Industry Appeals Tribunal for social-economic administrative law.) but most administrative appeals end up in the judicial section of the Council of State (Raad van State).

=== Sweden ===
In Sweden, there is a system of administrative courts that considers only administrative law cases and is completely separate from the system of general courts. This system has three tiers, with 12 county administrative courts () as the first tier, four administrative courts of appeal () as the second tier, and the Supreme Administrative Court of Sweden () as the third tier.

Migration cases are handled in a two-tier system, effectively within the system of general administrative courts. Three of the administrative courts serve as migration courts () with the Administrative Court of Appeal in Stockholm serving as the Migration Court of Appeal ().

===Taiwan (ROC)===
In Taiwan the recently enacted &quot;Constitutional Procedure Act&quot; (憲法訴訟法) in 2019 (former &quot;Constitutional Interpretation Procedure Act, 1993&quot;), the Justices of the Constitutional Court of Judicial Yuan of Taiwan is in charge of judicial interpretation. As of 2019, this council has made 757 interpretations.

=== Turkey ===
In Turkey, the lawsuits against the acts and actions of the national or local governments and public bodies are handled by administrative courts which are the main administrative courts. The decisions of the administrative courts are checked by the Regional Administrative Courts and Council of State. Council of State as a court of last resort is exactly similar to Conseil d&#x27;État in France.

=== Ukraine ===
Administrative law in Ukraine is a homogeneous legal substance isolated in a system of jurisprudence characterized as: (1) a branch of law; (2) a science; (3) a discipline.

== In common law countries ==
Generally speaking, most countries that follow the principles of common law have developed procedures for judicial review that limit the reviewability of decisions made by administrative law bodies. Often these procedures are coupled with legislation or other common law doctrines that establish standards for proper rulemaking. Administrative law may also apply to the review of decisions of so-called semi-public bodies, such as non-profit corporations, disciplinary boards, and other decision-making bodies that affect the legal rights of members of a particular group or entity.

While administrative decision-making bodies are often controlled by larger governmental units, their decisions could be reviewed by a court of general jurisdiction under some principle of judicial review based upon due process (United States) or fundamental justice (Canada). Judicial review of administrative decisions is different from an administrative appeal. When sitting in review of a decision, the Court will only look at the method in which the decision was arrived at, whereas in an administrative appeal, the correctness of the decision itself will be examined, usually by a higher body in the agency. This difference is vital in appreciating administrative law in common law countries.

The scope of judicial review may be limited to certain questions of fairness, or whether the administrative action is &quot;ultra vires&quot;. In terms of ultra vires actions in the broad sense, a reviewing court may set aside an administrative decision if it is unreasonable (under Canadian law, following the rejection of the &quot;Patently Unreasonable&quot; standard by the Supreme Court in Dunsmuir v New Brunswick), &quot;Wednesbury&quot; unreasonable (under British law), or arbitrary and capricious (under U.S. Administrative Procedure Act and New York State law). Administrative law, as laid down by the Supreme Court of India, has also recognized two more grounds of judicial review which were recognized but not applied by English Courts, namely legitimate expectation and proportionality.

The powers to review administrative decisions are usually established by statute but were originally developed from the royal prerogative writs of English law, such as the writ of mandamus and the writ of certiorari. In certain common law jurisdictions, such as India or Pakistan, the power to pass such writs is a Constitutionally guaranteed power. This power is seen as fundamental to the power of judicial review and an aspect of the independent judiciary.

=== Australia ===
=== Canada ===
=== Singapore ===
=== United Kingdom ===
=== United States ===

In the United States, many government agencies are organized under the executive branch of government, although a few are part of the judicial or legislative branches.

In the federal government, the executive branch, led by the president, controls the federal executive departments, which are led by secretaries who are members of the United States Cabinet. The many independent agencies of the United States government created by statutes enacted by Congress exist outside of the federal executive departments but are still part of the executive branch.

Congress has also created some special judicial bodies known as Article I tribunals to handle some areas of administrative law.

The actions of executive agencies and independent agencies are the main focus of American administrative law. In response to the rapid creation of new independent agencies in the early twentieth century (see discussion below), Congress enacted the Administrative Procedure Act (APA) in 1946. Many of the independent agencies operate as miniature versions of the tripartite federal government, with the authority to &quot;legislate&quot; (through rulemaking; see Federal Register and Code of Federal Regulations), &quot;adjudicate&quot; (through administrative hearings), and to &quot;execute&quot; administrative goals (through agency enforcement personnel). Because the United States Constitution sets no limits on this tripartite authority of administrative agencies, Congress enacted the APA to establish fair administrative law procedures to comply with the constitutional requirements of due process. Agency procedures are drawn from four sources of authority: the APA, organic statutes, agency rules, and informal agency practice. It is important to note, though, that agencies can only act within their congressionally delegated authority, and must comply with the requirements of the APA.

At the state level, the first version of the Model State Administrative Procedure Act was promulgated and published in 1946 by the Uniform Law Commission (ULC), in which year the Federal Administrative Procedure Act was drafted. It incorporates basic principles with only enough elaboration of detail to support essential features, therefore it is a &quot;model&quot;, and not a &quot;uniform&quot;, act. A model act is needed because state administrative law in the states is not uniform, and there are a variety of approaches used in the various states. Later it was modified in 1961 and 1981. The present version is the 2010 Model State Administrative Procedure Act (MSAPA) which maintains the continuity with earlier ones. The reason for the revision is that, in the past two decades state legislatures, dissatisfied with agency rule-making and adjudication, have enacted statutes that modify administrative adjudication and rule-making procedure.

The American Bar Association&#x27;s official journal concerning administrative law is the &quot;Administrative Law Review&quot;, a quarterly publication that is managed and edited by students at the Washington College of Law.

==== Historical development ====
Stephen Breyer, a U.S. Supreme Court Justice from 1994 to 2022, divides the history of administrative law in the United States into six discrete periods, in his book, &quot;Administrative Law &amp; Regulatory Policy&quot; (3d Ed., 1992):

* English antecedents &amp; the American experience to 1875
* 1875 – 1930: the rise of regulation &amp; the traditional model of administrative law
* 1930 – 1945: the New Deal
* 1945 – 1965: the Administrative Procedure Act &amp; the maturation of the traditional model of administrative law
* 1965 – 1985: critique and transformation of the administrative process
* 1985 – ?: retreat or consolidation

==== Agriculture ====
The agricultural sector is one of the most heavily regulated sectors in the U.S. economy, as it is regulated in various ways at the international, federal, state, and local levels. Consequently, administrative law is a significant component of the discipline of agricultural law. The United States Department of Agriculture and its myriad agencies such as the Agricultural Marketing Service are the primary sources of regulatory activity, although other administrative bodies such as the Environmental Protection Agency play a significant regulatory role as well.

== See also ==
* Constitutionalism
* Rule of law
* Rechtsstaat

== References ==
=== Literature ===









=== Cases ===

== Further reading ==



== Notes ==
=== Explanatory notes ===
=== Citation footnotes ===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171251" start="0" end="18" title="Administrative law" label="Administrative law"/>
<link wikidata="Q327333" start="68" end="93" title="government agency" label="executive branch agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q207892" start="332" end="342" title="public law" label="public law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641572" start="841" end="861" title="administrative court" label="administrative court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1478" end="1492" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="1695" end="1705" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="1726" end="1735" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q158970" start="1984" end="1988" title="tort" label="tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q230578" start="2291" end="2316" title="Fernando Henrique Cardoso" label="Fernando Henrique Cardoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q466956" start="2695" end="2720" title="President of Chile" label="President of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641572" start="2978" end="2995" title="Administrative court" label="specialized court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3202" end="3221" title="History of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China (1976–1989)#Reform and opening up" label="economic reform era"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="3235" end="3248" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="3434" end="3457" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040455" start="4362" end="4388" title="Jurisdictional dualism in France" label="dual jurisdictional system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524573" start="4445" end="4457" title="French criminal law" label="criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641572" start="4689" end="4709" title="administrative court" label="administrative court"/>
<link wikidata="Q769657" start="4732" end="4751" title="Council of State (France)" label="Conseil d&amp;#x27;État"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001092" start="5033" end="5063" title="Cour nationale du droit d&amp;#x27;asile" label="National Court of Asylum Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102008" start="5320" end="5328" title="Jurisprudence constante" label="case law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17102008" start="5336" end="5359" title="jurisprudence constante" label="jurisprudence constante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192543" start="5371" end="5385" title="legal doctrine" label="legal doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757432" start="5514" end="5533" title="Right to fair trial" label="Right to fair trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q161837" start="5741" end="5755" title="public service" label="public service"/>
<link wikidata="Q688503" start="5945" end="5967" title="Freedom of association" label="Freedom of association"/>
<link wikidata="Q10605180" start="6010" end="6035" title="Right to entrepreneurship" label="Right to entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q49094488" start="6142" end="6157" title="legal certainty" label="legal certainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q207892" start="6834" end="6844" title="public law" label="public law"/>
<link wikidata="Q56045" start="7188" end="7215" title="Basic Law for the Federal Republic of Germany" label="German Constitution of 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209223" start="7536" end="7547" title="Rechtsstaat" label="Rechtsstaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="7555" end="7566" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011160" start="10062" end="10080" title="circular reasoning" label="circular reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="10671" end="10700" title="Separation of powers" label="division of government powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="13958" end="13963" title="Urban planning" label="Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738778" start="13968" end="13985" title="Land-use planning" label="land use planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q206893" start="14481" end="14504" title="Civil procedure code of Germany" label="Code of Civil Procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="14964" end="14985" title="public administration" label="public administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="15423" end="15434" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q571587" start="16774" end="16788" title="traffic ticket" label="traffic ticket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155243" start="17409" end="17423" title="Raad van State" label="Raad van State"/>
<link wikidata="Q750632" start="17759" end="17797" title="Supreme Administrative Court of Sweden" label="Supreme Administrative Court of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="18120" end="18126" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31041" start="18321" end="18334" title="Judicial Yuan" label="Judicial Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331848" start="18361" end="18384" title="judicial interpretation" label="judicial interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="18460" end="18466" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q769657" start="18824" end="18843" title="Conseil d&amp;#x27;État (France)" label="Conseil d&amp;#x27;État"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="18894" end="18901" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="19141" end="19151" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q898871" start="19182" end="19197" title="judicial review" label="judicial review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479254" start="19393" end="19403" title="rulemaking" label="rulemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="19507" end="19530" title="non-profit corporations" label="non-profit corporations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695164" start="19803" end="19823" title="general jurisdiction" label="general jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="19875" end="19886" title="due process" label="due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508961" start="19906" end="19925" title="fundamental justice" label="fundamental justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578557" start="20427" end="20435" title="Equity (law)" label="fairness"/>
<link wikidata="Q138203" start="20483" end="20494" title="ultra vires" label="ultra vires"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="20622" end="20634" title="unreasonable" label="unreasonable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315694" start="20754" end="20778" title="Dunsmuir v New Brunswick" label="Dunsmuir v New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809228" start="20781" end="20816" title="Wednesbury unreasonableness" label="&amp;quot;Wednesbury&amp;quot; unreasonable"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344901" start="20878" end="20906" title="Administrative Procedure Act (United States)" label="Administrative Procedure Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q213380" start="20972" end="20994" title="Supreme Court of India" label="Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519071" start="21116" end="21138" title="legitimate expectation" label="legitimate expectation"/>
<link wikidata="Q603959" start="21143" end="21158" title="Proportionality (political maxim)" label="proportionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240696" start="21287" end="21303" title="prerogative writ" label="prerogative writ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="21308" end="21319" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q312424" start="21341" end="21349" title="mandamus" label="mandamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056352" start="21366" end="21376" title="certiorari" label="certiorari"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="21432" end="21440" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="21610" end="21619" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q327333" start="21746" end="21765" title="Government agency" label="government agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="21790" end="21806" title="Executive (government)" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="21853" end="21861" title="Judiciary" label="judicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="21865" end="21885" title="Legislature" label="legislative branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="21895" end="21913" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal government"/>
<link wikidata="Q910252" start="21972" end="22001" title="United States federal executive departments" label="federal executive departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="22055" end="22076" title="United States Cabinet" label="United States Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752939" start="22087" end="22139" title="independent agencies of the United States government" label="independent agencies of the United States government"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="22151" end="22158" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="22171" end="22179" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440562" start="22340" end="22359" title="Article I and Article III tribunals" label="Article I tribunals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="22632" end="22640" title="U.S. Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344901" start="22653" end="22681" title="Administrative Procedure Act (United States)" label="Administrative Procedure Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479254" start="22851" end="22861" title="rulemaking" label="rulemaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440362" start="22867" end="22883" title="Federal Register" label="Federal Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065972" start="22888" end="22915" title="Code of Federal Regulations" label="Code of Federal Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q357789" start="22918" end="22940" title="adjudication" label="&amp;quot;adjudicate&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="23076" end="23102" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q327333" start="23150" end="23173" title="government agency" label="administrative agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344901" start="23196" end="23199" title="Administrative Procedure Act (United States)" label="APA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="23298" end="23309" title="due process" label="due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q463465" start="24560" end="24584" title="American Bar Association" label="American Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683470" start="24652" end="24677" title="Administrative Law Review" label="Administrative Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q167049" start="24755" end="24780" title="Washington College of Law" label="Washington College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11124" start="24816" end="24830" title="Stephen Breyer" label="Stephen Breyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="24834" end="24860" title="U.S. Supreme Court Justice" label="U.S. Supreme Court Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344901" start="25250" end="25278" title="Administrative Procedure Act (United States)" label="Administrative Procedure Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327674" start="25742" end="25758" title="agricultural law" label="agricultural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="25764" end="25803" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="25968" end="25999" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194747" start="26062" end="26079" title="Constitutionalism" label="Constitutionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="26082" end="26093" title="Rule of law" label="Rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209223" start="26096" end="26107" title="Rechtsstaat" label="Rechtsstaat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2563" wikidata="Q311548" url="?curid=2563" title="Arthur Phillip">
<text>Arthur Phillip (11 October 1738 – 31 August 1814) was a British Royal Navy officer who served as the first governor of the Colony of New South Wales.

Phillip was educated at Greenwich Hospital School from June 1751 until December 1753. He then became an apprentice on the whaling ship &quot;Fortune&quot;. With the outbreak of the Seven Years&#x27; War against France, Phillip enlisted in the Royal Navy as captain&#x27;s servant to Michael Everitt aboard . With Everitt, Phillip also served on and . Phillip was promoted to lieutenant on 7 June 1761, before being put on half-pay at the end of hostilities on 25 April 1763. Seconded to the Portuguese Navy in 1774, he served in the war against Spain. Returning to Royal Navy service in 1778, in 1782 Phillip, in command of , was to capture Spanish colonies in South America, but an armistice was concluded before he reached his destination. In 1784, Phillip was employed by Home Office Under Secretary Evan Nepean, to survey French defences in Europe.

In 1786, Phillip was appointed by Lord Sydney as the commander of the First Fleet, a fleet of 11 ships whose crew were to establish a penal colony and a settlement at Botany Bay, New South Wales. On arriving at Botany Bay, Phillip found the site unsuitable and searched for a more habitable site for a settlement, which he found in Port Jackson – the site of Sydney, Australia, today. Phillip was a far-sighted governor who soon realised that New South Wales would need a civil administration and a system for emancipating convicts. However, his plan to bring skilled tradesmen on the First Fleet&#x27;s voyage had been rejected. Consequently, he faced immense problems with labour, discipline, and supply. Phillip wanted harmonious relations with the local indigenous peoples, in the belief that everyone in the colony was a British citizen and was protected by the law as such, therefore the indigenous peoples had the same rights as everyone under Phillip&#x27;s command. Eventually, cultural differences between the two groups of people led to conflict. The arrival of more convicts with the Second and Third Fleets placed new pressures on scarce local resources. By the time Phillip sailed home in December 1792, the colony was taking shape, with official land grants, systematic farming, and a water supply in place.

On 11 December 1792, Phillip left the colony to return to Britain to receive medical treatment for kidney stones. He had planned to return to Australia, but medical advisors recommended he resign from the governorship. His health recovered and he returned to active duty in the Navy in 1796, holding a number of commands in home waters before being put in command of the Hampshire Sea Fencibles. He eventually retired from active naval service in 1805. He spent his final years of retirement in Bath, Somerset, before his death on 31 August 1814. As the first Governor of New South Wales, a number of places in Australia are named after him, including Port Phillip, Phillip Island, Phillip Street in the Sydney central business district, the suburb of Phillip in Canberra and the Governor Phillip Tower building in Sydney, as well as many streets, parks, and schools.

==Early life==
Arthur Phillip was born on 11 October 1738, in the Parish of All Hallows, in Bread Street, London. He was the son of Jacob Phillip, an immigrant from Frankfurt, who by various accounts was a language teacher, a merchant vessel owner, a merchant captain, or a common seaman. His mother, Elizabeth Breach, was the widow of a common seaman by the name of John Herbert, who had died of disease in Jamaica aboard on 13 August 1732. At the time of Arthur Phillip&#x27;s birth, his family maintained a modest existence as tenants near Cheapside in the City of London.

There are no surviving records of Phillip&#x27;s early childhood. His father, Jacob, died in 1739, after which the Phillip family would have a low income. Arthur went to sea on a British naval vessel aged nine. On 22 June 1751, he was accepted into the Greenwich Hospital School, a charity school for the sons of indigent seafarers. In accordance with the school&#x27;s curriculum, his education focused on literacy, arithmetic, and navigational skills, including cartography. His headmaster, Reverend Francis Swinden, observed that in personality, Phillip was &quot;unassuming, reasonable, business-like to the smallest degree in everything he undertakes&quot;.

Phillip remained at the Greenwich Hospital School for two and a half years, longer than the average student stay of one year. At the end of 1753, he was granted a seven-year indenture as an apprentice aboard &quot;Fortune&quot;, a 210-ton whaling vessel commanded by merchant mariner William Readhead. Phillip left the Greenwich Hospital School on 1 December, and spent the next few months aboard the &quot;Fortune&quot;, awaiting the start of the 1754 whaling season.

Contemporary portraits depict Phillip as shorter than average, with an olive complexion and dark eyes. A long nose and a pronounced lower lip dominated his &quot;smooth pear of a skull&quot; as quoted by Robert Hughes.

==Early maritime career==
===Whaling and merchant expeditions===
In April 1754 &quot;Fortune&quot; headed out to hunt whales near Svalbard in the Barents Sea. As an apprentice Phillip&#x27;s responsibilities included stripping blubber from whale carcasses and helping to pack it into barrels. Food was scarce, and &quot;Fortune&quot;″s 30 crew members supplemented their diet with bird&#x27;s eggs, scurvy grass, and, where possible, reindeer. The ship returned to England on 20 July 1754. The whaling crew were paid and replaced with twelve sailors for a winter voyage to the Mediterranean. Phillip remained aboard as &quot;Fortune&quot; undertook an outward trading voyage to Barcelona and Livorno carrying salt and raisins, returning via Rotterdam with a cargo of grains and citrus. The ship returned to England in April 1755 and sailed immediately for Svalbard for that year&#x27;s whale hunt. Phillip was still a member of the crew but abandoned his apprenticeship when the ship returned to England on 27 July.

===Royal Navy and the Seven Years&#x27; War===

On 16 October 1755, Phillip enlisted in the Royal Navy as captain&#x27;s servant aboard the 68-gun , commanded by his mother&#x27;s cousin, Captain Michael Everitt. As a member of &quot;Buckingham&quot;″s crew, Phillip served in home waters until April 1756 and then joined Admiral John Byng&#x27;s Mediterranean fleet. The &quot;Buckingham&quot; was Rear-Admiral Temple West&#x27;s flagship at the Battle of Minorca on 20 May 1756.

Phillip moved on 1 August 1757, with Everitt, to the 90-gun , which took part in the Raid on St Malo on 5–12 June 1758. Phillip, again with Captain Everitt, transferred on 28 December 1758 to the 64-gun , which went to the West Indies to serve at the Siege of Havana. On 7 June 1761, Phillip was commissioned as a lieutenant in recognition for his active service. With the coming of peace on 25 April 1763, he was retired on half-pay.

===Retirement and the Portuguese Navy===
In July 1763, Phillip married Margaret Charlotte Denison (), known as Charlott, a widow 16 years his senior, and moved to Glasshayes in Lyndhurst, Hampshire, establishing a farm there. The marriage was unhappy, and the couple separated in 1769 when Phillip returned to the Navy. Margaret Phillip died in August 1792 and is buried at Llanycil, Bala, North Wales with her companion, Mrs Cane. The following year, he was posted as second lieutenant aboard , a newly built 74-gun ship of the line.

In 1774, Phillip was seconded to the Portuguese Navy as a captain, serving in the war against Spain. While with the Portuguese Navy, Phillip commanded a 26-gun frigate, &quot;Nossa Senhora do Pilar&quot;. On that ship, he took a detachment of troops from Rio de Janeiro to Colonia do Sacramento on the Río de la Plata (opposite Buenos Aires) to relieve the garrison there. The voyage also conveyed a consignment of convicts assigned to carry out work at Colonia. During a storm encountered in the course of the voyage, the convicts assisted in working the ship, and on arriving at Colonia, Phillip recommended that they be rewarded for saving the ship by remission of their sentences. A garbled version of this recommendation eventually found its way into the English press in 1786, when Phillip was appointed to lead the expedition to Sydney. Phillip played a leading role in the capture of the Spanish ship &quot;San Agustín&quot;, on 19 April 1777, off Santa Catarina. The Portuguese Navy commissioned her as the &quot;Santo Agostinho&quot;, under Phillip&#x27;s command. The action was reported in the English press: 

Madrid, 28 Aug. Letters from Lisbon bring the following Account from Rio Janeiro: That the St. Augustine, of 70 Guns, having been separated from the Squadron of M. Casa Tilly, was attacked by two Portugueze Ships, against which they defended themselves for a Day and a Night, but being next Day surrounded by the Portugueze Fleet, was obliged to surrender.
===Recommissioned into Royal Navy===
In 1778, with Britain again at war, Phillip was recalled to Royal Navy service and on 9 October was appointed first lieutenant of the 74-gun as part of the Channel fleet. Promoted to commander on 2 September 1779 and given command of the 8-gun fireship HMS &quot;Basilisk&quot;. With Spain&#x27;s entry into the conflict, Phillip had a series of private meetings with the First Lord of the Admiralty, the Earl of Sandwich, sharing his charts and knowledge about the South American coastlines. 

Phillip was promoted to post-captain on 30 November 1781 and given command of the 20-gun . &quot;Ariadne&quot; was sent to the Elbe to escort a transport ship carrying a detachment of Hanoverian troops, arriving at the port of Cuxhaven on 28 December, the estuary froze over trapping &quot;Ariadne&quot; in the harbour. In March 1782, Phillip arrived in England with the Hanoverian troops. In the following months &quot;Ariadne&quot; got a new lieutenant, Philip Gidley King, whom Phillip took under his wing. &quot;Ariadne&quot; was used to patrol the Channel where on 30 June, she captured the French frigate &quot;Le Robecq&quot;.

With a change of government on 27 March 1782, Sandwich retired from the Admiralty, Lord Germain was replaced as Secretary of State for Home and American Affairs by Earl of Shelburne, before 10 July 1782, in another change of government Thomas Townshend replaced him, and assumed responsibility for organising an expedition against Spanish America. Like Sandwich and Germain, he turned to Phillip for planning advice. The plan was for a squadron of three ships of the line and a frigate to mount a raid on Buenos Aires and Monte Video, then to proceed to the coasts of Chile, Peru, and Mexico to maraud, and ultimately to cross the Pacific to join the British Navy&#x27;s East India squadron for an attack on Manila. On 27 December 1782, Phillip, took charge of the 64-gun . The expedition, consisting of the 70-gun , the 74-gun , &quot;Europa&quot;, and the 32-gun frigate , sailed on 16 January 1783 under the command of Commodore Robert Kingsmill. Shortly after the ships&#x27; departure, an armistice was concluded between Great Britain and Spain. Phillip learnt of this in April when he put in for storm repairs at Rio de Janeiro. Phillip wrote to Townshend from Rio de Janeiro on 25 April 1783, expressing his disappointment that the ending of the American War had robbed him of the opportunity for naval glory in South America.

===Survey work in Europe===
After his return to England in April 1784, Phillip remained in close contact with Townshend, now Lord Sydney, and Home Office Under Secretary Evan Nepean. From October 1784 to September 1786, Nepean, who was in charge of the Secret Service relating to the Bourbon Powers, France, and Spain, employed him to spy on the French naval arsenals at Toulon and other ports. There was fear that Britain would soon be at war with these powers as a consequence of the Batavian Revolution in the Netherlands.

==Colonial service==

Lord Sandwich, together with the president of the Royal Society, Sir Joseph Banks, the scientist who had accompanied Lieutenant James Cook on his 1770 voyage, was advocating the establishment of a British colony in Botany Bay, New South Wales. Banks accepted an offer of assistance from the American loyalist James Matra in July 1783. Under Banks&#x27; guidance, Matra rapidly produced &quot;A Proposal for Establishing a Settlement in New South Wales&quot; (24 August 1783), with a fully developed set of reasons for a colony composed of American loyalists, Chinese, and South Sea Islanders (but not convicts). Thomas Townshend, Lord Sydney, as Secretary of State for the Home Office and minister in charge, decided to establish the proposed colony in Australia. This decision was taken for two reasons: the ending of the option to transport criminals to North America following the American Revolution, and the need for a base in the Pacific to counter French expansion.

In September 1786, Phillip was appointed commodore of the fleet, which came to be known as the First Fleet. His assignment was to transport convicts and soldiers to establish a colony at Botany Bay. Upon arriving there, Phillip was to assume the powers of captain general and governor in chief of the new colony. A subsidiary colony was to be founded on Norfolk Island, as recommended by Sir John Call and Sir George Young, to take advantage of that island&#x27;s native flax (harakeke) and timber for naval purposes.

===Voyage to Colony of New South Wales===

On 25 October 1786, the 20-gun , lying in the dock at Deptford, was commissioned, with the command given to Phillip. The armed tender HMAT Supply (also known as ), under the command of Lieutenant Henry Lidgbird Ball, was also commissioned to join the expedition. On 15 December, Captain John Hunter was assigned as second captain to &quot;Sirius&quot; to command in the absence of Phillip, who as governor of the colony, would be where the seat of government was to be fixed.

The fleet of 11 ships and about 1,500 people, under Phillip&#x27;s command, sailed from Portsmouth, England, on 13 May 1787; provided an escort out of British waters. On 3 June 1787, the fleet anchored at Santa Cruz, Tenerife. On 10 June they set sail to cross the Atlantic to Rio de Janeiro, taking advantage of favourable trade winds and ocean currents. The Fleet reached Rio de Janeiro on 5 August and stayed for a month to resupply. The Fleet left Rio de Janeiro on 4 September to run before the westerlies to Table Bay in Southern Africa, which it reached on 13 October; this was the last port of call before Botany Bay. On 25 November, Phillip transferred from the &quot;Sirius&quot; to the faster &quot;Supply&quot;, and with the faster ships of the fleet hastened ahead to prepare for the arrival of the rest of the fleet. However, this &quot;flying squadron&quot;, as Frost called it, reached Botany Bay only hours before the rest of the Fleet, so no preparatory work was possible. &quot;Supply&quot; reached Botany Bay on 18 January 1788; the three fastest transports in the advance group arrived on 19 January; slower ships, including &quot;Sirius&quot;, arrived on 20 January.
Phillip soon decided that the site, chosen on the recommendation of Sir Joseph Banks, who had accompanied James Cook in 1770, was not suitable, since it had poor soil, no secure anchorage, and no reliable water source. Cook was an explorer and Banks had a scientific interest, whereas Phillip&#x27;s differing assessment of the site came from his perspective as, quoted by Tyrrell, &quot;custodian of over a thousand convicts&quot; for whom he was responsible. After some exploration, Phillip decided to go on to Port Jackson, and on 26 January, the marines and the convicts landed at a cove, which Phillip named for Lord Sydney. This date later became Australia&#x27;s national day, Australia Day. Governor Phillip formally proclaimed the colony on 7 February 1788 in Sydney. Sydney Cove offered a fresh water supply and a safe harbour, which Phillip famously described as: &quot;being with out exception the finest Harbour in the World [...] Here a Thousand Sail of the Line may ride in the most perfect Security.&quot;

===Establishing a settlement===

On 26 January, the Union Jack was raised, and possession of the land was taken formally in the name of King George III. The next day, sailors from &quot;Sirius&quot;, a party of marines, and a number of male convicts were disembarked to fell timber and clear the ground for the erection of tents. The remaining large company of male convicts disembarked from the transports over the following days. Phillip himself structured the ordering of the camp. His own tent as governor and those of his attendant staff and servants were set on the east side of Tank Stream, with the tents of the male convicts and marines on the west. During this time, priority was given to building permanent storehouses for the settlement&#x27;s provisions. On 29 January, the governor&#x27;s portable house was placed, and livestock were landed the next day. The female convicts disembarked on 6 February; the general camp for the women was to the north of the governor&#x27;s house and separated from the male convicts by the houses of chaplain Richard Johnson and the Judge Advocate, Marine Captain David Collins. On 7 February 1788, Phillip and his government were formally inaugurated.

On 15 February 1788, Phillip sent Lieutenant Philip Gidley King with a party of 23, including 15 convicts, to establish the colony at Norfolk Island, partly in response to a perceived threat of losing the island to the French, and partly to establish an alternative food source for the mainland colony.

===Governor of New South Wales===
When Phillip was appointed as governor-designate of the colony and began to plan the expedition, he requested that the convicts that were being sent be trained; only twelve carpenters and a few men who knew anything about agriculture were sent. Seamen with technical and building skills were commandeered immediately.

Phillip established a civil administration, with courts of law, that applied to everyone living in the settlement. Two convicts, Henry and Susannah Kable, sought to sue Duncan Sinclair, the captain of the &quot;Alexander&quot;, for stealing their possessions during the voyage. Sinclair, believing that as convicts they had no protection from the law, as was the case in Britain, boasted that he could not be sued. Despite this, the court found for the plaintiffs and ordered the captain to make restitution for the theft of the Kables&#x27; possessions.

Phillip had drawn up a detailed memorandum of his plans for the proposed new colony. In one paragraph he wrote: &quot;The laws of this country [England] will of course, be introduced in [New] South Wales, and there is one that I would wish to take place from the moment his Majesty&#x27;s forces take possession of the country: That there can be no slavery in a free land, and consequently no slaves.&quot; Nevertheless, Phillip believed in severe discipline; floggings and hangings were commonplace, although Phillip commuted many death sentences. The settlement&#x27;s supplies were rationed equally to convicts, officers, and marines, and females were given two-thirds of the weekly males&#x27; rations. In late February, six convicts were brought before the criminal court for stealing supplies. They were sentenced to death; the ringleader, Thomas Barrett, was hanged that day. Phillip gave the rest a reprieve. They were banished to an island in the harbour and given only bread and water.

The governor also expanded the settlement&#x27;s knowledge of the landscape. Two officers from &quot;Sirius&quot;, Captain John Hunter and Lieutenant William Bradley, conducted a thorough survey of the harbour at Sydney Cove. Phillip later joined them on an expedition to survey Broken Bay.

The fleet&#x27;s ships left over the next months, with &quot;Sirius&quot; and &quot;Supply&quot; remaining in the colony under command of the governor. They were used to survey and map the coastlines and waterways. Scurvy broke out, so &quot;Sirius&quot; left Port Jackson for Cape Town under the command of Hunter in October 1788, having been sent for supplies. The voyage, which completed a circumnavigation, returned to Sydney Cove in April, just in time to save the near-starving colony.
As an experienced farmhand, Phillip&#x27;s appointed servant Henry Edward Dodd, served as farm superintendent at Farm Cove, where he successfully cultivated the first crops, later moving to Rose Hill, where the soil was better. James Ruse, a convict, was later appointed to the position after Dodd died in 1791. When Ruse succeeded in the farming endeavours, he received the colony&#x27;s first land grant.

In June 1790, more convicts arrived with the Second Fleet, but , carrying more supplies, was disabled en route after hitting an iceberg, leaving the colony low on provisions again. &quot;Supply&quot;, the only ship left under colonial command after &quot;Sirius&quot; was wrecked 19 March 1790 trying to land men and supplies on Norfolk Island, was sent to Batavia for supplies. The colony&#x27;s isolation meant that it took almost two years for Phillip to receive replies to his dispatches from his superiors in London.

In late 1792, Phillip, whose health was suffering, relinquished the governorship to Major Francis Grose, lieutenant-governor and commander of New South Wales Corps. On 11 December 1792, Phillip left for Britain, on the &quot;Atlantic&quot;, which had arrived with convicts of the Third Fleet. Phillip was unable to follow his original intention of returning to Port Jackson once his health was restored, as medical advice compelled him to resign formally on 23 July 1793.

===Military personnel in colony===
The main challenge for order and harmony in the settlement came not from the convicts secured there on terms of good behaviour, but from the attitude of officers from the New South Wales Marine Corps. As Commander in Chief, Phillip was in command of both the naval and marine forces; his naval officers readily obeyed his commands, but a measure of co-operation from the marine officers ran against their tradition. Major Robert Ross and his officers (with the exception of a few such as David Collins, Watkin Tench, and William Dawes) refused to do anything other than guard duty, claiming that they were neither gaolers, supervisors, nor policemen.

Four companies of marines, consisting of 160 privates with 52 officers and NCO&#x27;s, accompanied the First Fleet to Botany Bay. In addition, there were 34 officers and men serving in the Ship&#x27;s Complement of Marines aboard &quot;Sirius&quot; and &quot;Supply&quot;, bringing the total to 246 who departed England.

Ross supported and encouraged his fellow officers in their conflicts with Phillip, engaged in clashes of his own, and complained of the governor&#x27;s actions to the Home Office. Phillip, more placid and forbearing in temperament, was anxious in the interests of the community as a whole to avoid friction between the civil and military authorities. Though firm in his attitude, he endeavoured to placate Ross, but to little effect. In the end, he solved the problem by ordering Ross to Norfolk Island on 5 March 1790 to replace the commandant there.

Beginning with guards arriving with the Second and Third fleets, but officially with the arrival of on 22 September 1791, the New South Wales Marines were relieved by a newly formed British Army regiment of foot, the New South Wales Corps. On 18 December 1791, &quot;Gorgon&quot; left Port Jackson, taking home the larger part of the still-serving New South Wales Marines. There remained in New South Wales a company of active marines serving under Captain George Johnston, who had been Phillip&#x27;s aide-de-camp, that transferred to the New South Wales Corps. Also remaining in the colony were discharged marines, many of whom became settlers. The official departure of the last serving marines from the colony was in December 1792, with Governor Phillip on &quot;Atlantic&quot;.

Major Francis Grose, commander of the New South Wales Corps, had replaced Ross as the Lieutenant-Governor and took over command of the colony when Phillip returned to Britain.

===Relations with indigenous peoples===
Phillip&#x27;s official orders with regard to Aboriginal people were to &quot;conciliate their affections&quot;, to &quot;live in amity and kindness with them&quot;, and to punish anyone who should &quot;wantonly destroy them, or give them any unnecessary interruption in the exercise of their several occupations&quot;. The first meeting between the colonists and the Eora, Aboriginal people, happened in Botany Bay. When Phillip went ashore, gifts were exchanged, thus Phillip and the officers began their relationship with the Eora through gift-giving, hilarity, and dancing, but also by showing them what their guns could do. Anyone found harming or killing Aboriginal people without provocation would be severely punished.

After the early meetings, dancing, and musket demonstrations, the Eora avoided the settlement in Sydney Cove for the first year, but they warned and then attacked whenever colonists trespassed on their lands away from the settlement. Part of Phillip&#x27;s early plan for peaceful cohabitation had been to persuade some Eora, preferably a family, to come and live in the town with the British so that the colonists could learn about the Eora&#x27;s language, beliefs, and customs.

By the end of the first year, as none of the Eora had come to live in the settlement, Phillip decided on a more ruthless strategy, and ordered the capture of some Eora warriors. The man who was captured was Arabanoo, from whom Phillip and his officers started to learn language and customs. Arabanoo died in April 1789 of smallpox, which also ravaged the rest of the Eora population. Phillip again ordered the boats to Manly Cove, where two more warriors were captured, Coleby and Bennelong; Coleby soon escaped, but Bennelong remained. Bennelong and Phillip formed a kind of friendship, before he too escaped.

Four months after Bennelong escaped from Sydney, Phillip was invited to a whale feast at Manly. Bennelong greeted him in a friendly and jovial way. Phillip was suddenly surrounded by warriors and speared in the shoulder by a man called Willemering. He ordered his men not to retaliate. Phillip, perhaps realising that the spearing was in retaliation for the kidnapping, ordered no actions to be taken over it. Friendly relations were reestablished afterwards, with Bennelong even returning to Sydney with his family.

Even though there were now friendly relations with the Indigenous people around Sydney Cove, the same couldn&#x27;t be said about the ones around Botany Bay, who had killed or wounded 17 colonists. Phillip despatched orders, as quoted by Tench, &quot;to put to death ten... [and] cut off the heads of the slain... to infuse a universal terror, which might operate to prevent further mischief&quot;. Even though two expeditions were despatched under command of Watkin Tench, no one was apprehended.

On 11 December 1792, when Phillip returned to Britain, Bennelong and another Aboriginal man named Yemmerrawanne (or Imeerawanyee) travelled with him on the &quot;Atlantic&quot;.

==Later life and death==
Phillip&#x27;s estranged wife, Charlott, died 3 August 1792 and was buried in St Beuno&#x27;s Churchyard, Llanycil, Bala, Merionethshire. Phillip, a resident in Marylebone, married Isabella Whitehead of Bath in St Marylebone Parish Church, in the Church of England on 8 May 1794.

His health recovered, he was recommissioned in March 1796 to the 74-gun as part of the Channel fleet. In October, his command was switched to the 74-gun . In September 1797, Phillip was transferred again to the 90-gun , command of which he held until December of that year. During 1798–99, Phillip commanded the Hampshire Sea Fencibles, then appointed inspector of the Impress Service, in which capacity he and a secretary toured the outposts of Britain to report on the strengths of the various posts.

In the ordinary course of events he was promoted to Rear-Admiral on 1 January 1801. Phillip retired in 1805 from active service in the Navy, was promoted to Vice-Admiral on 13 December 1806, and received a final promotion to Admiral of the Blue on 4 June 1814.

Phillip suffered a stroke in 1808, which left him partially paralysed. He died 31 August 1814 at his residence, 19 Bennett Street, Bath. He was buried nearby at St Nicholas&#x27;s Church, Bathampton. His Last Will and Testament has been transcribed and is online. Forgotten for many years, the grave was discovered in November 1897 by a young woman cleaning the church, who found the name after lifting matting from the floor; the historian James Bonwick had been searching Bath records for its location. An annual service of remembrance is held at the church around Phillip&#x27;s birthdate by the Britain–Australia Society.

In 2007, Geoffrey Robertson alleged that Phillip&#x27;s remains were no longer in St Nicholas Church, Bathampton, and had been lost: &quot;Captain Arthur Phillip is not where the ledger stone says he is: it may be that he is buried somewhere outside, it may simply be that he is simply lost. But he is not where Australians have been led to believe that he now lies.&quot;

==Legacy==
A number of places in Australia bear Phillip&#x27;s name, including Port Phillip, Phillip Island (Victoria), Phillip Island (Norfolk Island), Phillip Street in the Sydney central business district, and St Phillip&#x27;s Church, Sydney.

A monument to Phillip in Bath Abbey Church was unveiled in 1937. Another was unveiled at St Mildred&#x27;s Church, Bread Street, London, in 1932; that church was destroyed in the London Blitz in 1940, but the principal elements of the monument were re-erected at the west end of Watling Street, near Saint Paul&#x27;s Cathedral, in 1968. A different bust and memorial is inside the nearby church of St Mary-le-Bow. There is a memorial fountain honouring him in the Royal Botanical Gardens, Sydney. There is a 1786 portrait of him by Francis Wheatley in the National Portrait Gallery, London, and another by the same painter painted in 1787 in the Mitchell Library, State Library of New South Wales, Sydney.

Percival Serle wrote of Phillip in his &quot;Dictionary of Australian Biography&quot;: 
===200th anniversary===
As part of a series of events on the bicentenary of his death, a memorial was dedicated in Westminster Abbey on 9 July 2014. In the service, the Dean of Westminster, Very Reverend Dr John Hall, described Phillip as follows: &quot;This modest, yet world-class seaman, linguist, and patriot, whose selfless service laid the secure foundations on which was developed the Commonwealth of Australia, will always be remembered and honoured alongside other pioneers and inventors here in the Nave: David Livingstone, Thomas Cochrane, and Isaac Newton.&quot; A similar memorial was unveiled by the outgoing 37th Governor of New South Wales, Marie Bashir, in St James&#x27; Church, Sydney, on 31 August 2014. A bronze bust was installed at the Museum of Sydney, and a full-day symposium discussed his contributions to the founding of modern Australia.

==In popular culture==
Phillip has been played by a number of actors in movies and television programs, including:
*Sir Cedric Hardwicke in &quot;Botany Bay&quot; (1953) 
*Edward Hepple in &quot;The Hungry Ones&quot; (1963)
*Wynn Roberts in &quot;Prelude to Harvest&quot; (1963)
*Peter Collingwood in &quot;The Timeless Land&quot; (1980)
*Sam Neill in &quot;The Incredible Journey of Mary Bryant&quot; (2005)
*David Wenham in &quot;Banished&quot; (2015)

He is a prominent character in Timberlake Wertenbaker&#x27;s play &quot;Our Country&#x27;s Good&quot;, in which he commissions Lieutenant Ralph Clark to stage a production of &quot;The Recruiting Officer&quot;. He is shown as compassionate and just, but receives little support from his fellow officers.

His life was the focus of &quot;I&#x27;ll Meet You in Botany Bay&quot;, a 1945 radio play.
== See also ==
* &quot;Historical Records of Australia&quot;
* Journals of the First Fleet
* History of smallpox in Australia

== References ==
===Citations===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==


== External links ==
* 
* B. H. Fletcher, &quot;Phillip, Arthur (1738–1814)&quot;, &quot;Australian Dictionary of Biography&quot;, Volume 2, Melbourne University Press, 1967, pp 326–333.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q311548" start="0" end="14" title="Arthur Phillip" label="Arthur Phillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="64" end="74" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528895" start="107" end="148" title="Governor of New South Wales" label="governor of the Colony of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445966" start="175" end="200" title="Royal Hospital School" label="Greenwich Hospital School"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="332" end="353" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q10888316" start="626" end="634" title="Secondment" label="Seconded"/>
<link wikidata="Q588089" start="642" end="657" title="Portuguese Navy" label="Portuguese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204142" start="684" end="701" title="Spanish–Portuguese War (1776–1777)" label="war against Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061326" start="954" end="965" title="Evan Nepean" label="Evan Nepean"/>
<link wikidata="Q332533" start="1039" end="1050" title="Thomas Townshend, 1st Viscount Sydney" label="Lord Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419429" start="1075" end="1086" title="First Fleet" label="First Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140316" start="1139" end="1151" title="penal colony" label="penal colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q894682" start="1172" end="1182" title="Botany Bay" label="Botany Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="1184" end="1199" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q54504" start="1337" end="1349" title="Port Jackson" label="Port Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="1364" end="1370" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q989174" start="2083" end="2091" title="convicts" label="convicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q745839" start="2101" end="2107" title="Second Fleet (Australia)" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421367" start="2112" end="2123" title="Third Fleet (Australia)" label="Third Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476656" start="2700" end="2723" title="Sea Fencibles" label="Hampshire Sea Fencibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="2824" end="2838" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath, Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324526" start="2981" end="2993" title="Port Phillip" label="Port Phillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q785760" start="2995" end="3009" title="Phillip Island" label="Phillip Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185822" start="3011" end="3025" title="Phillip Street" label="Phillip Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852577" start="3033" end="3065" title="Sydney central business district" label="Sydney central business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185600" start="3071" end="3088" title="Phillip, Australian Capital Territory" label="suburb of Phillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="3092" end="3100" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q54507" start="3109" end="3131" title="Governor Phillip Tower" label="Governor Phillip Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728787" start="3264" end="3285" title="All Hallows, Bread Street" label="Parish of All Hallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959146" start="3290" end="3302" title="Bread Street" label="Bread Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3304" end="3310" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="3363" end="3372" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="3606" end="3613" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068693" start="3741" end="3750" title="Cheapside" label="Cheapside"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="3758" end="3772" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445966" start="4028" end="4053" title="Royal Hospital School" label="Greenwich Hospital School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576531" start="4057" end="4071" title="charity school" label="charity school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811222" start="5113" end="5126" title="Robert Hughes (critic)" label="Robert Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="5259" end="5267" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q45823" start="5275" end="5286" title="Barents Sea" label="Barents Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458667" start="5346" end="5363" title="flensing" label="stripping blubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q162611" start="5528" end="5540" title="scurvy grass" label="scurvy grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="5563" end="5571" title="reindeer" label="reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="5706" end="5719" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="5807" end="5816" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761" start="5821" end="5828" title="Livorno" label="Livorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="5870" end="5879" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="6238" end="6248" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24038800" start="6468" end="6475" title="Admiral of the Blue" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q130261" start="6476" end="6485" title="John Byng" label="John Byng"/>
<link wikidata="Q24038805" start="6545" end="6557" title="Rear-Admiral of the Red" label="Rear-Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698697" start="6558" end="6569" title="Temple West" label="Temple West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196554" start="6593" end="6610" title="Battle of Minorca (1756)" label="Battle of Minorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417630" start="6713" end="6728" title="Raid on St Malo" label="Raid on St Malo"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="6851" end="6862" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q562277" start="6879" end="6894" title="Battle of Havana (1762)" label="Siege of Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q457271" start="6942" end="6952" title="Lieutenant (Royal Navy)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039461" start="7227" end="7237" title="Glasshayes" label="Glasshayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182986" start="7241" end="7261" title="Lyndhurst, Hampshire" label="Lyndhurst, Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207452" start="7581" end="7597" title="ship of the line" label="ship of the line"/>
<link wikidata="Q10888316" start="7621" end="7629" title="Secondment" label="seconded"/>
<link wikidata="Q588089" start="7637" end="7652" title="Portuguese Navy" label="Portuguese Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204142" start="7682" end="7699" title="Spanish–Portuguese War (1776–1777)" label="war against Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="7855" end="7869" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q56064" start="7873" end="7894" title="Colonia del Sacramento" label="Colonia do Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q35827" start="7902" end="7917" title="Río de la Plata" label="Río de la Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="7928" end="7940" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950348" start="8496" end="8532" title="Spanish ship San Agustín (1768)" label="Spanish ship &amp;quot;San Agustín&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q897986" start="9361" end="9369" title="fireship" label="fireship"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="9489" end="9516" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q334953" start="9522" end="9538" title="John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich" label="Earl of Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399716" start="9636" end="9648" title="post-captain" label="post-captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="9739" end="9743" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197" start="9839" end="9847" title="Cuxhaven" label="Cuxhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q725880" start="10068" end="10086" title="Philip Gidley King" label="Philip Gidley King"/>
<link wikidata="Q332806" start="10330" end="10342" title="George Germain, 1st Viscount Sackville" label="Lord Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="10359" end="10407" title="Home Secretary" label="Secretary of State for Home and American Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q312573" start="10411" end="10428" title="William Petty, 2nd Earl of Shelburne" label="Earl of Shelburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q332533" start="10483" end="10499" title="Thomas Townshend, 1st Viscount Sydney" label="Thomas Townshend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335" start="10769" end="10780" title="Montevideo" label="Monte Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257199" start="11169" end="11178" title="Commodore (Royal Navy)" label="Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q245666" start="11179" end="11195" title="Sir Robert Kingsmill, 1st Baronet" label="Robert Kingsmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="11500" end="11512" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061326" start="11752" end="11763" title="Evan Nepean" label="Evan Nepean"/>
<link wikidata="Q44160" start="11953" end="11959" title="Toulon" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603206" start="12068" end="12087" title="Batavian Revolution" label="Batavian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q334953" start="12131" end="12144" title="John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich" label="Lord Sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="12181" end="12194" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q153408" start="12200" end="12212" title="Joseph Banks" label="Joseph Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="12259" end="12269" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178839" start="12277" end="12288" title="First voyage of James Cook" label="1770 voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q894682" start="12346" end="12356" title="Botany Bay" label="Botany Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="12358" end="12373" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="12431" end="12439" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139085" start="12440" end="12451" title="James Matra" label="James Matra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770529" start="12964" end="12983" title="Penal transportation" label="transport criminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="13015" end="13034" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="13067" end="13074" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="13086" end="13102" title="French colonial empire" label="French expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419429" start="13200" end="13211" title="First Fleet" label="First Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q56923" start="13361" end="13376" title="captain general" label="captain general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528895" start="13381" end="13398" title="Governor of New South Wales" label="governor in chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="13459" end="13473" title="Norfolk Island" label="Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527640" start="13497" end="13506" title="John Call" label="John Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344132" start="13515" end="13527" title="George Young (Royal Navy officer)" label="George Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q607380" start="13582" end="13590" title="harakeke" label="harakeke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606983" start="13863" end="13882" title="Henry Lidgbird Ball" label="Henry Lidgbird Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353724" start="13954" end="13965" title="John Hunter (Royal Navy officer)" label="John Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="14232" end="14242" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q14328" start="14349" end="14359" title="Santa Cruz de Tenerife" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q40846" start="14361" end="14369" title="Tenerife" label="Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="14468" end="14478" title="trade wind" label="trade wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q12343832" start="14644" end="14654" title="westerlies" label="westerlies"/>
<link wikidata="Q531909" start="14658" end="14667" title="Table Bay" label="Table Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706656" start="15021" end="15026" title="Alan Frost" label="Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q54504" start="15846" end="15858" title="Port Jackson" label="Port Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756937" start="15940" end="15961" title="Sydney Cove" label="named for Lord Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q502375" start="16017" end="16030" title="Australia Day" label="Australia Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16497" end="16507" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683489" start="16941" end="16952" title="Tank Stream" label="Tank Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326892" start="17413" end="17428" title="Richard Johnson (chaplain)" label="Richard Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874817" start="17437" end="17451" title="Judge Advocate of New South Wales" label="Judge Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q931448" start="17468" end="17481" title="David Collins (lieutenant governor)" label="David Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q31057" start="17692" end="17706" title="Norfolk Island" label="Norfolk Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724192" start="18344" end="18349" title="Henry Kable" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16176775" start="19289" end="19318" title="Commutation (law)" label="commuted many death sentences"/>
<link wikidata="Q63185030" start="19617" end="19631" title="Thomas Barrett (convict)" label="Thomas Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005833" start="19918" end="19933" title="William Bradley (Royal Navy officer)" label="William Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q925649" start="20047" end="20057" title="Broken Bay" label="Broken Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q163865" start="20275" end="20281" title="Scurvy" label="Scurvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="20337" end="20346" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135885" start="20453" end="20469" title="circumnavigation" label="circumnavigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435475" start="20665" end="20674" title="Farm Cove, New South Wales" label="Farm Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q21319" start="20742" end="20751" title="Rose Hill, New South Wales" label="Rose Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142512" start="20780" end="20790" title="James Ruse" label="James Ruse"/>
<link wikidata="Q745839" start="21005" end="21017" title="Second Fleet (Australia)" label="Second Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199713" start="21317" end="21324" title="Batavia, Dutch East Indies" label="Batavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441518" start="21573" end="21586" title="Francis Grose (British Army officer)" label="Francis Grose"/>
<link wikidata="Q847247" start="21625" end="21646" title="New South Wales Corps" label="New South Wales Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816258" start="21708" end="21716" title="Atlantic (1783 ship)" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187324" start="22162" end="22190" title="New South Wales Marine Corps" label="New South Wales Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349391" start="22413" end="22424" title="Robert Ross (British Marines officer)" label="Robert Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q931448" start="22479" end="22492" title="David Collins (lieutenant governor)" label="David Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566721" start="22494" end="22506" title="Watkin Tench" label="Watkin Tench"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007674" start="22512" end="22525" title="William Dawes (British Marines officer)" label="William Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q847247" start="23735" end="23756" title="New South Wales Corps" label="New South Wales Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507671" start="23975" end="23990" title="George Johnston (British Marines officer)" label="George Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="24020" end="24032" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441518" start="24308" end="24321" title="Francis Grose (British Army officer)" label="Francis Grose"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="24565" end="24575" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q257174" start="24888" end="24892" title="Eora" label="Eora"/>
<link wikidata="Q623669" start="25937" end="25945" title="Arabanoo" label="Arabanoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="26052" end="26060" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q509716" start="26149" end="26159" title="Manly Cove" label="Manly Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q24044915" start="26200" end="26206" title="Colebe" label="Coleby"/>
<link wikidata="Q817828" start="26211" end="26220" title="Bennelong" label="Bennelong"/>
<link wikidata="Q110628912" start="26578" end="26589" title="Willemering" label="Willemering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566721" start="27320" end="27332" title="Watkin Tench" label="Watkin Tench"/>
<link wikidata="Q20687642" start="27457" end="27470" title="Yemmerrawanne" label="Yemmerrawanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q14508553" start="27669" end="27677" title="Llanycil" label="Llanycil"/>
<link wikidata="Q171923" start="27679" end="27683" title="Bala, Gwynedd" label="Bala"/>
<link wikidata="Q577711" start="27685" end="27699" title="Merionethshire" label="Merionethshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q123634" start="27724" end="27734" title="Marylebone" label="Marylebone"/>
<link wikidata="Q22889" start="27766" end="27770" title="Bath, Somerset" label="Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q211300" start="27774" end="27801" title="St Marylebone Parish Church" label="St Marylebone Parish Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="27810" end="27827" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476656" start="28156" end="28179" title="Sea Fencibles" label="Hampshire Sea Fencibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566803" start="28213" end="28228" title="Impress Service" label="Impress Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q24038804" start="28400" end="28412" title="Rear-Admiral of the Blue" label="Rear-Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q24038807" start="28505" end="28517" title="Vice-Admiral of the Blue" label="Vice-Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q24038800" start="28573" end="28592" title="Admiral of the Blue" label="Admiral of the Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045840" start="28771" end="28796" title="Church of St Nicholas, Bathampton" label="St Nicholas&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868986" start="28798" end="28808" title="Bathampton" label="Bathampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129997" start="29051" end="29064" title="James Bonwick" label="James Bonwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969261" start="29209" end="29234" title="Britain–Australia Society" label="Britain–Australia Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033418" start="29246" end="29264" title="Geoffrey Robertson" label="Geoffrey Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324526" start="29690" end="29702" title="Port Phillip" label="Port Phillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q785760" start="29704" end="29718" title="Phillip Island" label="Phillip Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q586302" start="29731" end="29762" title="Phillip Island (Norfolk Island)" label="Phillip Island (Norfolk Island)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185822" start="29764" end="29778" title="Phillip Street" label="Phillip Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852577" start="29786" end="29818" title="Sydney central business district" label="Sydney central business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505123" start="29824" end="29856" title="St Phillip&amp;#x27;s Church, Sydney" label="St Phillip&amp;#x27;s Church, Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q334399" start="29884" end="29894" title="Bath Abbey" label="Bath Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594882" start="29948" end="29972" title="St Mildred, Bread Street" label="St Mildred&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="30038" end="30050" title="London Blitz" label="London Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q173882" start="30159" end="30186" title="Saint Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="Saint Paul&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301992" start="30258" end="30272" title="St Mary-le-Bow" label="St Mary-le-Bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q54489" start="30324" end="30355" title="Royal Botanical Gardens, Sydney" label="Royal Botanical Gardens, Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482749" start="30392" end="30408" title="Francis Wheatley (painter)" label="Francis Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q238587" start="30416" end="30449" title="National Portrait Gallery, London" label="National Portrait Gallery, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133813" start="30506" end="30556" title="State Library of New South Wales" label="Mitchell Library, State Library of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167145" start="30567" end="30581" title="Percival Serle" label="Percival Serle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273962" start="30612" end="30646" title="Dictionary of Australian Biography" label="Dictionary of Australian Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="30770" end="30787" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q820595" start="30824" end="30843" title="Dean of Westminster" label="Dean of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499234" start="30845" end="30871" title="John Hall (priest)" label="Very Reverend Dr John Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="31164" end="31168" title="Nave" label="Nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q48373" start="31170" end="31187" title="David Livingstone" label="David Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q334994" start="31189" end="31204" title="Thomas Cochrane, 10th Earl of Dundonald" label="Thomas Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="31210" end="31222" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528895" start="31283" end="31310" title="Governor of New South Wales" label="Governor of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897276" start="31312" end="31324" title="Marie Bashir" label="Marie Bashir"/>
<link wikidata="Q648182" start="31329" end="31358" title="St James&amp;#x27; Church, Sydney" label="St James&amp;#x27; Church, Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q910232" start="31414" end="31430" title="Museum of Sydney" label="Museum of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q527735" start="31643" end="31659" title="Cedric Hardwicke" label="Cedric Hardwicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948511" start="31663" end="31685" title="Botany Bay (film)" label="&amp;quot;Botany Bay&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343426" start="31695" end="31708" title="Edward Hepple" label="Edward Hepple"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007306" start="31718" end="31733" title="The Hungry Ones" label="The Hungry Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040183" start="31748" end="31760" title="Wynn Roberts (actor)" label="Wynn Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967141" start="31770" end="31788" title="Prelude to Harvest" label="Prelude to Harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173339" start="31803" end="31820" title="Peter Collingwood" label="Peter Collingwood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31830" end="31847" title="The Timeless Land#Television production" label="The Timeless Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q214309" start="31862" end="31871" title="Sam Neill" label="Sam Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q127560" start="31881" end="31918" title="The Incredible Journey of Mary Bryant" label="The Incredible Journey of Mary Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q296328" start="31933" end="31945" title="David Wenham" label="David Wenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950263" start="31955" end="31963" title="Banished (TV series)" label="Banished"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804690" start="32009" end="32031" title="Timberlake Wertenbaker" label="Timberlake Wertenbaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7110590" start="32050" end="32073" title="Our Country&amp;#x27;s Good" label="Our Country&amp;#x27;s Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287344" start="32116" end="32127" title="Ralph Clark" label="Ralph Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759830" start="32159" end="32181" title="The Recruiting Officer" label="The Recruiting Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q123179620" start="32315" end="32347" title="I&amp;#x27;ll Meet You in Botany Bay" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Meet You in Botany Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="32362" end="32372" title="radio play" label="radio play"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791170" start="32397" end="32428" title="Historical Records of Australia" label="Historical Records of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850901" start="32437" end="32464" title="Journals of the First Fleet" label="Journals of the First Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32467" end="32499" title="History of smallpox#Australia" label="History of smallpox in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q672680" start="32752" end="32786" title="Australian Dictionary of Biography" label="Australian Dictionary of Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811908" start="32804" end="32830" title="Melbourne University Press" label="Melbourne University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2564" wikidata="Q2502" url="?curid=2564" title="April 10">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
* 428 – Nestorius becomes the Patriarch of Constantinople.
* 837 – Halley&#x27;s Comet makes its closest approach to Earth at a distance equal to 0.0342 AU (5.1 million kilometres/3.2 million miles).
*1407 – Deshin Shekpa, 5th Karmapa Lama visits the Ming dynasty capital at Nanjing and is awarded the title &quot;Great Treasure Prince of Dharma&quot;.
*1500 – Ludovico Sforza is captured by Swiss troops at Novara and is handed over to the French.
*1545 – The settlement of Villa Imperial de Carlos V (now the city of Potosí) in Bolivia is founded after the discovery of huge silver deposits in the area.
===1601–1900===
*1606 – The Virginia Company of London is established by royal charter by James I of England with the purpose of establishing colonial settlements in North America.
*1710 – The Statute of Anne, the first law regulating copyright, comes into force in Great Britain.
*1717 – Robert Walpole resigns from the British government, commencing the Whig Split which lasts until 1720.
*1724 – Bach leads the first performance of his cantata &quot;Erfreut euch, ihr Herzen&quot;, BWV 66, his first cantata composed for Easter in Leipzig.
*1741 – War of the Austrian Succession: Prussia gains control of Silesia at the Battle of Mollwitz.
*1809 – Napoleonic Wars: The War of the Fifth Coalition begins when forces of the Austrian Empire invade Bavaria.
*1815 – The Mount Tambora volcano begins a three-month-long eruption, lasting until July 15. The eruption ultimately kills 71,000 people and affects Earth&#x27;s climate for the next two years.
*1816 – The Federal government of the United States approves the creation of the Second Bank of the United States.
*1821 – Patriarch Gregory V of Constantinople is hanged by the Ottoman government from the main gate of the Patriarchate and his body is thrown into the Bosphorus.
* 1821 – Greek War of Independence: the island of Psara joins the Greek struggle for independence.
*1826 – The 10,500 inhabitants of the Greek town of Missolonghi begin leaving the town after a year&#x27;s siege by Turkish forces. Very few of them survive.
*1858 – After the original Big Ben, a bell for the Palace of Westminster, had cracked during testing, it is recast into the current bell by Whitechapel Bell Foundry.
*1864 – Archduke Maximilian of Habsburg is proclaimed emperor of Mexico during the French intervention in Mexico.
*1865 – American Civil War: A day after his surrender to Union forces, Confederate General Robert E. Lee addresses his troops for the last time.
*1866 – The American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA) is founded in New York City by Henry Bergh.
*1868 – At Arogee in Abyssinia, British and Indian forces defeat an army of Emperor Tewodros II. While 700 Ethiopians are killed and many more injured, only two British/Indian troops die.
*1872 – The first Arbor Day is celebrated in Nebraska.
*1875 – India: Arya Samaj is founded in Mumbai by Swami Dayananda Saraswati to propagate his goal of social reform. 
*1887 – On Easter Sunday, Pope Leo XIII authorizes the establishment of the Catholic University of America.
*1896 – 1896 Summer Olympics: The Olympic marathon is run ending with the victory of Greek athlete Spyridon Louis.
*1900 – British suffer a sharp defeat by the Boers south of Brandfort. 600 British troops are killed and wounded and 800 taken prisoner.

===1901–present===
*1912 – &quot;RMS Titanic&quot; sets sail from Southampton, England on her maiden and only voyage.
*1916 – The Professional Golfers&#x27; Association of America (PGA) is created in New York City.
*1919 – Mexican Revolution leader Emiliano Zapata is ambushed and shot dead by government forces in Morelos.
* 1919 – The Third Regional Congress of Peasants, Workers and Insurgents is held by the Makhnovshchina at Huliaipole.
*1925 – &quot;The Great Gatsby&quot; by F. Scott Fitzgerald is first published in New York City, by Charles Scribner&#x27;s Sons.
*1938 – The 1938 German parliamentary election and referendum seeks approval for a single list of Nazi candidates and the recent annexation of Austria.
*1939 – &quot;Alcoholics Anonymous&quot;, A.A.&#x27;s &quot;Big Book&quot;, is first published.
*1941 – World War II: The Axis powers establish the Independent State of Croatia.
*1944 – Rudolf Vrba and Alfréd Wetzler escape from Birkenau death camp.
*1963 – One hundred twenty-nine American sailors die when the submarine sinks at sea.
*1968 – The TEV &quot;Wahine&quot;, a New Zealand ferry sinks in Wellington harbour due to a fierce storm – the strongest winds ever in Wellington. Out of the 734 people on board, fifty-three died.
*1970 – Paul McCartney announces that he is leaving The Beatles for personal and professional reasons.
*1971 – Ping-pong diplomacy: In an attempt to thaw relations with the United States, China hosts the U.S. table tennis team for a week-long visit.
*1972 – Tombs containing bamboo slips, among them Sun Tzu&#x27;s &quot;Art of War&quot; and Sun Bin&#x27;s lost military treatise, are discovered by construction workers in Shandong.
* 1972 – Vietnam War: For the first time since November 1967, American B-52 bombers reportedly begin bombing North Vietnam.
*1973 – Invicta International Airlines Flight 435 crashes in a snowstorm on approach to Basel, Switzerland, killing 108 people.
*1979 – Red River Valley tornado outbreak: A tornado lands in Wichita Falls, Texas killing 42 people.
*1988 – The Ojhri Camp explosion kills or injures more than 1,000 people in Rawalpindi and Islamabad, Pakistan.
*1991 – Italian ferry collides with an oil tanker in dense fog off Livorno, Italy, killing 140.
* 1991 – A rare tropical storm develops in the South Atlantic Ocean near Angola; the first to be documented by satellites.
*1998 – The Good Friday Agreement is signed in Northern Ireland.
*2009 – President of Fiji Ratu Josefa Iloilo announces the abrogation of the constitution and assumes all governance in the country, creating a constitutional crisis.
*2010 – Polish Air Force Tu-154M crashes near Smolensk, Russia, killing 96 people, including Polish President Lech Kaczyński, his wife, and dozens of other senior officials and dignitaries.
*2016 – The Paravur temple accident in which a devastating fire caused by the explosion of firecrackers stored for Vishu, kills more than one hundred people out of the thousands gathered for seventh day of Bhadrakali worship.
* 2016 – An earthquake of 6.6 magnitude strikes 39 km west-southwest of Ashkasham, impacting India, Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Srinagar and Pakistan.
*2019 – Scientists from the Event Horizon Telescope project announce the first ever image of a black hole, which was located in the centre of the M87 galaxy.
*2023 – A mass shooting occurs at the Old National Bank in Louisville, Kentucky that leaves five victims dead and eight wounded.

==Births==

===Pre-1600===
* 401 – Theodosius II, Roman emperor (d. 450)
*1018 – Nizam al-Mulk, Persian scholar and vizier (d. 1092)
*1472 – Margaret of York, English princess (d. 1472)
*1480 – Philibert II, duke of Savoy (d. 1504)
*1487 – William I, count of Nassau-Siegen (d. 1559)
*1512 – James V, king of Scotland (d. 1542)
*1579 – Augustus II, duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg (d. 1666)
*1583 – Hugo Grotius, Dutch philosopher and jurist (d. 1645)
===1601–1900===
*1603 – Christian, Prince-Elect of Denmark (d. 1647)
*1651 – Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus, German mathematician, physicist, and physician (d. 1708)
*1656 – René Lepage de Sainte-Claire, French-Canadian settler, founded Rimouski (d. 1718)
*1704 – Benjamin Heath, English scholar and author (d. 1766)
*1707 – Michel Corrette, French organist, composer, and author (d. 1795)
*1713 – John Whitehurst, English geologist and clockmaker (d. 1788)
*1755 – Samuel Hahnemann, German-French physician and academic (d. 1843)
*1762 – Giovanni Aldini, Italian physicist and academic (d. 1834)
*1769 – Jean Lannes, French marshal (d. 1809)
*1778 – William Hazlitt, English essayist and critic (d. 1830)
*1794 – Matthew C. Perry, English-Scottish American commander (d. 1858)
*1806 – Juliette Drouet, French actress (d. 1883)
* 1806 – Leonidas Polk, Scottish-American general and bishop (d. 1884)
*1827 – Lew Wallace, American general, lawyer, and politician, 11th Governor of New Mexico Territory (d. 1905)
*1829 – William Booth, English minister, founded The Salvation Army (d. 1912)
*1847 – Joseph Pulitzer, Hungarian-American journalist, publisher, and politician, founded Pulitzer, Inc. (d. 1911)
*1864 – Eugen d&#x27;Albert, Scottish-German pianist and composer (d. 1932)
*1865 – Jack Miner, American-Canadian farmer, hunter, and environmentalist (d. 1944)
*1867 – George William Russell, Irish author, poet, and painter (d. 1935)
*1868 – George Arliss, English actor and playwright (d. 1946)
* 1868 – Asriel Günzig, Moravian rabbi (d. 1931)
*1873 – Kyösti Kallio, Finnish farmer, banker, and politician, 4th President of Finland (d. 1940)
*1875 – George Clawley, English footballer (d. 1920)
*1877 – Alfred Kubin, Austrian author and illustrator (d. 1959)
*1879 – Coenraad Hiebendaal, Dutch rower and physician (d. 1921)
*1880 – Frances Perkins, American sociologist, academic, and politician, United States Secretary of Labor (d. 1965)
* 1880 – Montague Summers, English clergyman and author (d. 1948)
*1886 – Johnny Hayes, American runner and trainer (d. 1965)
*1887 – Bernardo Houssay, Argentinian physiologist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1971)
*1889 – Louis Rougier, French philosopher from the Vienna Circle (d. 1982)
*1891 – Frank Barson, English footballer and coach (d. 1968)
*1893 – Otto Steinböck, Austrian zoologist (d. 1969)
*1894 – Ben Nicholson, British painter (d. 1982)
*1897 – Prafulla Chandra Sen, Indian accountant and politician, 3rd Chief Minister of West Bengal (d. 1990)
*1900 – Arnold Orville Beckman, American chemist, inventor, and philanthropist (d. 2004)

===1901–present===
*1901 – Dhananjay Ramchandra Gadgil, Indian economist (d. 1971)
*1903 – Patroklos Karantinos, Greek architect (d. 1976)
* 1903 – Clare Turlay Newberry, American author and illustrator (d. 1970)
*1906 – Steve Anderson, American hurdler (d. 1988)
*1910 – Margaret Clapp, American scholar and academic (d. 1974)
* 1910 – Helenio Herrera, Argentinian footballer and manager (d. 1997)
* 1910 – Paul Sweezy, American economist and publisher, founded the &quot;Monthly Review&quot; (d. 2004)
*1911 – Martin Denny, American pianist and composer (d. 2005)
* 1911 – Maurice Schumann, French journalist and politician, Minister of Foreign and European Affairs for France (d. 1998)
*1912 – Boris Kidrič, Austrian-Slovenian politician, 1st Prime Minister of Slovenia (d. 1953)
*1913 – Stefan Heym, German-American soldier and author (d. 2001)
*1914 – Jack Badcock, Australian cricketer (d. 1982)
*1915 – Harry Morgan, American actor and director (d. 2011)
* 1915 – Leo Vroman, Dutch-American hematologist, poet, and illustrator (d. 2014)
*1916 – Lee Jung-seob, Korean painter (d. 1956)
*1917 – Jagjit Singh Lyallpuri, Indian politician (d. 2013)
* 1917 – Robert Burns Woodward, American chemist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 1979)
*1919 – John Houbolt, American engineer and academic (d. 2014)
*1921 – Chuck Connors, American baseball player and actor (d. 1992)
* 1921 – Jake Warren, Canadian soldier and diplomat, Canadian Ambassador to the United States (d. 2008)
* 1921 – Sheb Wooley, American singer-songwriter and actor (d. 2003) 
*1923 – Roger Gaillard, Haitian historian and author (d. 2000)
* 1923 – Jane Kean, American actress and singer (d. 2013)
* 1923 – Floyd Simmons, American decathlete and actor (d. 2008)
* 1923 – Sid Tickridge, English footballer (d. 1997)
* 1923 – John Watkins, South African cricketer (d. 2021)
*1924 – Kenneth Noland, American soldier and painter (d. 2010)
*1925 – Angelo Poffo, American wrestler and promoter (d. 2010)
*1926 – Jacques Castérède, French pianist and composer (d. 2014)
* 1926 – Junior Samples, American comedian (d. 1983)
*1927 – Norma Candal, Puerto Rican actress (d. 2006)
* 1927 – Marshall Warren Nirenberg, American biochemist and geneticist, Nobel Prize laureate (d. 2010)
*1929 – Mike Hawthorn, English race car driver (d. 1959)
* 1929 – Liz Sheridan, American actress (d. 2022) 
* 1929 – Max von Sydow, Swedish-French actor (d. 2020)
*1930 – Claude Bolling, French pianist, composer, and actor (d. 2020)
* 1930 – Dolores Huerta, American activist, co-founded the United Farm Workers
* 1930 – Spede Pasanen, Finnish film director and producer, comedian, and inventor (d. 2001)
*1931 – Kishori Amonkar, Indian classical vocalist (d. 2017)
*1932 – Delphine Seyrig, Swiss/Alsatian French actress (d. 1990)
* 1932 – Omar Sharif, Egyptian actor and screenwriter (d. 2015)
*1933 – Rokusuke Ei, Japanese composer and author (d. 2016)
* 1933 – Helen McElhone, Scottish politician (d. 2013)
*1934 – David Halberstam, American journalist and author (d. 2007)
*1935 – Patrick Garland, English actor and director (d. 2013)
* 1935 – Peter Hollingworth, Australian bishop, 23rd Governor General of Australia
* 1935 – Christos Yannaras, Greek philosopher, theologian and author (d. 2024)
*1936 – John A. Bennett, American soldier (d. 1961)
* 1936 – David A. Hardy, British artist
* 1936 – John Howell, English long jumper
* 1936 – John Madden, American football player, coach, and sportscaster (d. 2021)
* 1936 – Bobby Smith, American singer (d. 2013)
*1937 – Bella Akhmadulina, Soviet and Russian poet, short story writer, and translator (d. 2010)
*1938 – Don Meredith, American football player and sportscaster (d. 2010)
*1939 – Claudio Magris, Italian scholar, author, and translator
*1940 – Gloria Hunniford, British radio and television host
*1941 – Chrysostomos II of Cyprus, (d. 2022)
* 1941 – Harold Long, Canadian politician (d. 2013)
* 1941 – Paul Theroux, American novelist, short story writer, and travel writer
*1942 – Nick Auf der Maur, Canadian journalist and politician (d. 1998)
* 1942 – Ian Callaghan, English footballer
* 1942 – Stuart Dybek, American novelist, short story writer, and poet
*1943 – Andrzej Badeński, Polish-German sprinter (d. 2008)
* 1943 – Margaret Pemberton, English author
*1945 – Kevin Berry, Australian swimmer (d. 2006)
*1946 – David Angell, American screenwriter and producer (d. 2001)
* 1946 – Bob Watson, American baseball player and manager (d. 2020)
* 1946 – Adolf Winkelmann, German director, producer, and screenwriter
*1947 – David A. Adler, American author and educator
* 1947 – Bunny Wailer, Jamaican singer-songwriter and drummer (d. 2021) 
*1948 – Mel Blount, American football player
* 1948 – Jim Burns, Welsh artist
*1949 – Daniel Mangeas, French banker and sportscaster
* 1949 – Eric Troyer, American singer-songwriter, keyboardist and guitarist
*1950 – Ken Griffey, Sr., American baseball player and manager
* 1950 – Eddie Hazel, American guitarist (d. 1992)
*1951 – David Helvarg, American journalist and activist
*1952 – Narayan Rane, Indian politician, 16th Chief Minister of Maharashtra
* 1952 – Masashi Sada, Japanese singer, lyricist, composer, novelist, actor, and producer
* 1952 – Steven Seagal, American actor, producer, and martial artist
*1953 – David Moorcroft, English runner and businessman
* 1953 – Pamela Wallin, Swedish-Canadian journalist, academic, and politician
*1954 – Paul Bearer, American wrestler and manager (d. 2013)
* 1954 – Anne Lamott, American author and educator
* 1954 – Peter MacNicol, American actor
* 1954 – Juan Williams, Panamanian-American journalist and author
*1955 – Marit Breivik, Norwegian handball player and coach
* 1955 – Lesley Garrett, English soprano and actress
* 1955 – Mike Rinder, Australian-American former Scientologist, critic (d. 2025)
*1956 – Carol V. Robinson, English chemist and academic
*1957 – Aliko Dangote, Nigerian businessman, founded Dangote Group
* 1957 – John M. Ford, American author and poet (d. 2006)
* 1957 – Steve Gustafson, Spanish-American bass player 
* 1957 – Rosemary Hill, English historian and author
*1958 – Bob Bell, Northern Irish engineer
* 1958 – Yefim Bronfman, Uzbek-American pianist
* 1958 – Brigitte Holzapfel, German high jumper
*1959 – Babyface, American singer-songwriter and producer 
* 1959 – Yvan Loubier, Canadian economist and politician
* 1959 – Brian Setzer, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
*1960 – Steve Bisciotti, American businessman, co-founded Allegis Group
* 1960 – Katrina Leskanich, American singer-songwriter and guitarist 
* 1960 – Terry Teagle, American basketball player
*1961 – Nicky Campbell, Scottish broadcaster and journalist
* 1961 – Carole Goble, English computer scientist and academic
* 1961 – Mark Jones, American basketball player
*1962 – Steve Tasker, American football player and sportscaster
*1963 – Warren DeMartini, American guitarist and songwriter 
* 1963 – Jeff Gray, American baseball player and coach
* 1963 – Doris Leuthard, Swiss lawyer and politician, 162nd President of the Swiss Confederation
*1965 – Tim Alexander, American drummer and songwriter 
* 1965 – Anna-Leena Härkönen, Finnish author
* 1966 – Brad William Henke, American football player and actor (d. 2022)
*1966 – Steve Claridge, English footballer, manager, and sportscaster
*1967 – Donald Dufresne, Canadian ice hockey player and coach
* 1967 – David Rovics, American singer-songwriter
*1968 – Metin Göktepe, Turkish photographer and journalist (d. 1996)
* 1968 – Orlando Jones, American actor, producer, and screenwriter
*1969 – Steve Glasson, Australian lawn bowler
* 1969 – Ekaterini Koffa, Greek sprinter
*1970 – Enrico Ciccone, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1970 – Leonard Doroftei, Romanian-Canadian boxer
* 1970 – Kenny Lattimore, American singer-songwriter
* 1970 – Q-Tip, American rapper, producer, and actor 
* 1971 – Indro Olumets, Estonian footballer and coach
* 1971 – Al Reyes, Dominican-American baseball player
*1972 – Ian Harvey, Australian cricketer
* 1972 – Priit Kasesalu, Estonian computer programmer, co-created Skype
* 1972 – Gordon Buchanan, Scottish film maker
*1973 – Guillaume Canet, French actor and director
* 1973 – Roberto Carlos, Brazilian footballer and manager
* 1973 – Aidan Moffat, Scottish singer-songwriter 
* 1973 – Christopher Simmons, Canadian-American graphic designer, author, and academic
*1974 – Eric Greitens, American soldier, author and politician
* 1974 – Petros Passalis, Greek footballer
*1975 – Chris Carrabba, American singer-songwriter and guitarist 
* 1975 – Terrence Lewis, Indian dancer and choreographer
* 1975 – David Harbour, American actor
*1976 – Clare Buckfield, English actress
* 1976 – Yoshino Kimura, Japanese actress and singer
* 1976 – Sara Renner, Canadian skier
*1977 – Stephanie Sheh, Taiwanese-American voice actress, director, and producer
*1978 – Sir Christus, Finnish guitarist (d. 2017)
*1979 – Iván Alonso, Uruguayan footballer
* 1979 – Kenyon Coleman, American football player
* 1979 – Rachel Corrie, American author and activist (d. 2003)
* 1979 – Tsuyoshi Domoto, Japanese singer-songwriter and actor
* 1979 – Sophie Ellis-Bextor, English singer-songwriter 
* 1979 – Pavlos Fyssas, Greek rapper (d. 2013)
* 1979 – Peter Kopteff, Finnish footballer
*1980 – Sean Avery, Canadian ice hockey player and model
* 1980 – Charlie Hunnam, English actor 
* 1980 – Shao Jiayi, Chinese footballer
* 1980 – Kasey Kahne, American race car driver
* 1980 – Andy Ram, Israeli tennis player
* 1980 – Bryce Soderberg, American singer-songwriter and bass player 
*1981 – Laura Bell Bundy, American actress and singer
* 1981 – Liz McClarnon, English singer and dancer 
* 1981 – Michael Pitt, American actor, model and musician
* 1981 – Alexei Semenov, Russian ice hockey player
*1982 – Andre Ethier, American baseball player
* 1982 – Chyler Leigh, American actress and singer
*1983 – Jamie Chung, American actress
* 1983 – Andrew Dost, American guitarist and songwriter 
* 1983 – Ryan Merriman, American actor
* 1983 – Hannes Sigurðsson, Icelandic footballer
*1984 – Faustina Agolley, Australian television host
* 1984 – Jeremy Barrett, American figure skater
* 1984 – Mandy Moore, American singer-songwriter and actress
* 1984 – David Obua, Ugandan footballer
* 1984 – Damien Perquis, French-Polish footballer
* 1984 – Gonzalo Javier Rodríguez, Argentinian footballer
*1985 – Barkhad Abdi, Somali-American actor and director
* 1985 – Willo Flood, Irish footballer
* 1985 – Jesús Gámez, Spanish footballer
* 1985 – Dion Phaneuf, Canadian ice hockey player
*1986 – Olivia Borlée, Belgian sprinter
* 1986 – Fernando Gago, Argentine footballer
* 1986 – Corey Kluber, American baseball pitcher
* 1986 – Vincent Kompany, Belgian footballer
* 1986 – Tore Reginiussen, Norwegian footballer
*1987 – Ahmed Adel Abdel Moneam, Egyptian footballer
* 1987 – Shay Mitchell, Canadian actress and model
* 1987 – Hayley Westenra, New Zealand soprano
*1988 – Chris Heston, American baseball pitcher
* 1988 – Kareem Jackson, American football player
* 1988 – Haley Joel Osment, American actor
*1989 – Charlie Culberson, American baseball player
*1990 – Ben Amos, English footballer
* 1990 – Andile Jali, South African footballer
* 1990 – Ricky Leutele, Australian-Samoan rugby league player
* 1990 – Maren Morris, American singer
* 1990 – Alex Pettyfer, English actor
*1991 – AJ Michalka, American actress and singer
*1992 – Jack Buchanan, Australian rugby league player
* 1992 – Sadio Mané, Senegalese footballer 
* 1992 – Chaz Mostert, Australian racing driver 
* 1992 – Daisy Ridley, English actress
*1993 – Sofia Carson, American singer and actress
*1994 – Siobhan Hunter, Scottish footballer
*1995 – Ian Nelson, American actor
*1996 – Thanasi Kokkinakis, Australian tennis player
* 1996 – Audrey Whitby, American actress
*1997 – Claire Wineland, American activist and author (d. 2018)
*1998 – Anna Pogorilaya, Russian figure skater
*2000 – Fidias Panayiotou, Cypriot internet celebrity and politician
*2001 – Ky Baldwin, Australian singer and actor
* 2001 – Noa Kirel, Israeli singer
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 879 – Louis the Stammerer, king of West Francia (b. 846)
* 943 – Landulf I, prince of Benevento and Capua
* 948 – Hugh of Arles, king of Italy
*1008 – Notker of Liège, French bishop (b. 940)
*1216 – Eric X, king of Sweden (b. 1180)
*1282 – Ahmad Fanakati, chief minister under Kublai Khan
*1309 – Elisabeth von Rapperswil, Swiss countess (b. 1261)
*1362 – Maud, English noblewoman (b. 1339)
*1500 – Michael Tarchaniota Marullus, Greek scholar and poet
*1533 – Frederick I, king of Denmark and Norway (b. 1471)
*1545 – Costanzo Festa, Italian composer
*1585 – Gregory XIII, pope of the Catholic Church (b. 1502)
*1598 – Jacopo Mazzoni, Italian philosopher (b. 1548)
*1599 – Gabrielle d&#x27;Estrées, French mistress of Henry IV of France (b. 1571)
===1601–1900===
*1601 – Mark Alexander Boyd, Scottish soldier and poet (b. 1562)
*1619 – Thomas Jones, English-Irish archbishop and politician, Lord Chancellor of Ireland (b. 1550)
*1640 – Agostino Agazzari, Italian composer and theorist (b. 1578)
*1644 – William Brewster, English official and pilgrim leader (b. 1566)
*1646 – Santino Solari, Swiss architect and sculptor (b. 1576)
*1667 – Jan Marek Marci, Czech physician and author (b. 1595)
*1704 – Wilhelm Egon von Fürstenberg, German cardinal (b. 1629)
*1756 – Giacomo Antonio Perti, Italian composer (b. 1661)
*1760 – Jean Lebeuf, French historian and author (b. 1687)
*1786 – John Byron, English admiral and politician, 24th Commodore Governor of Newfoundland (b. 1723)
*1806 – Horatio Gates, English-American general (b. 1727)
*1813 – Joseph-Louis Lagrange, Italian mathematician and astronomer (b. 1736)
*1821 – Gregory V of Constantinople, Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople (b. 1746)
*1823 – Karl Leonhard Reinhold, Austrian philosopher and academic (b. 1757)
*1871 – Lucio Norberto Mansilla, Argentinian general and politician (b. 1789)
*1889 – William Crichton, Scottish engineer and shipbuilder (b. 1827)
===1901–present===
*1909 – Algernon Charles Swinburne, English poet, playwright, novelist, and critic (b. 1837)
*1919 – Emiliano Zapata, Mexican general (b. 1879)
*1920 – Moritz Cantor, German mathematician and historian (b. 1829)
*1931 – Kahlil Gibran, Lebanese-American poet, painter, and philosopher (b. 1883)
*1935 – Rosa Campbell Praed, Australian novelist (b. 1851)
*1938 – King Oliver, American cornet player and bandleader (b. 1885)
*1942 – Carl Schenstrøm, Danish actor and director (b. 1881)
*1943 – Andreas Faehlmann, Estonian-German sailor and engineer (b. 1898)
*1945 – Hendrik Nicolaas Werkman, Dutch printer and typographer (b. 1882)
*1947 – Charles Nordhoff, English-American lieutenant and author (b. 1887)
*1950 – Fevzi Çakmak, Turkish field marshal and politician, 2nd Prime Minister of Turkey (b. 1876)
*1954 – Auguste Lumière, French director and producer (b. 1862)
* 1954 – Oscar Mathisen, Norwegian speed skater (b. 1888)
*1955 – Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, French priest, theologian, and philosopher (b. 1881)
*1958 – Chuck Willis, American singer-songwriter (b. 1928)
*1960 – André Berthomieu, French director and screenwriter (b. 1903)
*1962 – Michael Curtiz, Hungarian-American director, producer, and screenwriter (b. 1886)
* 1962 – Stuart Sutcliffe, Scottish artist and musician (b. 1940)
*1965 – Lloyd Casner, American race car driver, founded Casner Motor Racing Division (b. 1928)
* 1965 – Linda Darnell, American actress (b. 1923)
*1966 – Evelyn Waugh, English soldier, novelist, journalist and critic (b. 1903)
*1968 – Gustavs Celmiņš, Latvian lieutenant and politician (b. 1899)
*1969 – Harley Earl, American businessman (b. 1893)
*1975 – Walker Evans, American photographer (b. 1903)
* 1975 – Marjorie Main, American actress (b. 1890)
*1978 – Hjalmar Mäe, Estonian politician (b. 1901)
*1979 – Nino Rota, Italian pianist, composer, and conductor (b. 1911)
*1980 – Kay Medford, American actress and singer (b. 1919)
*1981 – Howard Thurman, American author, philosopher and civil rights activist (b. 1899)
*1983 – Issam Sartawi, Palestinian activist (b. 1935)
*1985 – Zisis Verros, Greek chieftain of the Macedonian Struggle (b. 1880)
*1986 – Linda Creed, American singer-songwriter (b. 1948)
*1988 – Ezekias Papaioannou, Greek Cypriot politician (b. 1908)
*1991 – Kevin Peter Hall, American actor (b. 1955)
* 1991 – Martin Hannett, English guitarist and producer (b. 1948)
* 1991 – Natalie Schafer, American actress (b. 1900)
*1992 – Sam Kinison, American comedian and actor (b. 1953)
*1993 – Chris Hani, South African activist and politician (b. 1942)
*1994 – Sam B. Hall, Jr., American lawyer, judge, and politician (b. 1924)
*1995 – Morarji Desai, Indian politician, 4th Prime Minister of India (b. 1896)
*1997 – Michael Dorris, American author and academic (b. 1945)
* 1998 – Seraphim of Athens, Greek archbishop (b. 1913)
*1999 – Heinz Fraenkel-Conrat, German-American biochemist and physician (b. 1910)
* 1999 – Jean Vander Pyl, American actress and voice artist (b. 1919)
*2000 – Peter Jones, English actor and screenwriter (b. 1920)
* 2000 – Larry Linville, American actor (b. 1939)
*2003 – Little Eva, American singer (b. 1943)
*2004 – Jacek Kaczmarski, Polish singer-songwriter, guitarist, and poet (b. 1957)
* 2004 – Sakıp Sabancı, Turkish businessman and philanthropist, founded Sabancı Holding (b. 1933)
*2005 – Norbert Brainin, Austrian violinist (b. 1923)
* 2005 – Scott Gottlieb, American drummer (b. 1970)
* 2005 – Archbishop Iakovos of America (b. 1911)
* 2005 – Al Lucas, American football player (b. 1978)
* 2005 – Wally Tax, Dutch singer-songwriter (b. 1948)
*2006 – Kleitos Kyrou, Greek poet and translator (b. 1921)
*2007 – Charles Philippe Leblond, French-Canadian biologist and academic (b. 1910)
* 2007 – Dakota Staton, American singer (b. 1930)
*2009 – Deborah Digges, American poet and educator (b. 1950)
* 2009 – Ioannis Patakis, Greek politician (b. 1940)
*2010 – Casualties in the 2010 Polish Air Force Tu-154 crash included:
** Ryszard Kaczorowski, Polish soldier and politician, 6th President of the Republic of Poland (b. 1919)
** Maria Kaczyńska, Polish economist, First Lady of Poland (b. 1942)
** Lech Kaczyński, Polish lawyer and politician, 4th President of Poland (b. 1949)
** Anna Walentynowicz, Ukrainian-Polish journalist and activist (b. 1929)
* 2010 – Dixie Carter, American actress and singer (b. 1939)
*2012 – Raymond Aubrac, French engineer and activist (b. 1914)
* 2012 – Barbara Buchholz, German theremin player and composer (b. 1959)
* 2012 – Lili Chookasian, Armenian-American operatic singer (b. 1921)
* 2012 – Luis Aponte Martínez, Puerto Rican cardinal (b. 1922)
* 2012 – Akin Omoboriowo, Nigerian lawyer and politician (b. 1932)
*2013 – Lorenzo Antonetti, Italian cardinal (b. 1922)
* 2013 – Raymond Boudon, French sociologist and academic (b. 1934)
* 2013 – Binod Bihari Chowdhury, Bangladeshi activist (b. 1911)
* 2013 – Robert Edwards, English physiologist and academic, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1925)
* 2013 – Olive Lewin, Jamaican anthropologist, musicologist, and author (b. 1927)
* 2013 – Gordon Thomas, English cyclist (b. 1921)
* 2013 – Angela Voigt, German long jumper (b. 1951)
*2014 – Dominique Baudis, French journalist and politician (b. 1947)
* 2014 – Jim Flaherty, Canadian lawyer and politician, 37th Canadian Minister of Finance (b. 1949)
* 2014 – Richard Hoggart, English author and academic (b. 1918)
* 2014 – Sue Townsend, English author and playwright (b. 1946)
*2015 – Richie Benaud, Australian cricketer and sportscaster (b. 1930)
* 2015 – Raúl Héctor Castro, Mexican-American politician and diplomat, 14th Governor of Arizona (b. 1916)
* 2015 – Judith Malina, German-American actress and director, co-founded The Living Theatre (b. 1926)
* 2015 – Rose Francine Rogombé, Gabonese lawyer and politician, President of Gabon (b. 1942)
* 2015 – Peter Walsh, Australian farmer and politician, 6th Australian Minister for Finance (b. 1935)
*2016 – Howard Marks, Welsh cannabis smuggler, writer, and legalisation campaigner (b. 1945)
*2023 – Al Jaffee, American cartoonist (b. 1921)
*2024 – O. J. Simpson, American football player, actor, and broadcaster (b. 1947)
==Holidays and observances==
*Christian feast day:
**Fulbert of Chartres
**James, Azadanus and Abdicius
**Mikael Agricola (Lutheran)
**Pierre Teilhard de Chardin (Episcopal Church)
**William of Ockham (Anglicanism)
**William Law (Anglicanism)
**April 10 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)
*Day of the Builder (Azerbaijan)
*Feast of the Third Day of the Writing of the Book of the Law (Thelema)
*Siblings Day (International observance)

== References ==
==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* Historical Events on April 10</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30902" start="28" end="31" title="428" label="428"/>
<link wikidata="Q185073" start="34" end="43" title="Nestorius" label="Nestorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="56" end="83" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q25093" start="87" end="90" title="837" label="837"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054" start="93" end="112" title="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet" label="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="179" end="181" title="Astronomical unit" label="AU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134" start="227" end="231" title="1407" label="1407"/>
<link wikidata="Q950798" start="234" end="265" title="Deshin Shekpa, 5th Karmapa Lama" label="Deshin Shekpa, 5th Karmapa Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="277" end="289" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="301" end="308" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126" start="380" end="384" title="1500" label="1500"/>
<link wikidata="Q236853" start="387" end="402" title="Ludovico Sforza" label="Ludovico Sforza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046" start="434" end="440" title="Novara" label="Novara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531" start="476" end="480" title="1545" label="1545"/>
<link wikidata="Q35045" start="545" end="551" title="Potosí" label="Potosí"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="556" end="563" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055970" start="598" end="618" title="Cerro Rico" label="huge silver deposits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747" start="649" end="653" title="1606" label="1606"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061207" start="660" end="686" title="London Company" label="Virginia Company of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="722" end="740" title="James I of England" label="James I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q918254" start="774" end="811" title="British colonization of the Americas" label="colonial settlements in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861" start="814" end="818" title="1710" label="1710"/>
<link wikidata="Q615405" start="825" end="840" title="Statute of Anne" label="Statute of Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="867" end="876" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="898" end="911" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895" start="914" end="918" title="1717" label="1717"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="921" end="935" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851458" start="988" end="998" title="Whig Split" label="Whig Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926" start="1024" end="1028" title="1724" label="1724"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="1031" end="1035" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350159" start="1079" end="1123" title="Erfreut euch, ihr Herzen, BWV 66" label="&amp;quot;Erfreut euch, ihr Herzen&amp;quot;, BWV 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573" start="1176" end="1180" title="1741" label="1741"/>
<link wikidata="Q32929" start="1183" end="1213" title="War of the Austrian Succession" label="War of the Austrian Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="1240" end="1247" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q663435" start="1255" end="1273" title="Battle of Mollwitz" label="Battle of Mollwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919" start="1276" end="1280" title="1809" label="1809"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="1283" end="1298" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q684324" start="1304" end="1330" title="War of the Fifth Coalition" label="War of the Fifth Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="1357" end="1372" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="1380" end="1387" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948" start="1390" end="1394" title="1815" label="1815"/>
<link wikidata="Q168714" start="1401" end="1414" title="Mount Tambora" label="Mount Tambora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686" start="1473" end="1480" title="July 15" label="July 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q209625" start="1530" end="1558" title="Year Without a Summer" label="affects Earth&amp;#x27;s climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6953" start="1584" end="1588" title="1816" label="1816"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="1595" end="1634" title="Federal government of the United States" label="Federal government of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263849" start="1664" end="1696" title="Second Bank of the United States" label="Second Bank of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976" start="1699" end="1703" title="1821" label="1821"/>
<link wikidata="Q705191" start="1716" end="1743" title="Gregory V of Constantinople" label="Gregory V of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1761" end="1779" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282276" start="1806" end="1818" title="Patriarchate" label="Patriarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="1851" end="1860" title="Bosphorus" label="Bosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182062" start="1871" end="1896" title="Greek War of Independence" label="Greek War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330873" start="1912" end="1917" title="Psara" label="Psara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004" start="1962" end="1966" title="1826" label="1826"/>
<link wikidata="Q642810" start="2013" end="2024" title="Missolonghi" label="Missolonghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q650567" start="2054" end="2073" title="Third Siege of Missolonghi" label="a year&amp;#x27;s siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684" start="2120" end="2124" title="1858" label="1858"/>
<link wikidata="Q41225" start="2146" end="2153" title="Big Ben" label="Big Ben"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="2170" end="2191" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Palace of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q174855" start="2259" end="2283" title="Whitechapel Bell Foundry" label="Whitechapel Bell Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704" start="2286" end="2290" title="1864" label="1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="2302" end="2324" title="Maximilian I of Mexico" label="Maximilian of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q952881" start="2368" end="2397" title="Second French intervention in Mexico" label="French intervention in Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708" start="2400" end="2404" title="1865" label="1865"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2407" end="2425" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512812" start="2504" end="2513" title="Lee&amp;#x27;s Farewell Address" label="addresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712" start="2545" end="2549" title="1866" label="1866"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416421" start="2556" end="2613" title="American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals" label="American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5718098" start="2653" end="2664" title="Henry Bergh" label="Henry Bergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717" start="2667" end="2671" title="1868" label="1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="2687" end="2696" title="Ethiopia" label="Abyssinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q743652" start="2724" end="2730" title="British Expedition to Abyssinia" label="defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q262589" start="2750" end="2761" title="Tewodros II" label="Tewodros II"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="2773" end="2781" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753" start="2855" end="2859" title="1872" label="1872"/>
<link wikidata="Q578836" start="2872" end="2881" title="Arbor Day" label="Arbor Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="2899" end="2907" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764" start="2910" end="2914" title="1875" label="1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q717798" start="2924" end="2934" title="Arya Samaj" label="Arya Samaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="2949" end="2955" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q224906" start="2959" end="2984" title="Swami Dayananda Saraswati" label="Swami Dayananda Saraswati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826" start="3027" end="3031" title="1887" label="1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="3037" end="3050" title="Easter Sunday" label="Easter Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="3052" end="3065" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q179036" start="3102" end="3132" title="Catholic University of America" label="Catholic University of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846" start="3135" end="3139" title="1896" label="1896"/>
<link wikidata="Q8080" start="3142" end="3162" title="1896 Summer Olympics" label="1896 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40244" start="3176" end="3184" title="marathon" label="marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202424" start="3233" end="3247" title="Spyridon Louis" label="Spyridon Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="3250" end="3254" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805770" start="3309" end="3318" title="Brandfort" label="Brandfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="3407" end="3411" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="3420" end="3431" title="RMS Titanic" label="RMS Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="3453" end="3464" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="3506" end="3510" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363321" start="3517" end="3566" title="Professional Golfers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="Professional Golfers&amp;#x27; Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="3603" end="3607" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="3610" end="3628" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="3636" end="3651" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Emiliano Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q66117" start="3702" end="3709" title="Morelos" label="Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3724" end="3783" title="Regional Congress of Peasants, Workers and Insurgents#Third Congress (April 1919)" label="Third Regional Congress of Peasants, Workers and Insurgents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436243" start="3799" end="3813" title="Makhnovshchina" label="Makhnovshchina"/>
<link wikidata="Q640649" start="3817" end="3827" title="Huliaipole" label="Huliaipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="3830" end="3834" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q214371" start="3843" end="3859" title="The Great Gatsby" label="The Great Gatsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="3869" end="3888" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q845617" start="3929" end="3957" title="Charles Scribner&amp;#x27;s Sons" label="Charles Scribner&amp;#x27;s Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="3960" end="3964" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q447420" start="3971" end="4020" title="1938 German parliamentary election and referendum" label="1938 German parliamentary election and referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="4112" end="4116" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q18231" start="4125" end="4145" title="Alcoholics Anonymous" label="Alcoholics Anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="4208" end="4212" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4215" end="4227" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="4233" end="4244" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="4259" end="4287" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="4290" end="4294" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q469726" start="4297" end="4308" title="Rudolf Vrba" label="Rudolf Vrba"/>
<link wikidata="Q570957" start="4313" end="4327" title="Alfréd Wetzler" label="Alfréd Wetzler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="4340" end="4359" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Birkenau death camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="4362" end="4366" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="4423" end="4432" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="4448" end="4452" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516950" start="4459" end="4481" title="TEV Wahine" label="TEV &amp;quot;Wahine&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="4646" end="4650" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="4653" end="4667" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="4697" end="4708" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="4749" end="4753" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048465" start="4756" end="4775" title="Ping-pong diplomacy" label="Ping-pong diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="4854" end="4866" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="4896" end="4900" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q16925239" start="4903" end="4908" title="Yinqueshan Han Tombs" label="Tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167293" start="4920" end="4932" title="Yinqueshan Han Slips" label="bamboo slips"/>
<link wikidata="Q37151" start="4945" end="4952" title="Sun Tzu" label="Sun Tzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8251" start="4966" end="4976" title="The Art of War" label="Art of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q334090" start="4987" end="4994" title="Sun Bin" label="Sun Bin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030518" start="5007" end="5024" title="Sun Bin&amp;#x27;s Art of War" label="military treatise"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="5068" end="5076" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="5087" end="5098" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="5134" end="5138" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q174534" start="5149" end="5161" title="B-52 Stratofortress" label="B-52 bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="5187" end="5200" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="5203" end="5207" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671791" start="5210" end="5251" title="Invicta International Airlines Flight 435" label="Invicta International Airlines Flight 435"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="5290" end="5295" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="5331" end="5335" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170696" start="5338" end="5371" title="1979 Red River Valley tornado outbreak" label="Red River Valley tornado outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q128349" start="5392" end="5412" title="Wichita Falls, Texas" label="Wichita Falls, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="5433" end="5437" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081609" start="5444" end="5454" title="Ojhri Camp" label="Ojhri Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q93230" start="5508" end="5518" title="Rawalpindi" label="Rawalpindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="5523" end="5532" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="5545" end="5549" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761" start="5611" end="5618" title="Livorno" label="Livorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q858010" start="5651" end="5655" title="South Atlantic tropical cyclone" label="rare"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="5656" end="5670" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="5693" end="5707" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q916" start="5713" end="5719" title="Angola" label="Angola"/>
<link wikidata="Q209363" start="5751" end="5761" title="weather satellite" label="satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="5764" end="5768" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="5775" end="5796" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="5829" end="5833" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q76292543" start="5836" end="5853" title="President of Fiji" label="President of Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451616" start="5854" end="5858" title="Ratu" label="Ratu"/>
<link wikidata="Q316317" start="5859" end="5872" title="Josefa Iloilo" label="Josefa Iloilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164178" start="5905" end="5917" title="1997 Constitution of Fiji" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613829" start="5972" end="5993" title="2009 Fijian constitutional crisis" label="constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="5996" end="6000" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q918504" start="6003" end="6019" title="Polish Air Force" label="Polish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q172957" start="6020" end="6026" title="Tu-154" label="Tu-154"/>
<link wikidata="Q131311" start="6028" end="6035" title="Smolensk air disaster" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337" start="6041" end="6049" title="Smolensk" label="Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757" start="6105" end="6119" title="Lech Kaczyński" label="Lech Kaczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="6186" end="6190" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q23772755" start="6197" end="6220" title="Paravur temple accident" label="Paravur temple accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587220" start="6300" end="6305" title="Vishu" label="Vishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350517" start="6391" end="6401" title="Bhadrakali" label="Bhadrakali"/>
<link wikidata="Q23838164" start="6423" end="6450" title="2016 Afghanistan earthquake" label="earthquake of 6.6 magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026731" start="6483" end="6492" title="Ashkasham" label="Ashkasham"/>
<link wikidata="Q25274" start="6560" end="6564" title="2019" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944788" start="6587" end="6610" title="Event Horizon Telescope" label="Event Horizon Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="6654" end="6664" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q14041" start="6705" end="6708" title="Messier 87" label="M87"/>
<link wikidata="Q49622" start="6718" end="6722" title="2023" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q117486057" start="6725" end="6740" title="2023 Louisville bank shooting" label="A mass shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084595" start="6755" end="6772" title="Old National Bank" label="Old National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="6776" end="6796" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q30479" start="6876" end="6879" title="401" label="401"/>
<link wikidata="Q160353" start="6882" end="6895" title="Theodosius II" label="Theodosius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q19251" start="6921" end="6925" title="1018" label="1018"/>
<link wikidata="Q298427" start="6928" end="6941" title="Nizam al-Mulk" label="Nizam al-Mulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589" start="6981" end="6985" title="1472" label="1472"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466210" start="6988" end="7004" title="Margaret of York (1472)" label="Margaret of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628" start="7034" end="7038" title="1480" label="1480"/>
<link wikidata="Q221263" start="7041" end="7053" title="Philibert II, Duke of Savoy" label="Philibert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652" start="7080" end="7084" title="1487" label="1487"/>
<link wikidata="Q688471" start="7087" end="7096" title="William I, Count of Nassau-Siegen" label="William I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192" start="7132" end="7136" title="1512" label="1512"/>
<link wikidata="Q137814" start="7139" end="7146" title="James V of Scotland" label="James V"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709" start="7176" end="7180" title="1579" label="1579"/>
<link wikidata="Q61963" start="7183" end="7194" title="Augustus the Younger, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Augustus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726" start="7234" end="7238" title="1583" label="1583"/>
<link wikidata="Q154959" start="7241" end="7253" title="Hugo Grotius" label="Hugo Grotius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735" start="7311" end="7315" title="1603" label="1603"/>
<link wikidata="Q693480" start="7318" end="7327" title="Christian, Prince-Elect of Denmark" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956" start="7364" end="7368" title="1651" label="1651"/>
<link wikidata="Q77288" start="7371" end="7405" title="Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus" label="Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982" start="7465" end="7469" title="1656" label="1656"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426532" start="7472" end="7500" title="René Lepage de Sainte-Claire" label="René Lepage de Sainte-Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336" start="7535" end="7543" title="Rimouski" label="Rimouski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824" start="7555" end="7559" title="1704" label="1704"/>
<link wikidata="Q112613" start="7562" end="7576" title="Benjamin Heath" label="Benjamin Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841" start="7616" end="7620" title="1707" label="1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q982378" start="7623" end="7638" title="Michel Corrette" label="Michel Corrette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873" start="7689" end="7693" title="1713" label="1713"/>
<link wikidata="Q709960" start="7696" end="7711" title="John Whitehurst" label="John Whitehurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627" start="7757" end="7761" title="1755" label="1755"/>
<link wikidata="Q157056" start="7764" end="7780" title="Samuel Hahnemann" label="Samuel Hahnemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q7652" start="7830" end="7834" title="1762" label="1762"/>
<link wikidata="Q171637" start="7837" end="7852" title="Giovanni Aldini" label="Giovanni Aldini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679" start="7896" end="7900" title="1769" label="1769"/>
<link wikidata="Q273032" start="7903" end="7914" title="Jean Lannes" label="Jean Lannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713" start="7942" end="7946" title="1778" label="1778"/>
<link wikidata="Q126596" start="7949" end="7964" title="William Hazlitt" label="William Hazlitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811" start="8005" end="8009" title="1794" label="1794"/>
<link wikidata="Q61855" start="8012" end="8028" title="Matthew C. Perry" label="Matthew C. Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903" start="8077" end="8081" title="1806" label="1806"/>
<link wikidata="Q440119" start="8084" end="8099" title="Juliette Drouet" label="Juliette Drouet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368292" start="8135" end="8148" title="Leonidas Polk" label="Leonidas Polk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008" start="8198" end="8202" title="1827" label="1827"/>
<link wikidata="Q357102" start="8205" end="8216" title="Lew Wallace" label="Lew Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q367079" start="8265" end="8297" title="Governor of New Mexico Territory" label="Governor of New Mexico Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572" start="8309" end="8313" title="1829" label="1829"/>
<link wikidata="Q309882" start="8316" end="8329" title="William Booth" label="William Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q188307" start="8357" end="8375" title="The Salvation Army" label="The Salvation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644" start="8387" end="8391" title="1847" label="1847"/>
<link wikidata="Q173417" start="8394" end="8409" title="Joseph Pulitzer" label="Joseph Pulitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259348" start="8477" end="8491" title="Pulitzer, Inc." label="Pulitzer, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7704" start="8503" end="8507" title="1864" label="1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q57178" start="8510" end="8529" title="Eugen d&amp;#x27;Albert" label="Eugen d&amp;#x27;Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708" start="8579" end="8583" title="1865" label="1865"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114141" start="8586" end="8596" title="Jack Miner" label="Jack Miner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715" start="8664" end="8668" title="1867" label="1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q366070" start="8671" end="8693" title="George William Russell" label="George William Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717" start="8738" end="8742" title="1868" label="1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q182229" start="8745" end="8758" title="George Arliss" label="George Arliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q23060822" start="8808" end="8821" title="Asriel Günzig" label="Asriel Günzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757" start="8849" end="8853" title="1873" label="1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q209441" start="8856" end="8869" title="Kyösti Kallio" label="Kyösti Kallio"/>
<link wikidata="Q29558" start="8915" end="8935" title="President of Finland" label="President of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764" start="8947" end="8951" title="1875" label="1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537953" start="8954" end="8968" title="George Clawley" label="George Clawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773" start="9000" end="9004" title="1877" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q558054" start="9007" end="9019" title="Alfred Kubin" label="Alfred Kubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783" start="9064" end="9068" title="1879" label="1879"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520299" start="9071" end="9090" title="Coenraad Hiebendaal" label="Coenraad Hiebendaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806" start="9129" end="9133" title="1880" label="1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q254478" start="9136" end="9151" title="Frances Perkins" label="Frances Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q967750" start="9201" end="9233" title="United States Secretary of Labor" label="United States Secretary of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q712220" start="9253" end="9269" title="Montague Summers" label="Montague Summers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822" start="9311" end="9315" title="1886" label="1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q456857" start="9318" end="9330" title="Johnny Hayes" label="Johnny Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826" start="9371" end="9375" title="1887" label="1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q237160" start="9378" end="9394" title="Bernardo Houssay" label="Bernardo Houssay"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="9435" end="9446" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831" start="9467" end="9471" title="1889" label="1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q446301" start="9474" end="9487" title="Louis Rougier" label="Louis Rougier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="9542" end="9546" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386222" start="9549" end="9561" title="Frank Barson" label="Frank Barson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840" start="9603" end="9607" title="1893" label="1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q23714979" start="9610" end="9624" title="Otto Steinböck" label="Otto Steinböck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843" start="9656" end="9660" title="1894" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q281637" start="9663" end="9676" title="Ben Nicholson" label="Ben Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847" start="9705" end="9709" title="1897" label="1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237582" start="9712" end="9732" title="Prafulla Chandra Sen" label="Prafulla Chandra Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507450" start="9772" end="9801" title="Chief Minister of West Bengal" label="Chief Minister of West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="9813" end="9817" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q695886" start="9820" end="9842" title="Arnold Orville Beckman" label="Arnold Orville Beckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035" start="9922" end="9926" title="1901" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268912" start="9929" end="9956" title="Dhananjay Ramchandra Gadgil" label="Dhananjay Ramchandra Gadgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="9986" end="9990" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q331108" start="9993" end="10013" title="Patroklos Karantinos" label="Patroklos Karantinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126267" start="10050" end="10071" title="Clare Turlay Newberry" label="Clare Turlay Newberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049" start="10116" end="10120" title="1906" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272620" start="10123" end="10137" title="Steve Anderson (athlete)" label="Steve Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="10167" end="10171" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759272" start="10174" end="10188" title="Margaret Clapp" label="Margaret Clapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q310078" start="10239" end="10254" title="Helenio Herrera" label="Helenio Herrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q715127" start="10310" end="10321" title="Paul Sweezy" label="Paul Sweezy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946330" start="10375" end="10389" title="Monthly Review" label="Monthly Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076" start="10407" end="10411" title="1911" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q557535" start="10414" end="10426" title="Martin Denny" label="Martin Denny"/>
<link wikidata="Q282882" start="10477" end="10493" title="Maurice Schumann" label="Maurice Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q789848" start="10529" end="10569" title="Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs (France)" label="Minister of Foreign and European Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="10592" end="10596" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q192041" start="10599" end="10611" title="Boris Kidrič" label="Boris Kidrič"/>
<link wikidata="Q45758" start="10648" end="10674" title="Prime Minister of Slovenia" label="Prime Minister of Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="10686" end="10690" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q76534" start="10693" end="10704" title="Stefan Heym" label="Stefan Heym"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="10752" end="10756" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111103" start="10759" end="10771" title="Jack Badcock" label="Jack Badcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="10805" end="10809" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q355125" start="10812" end="10824" title="Harry Morgan" label="Harry Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355992" start="10873" end="10883" title="Leo Vroman" label="Leo Vroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="10947" end="10951" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q3789181" start="10954" end="10967" title="Lee Jung-seob" label="Lee Jung-seob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092" start="10995" end="10999" title="1917" label="1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993226" start="11002" end="11024" title="Jagjit Singh Lyallpuri" label="Jagjit Singh Lyallpuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q232316" start="11063" end="11084" title="Robert Burns Woodward" label="Robert Burns Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="11117" end="11128" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="11149" end="11153" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392694" start="11156" end="11168" title="John Houbolt" label="John Houbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="11212" end="11216" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q705738" start="11219" end="11232" title="Chuck Connors" label="Chuck Connors"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018304" start="11288" end="11299" title="Jake Warren" label="Jake Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q29511807" start="11332" end="11372" title="Canadian Ambassador to the United States" label="Canadian Ambassador to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349284" start="11392" end="11403" title="Sheb Wooley" label="Sheb Wooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="11454" end="11458" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438996" start="11461" end="11475" title="Roger Gaillard (historian)" label="Roger Gaillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152433" start="11525" end="11534" title="Jane Kean" label="Jane Kean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859900" start="11583" end="11596" title="Floyd Simmons" label="Floyd Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507932" start="11647" end="11660" title="Sid Tickridge" label="Sid Tickridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263183" start="11700" end="11712" title="John Watkins (South African cricketer)" label="John Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="11749" end="11753" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q527001" start="11756" end="11770" title="Kenneth Noland" label="Kenneth Noland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="11812" end="11816" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q536393" start="11819" end="11831" title="Angelo Poffo" label="Angelo Poffo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="11875" end="11879" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q326609" start="11882" end="11899" title="Jacques Castérède" label="Jacques Castérède"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313445" start="11948" end="11962" title="Junior Samples" label="Junior Samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="11993" end="11997" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051651" start="12000" end="12012" title="Norma Candal" label="Norma Candal"/>
<link wikidata="Q110060" start="12054" end="12079" title="Marshall Warren Nirenberg" label="Marshall Warren Nirenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="12117" end="12128" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="12149" end="12153" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104" start="12156" end="12169" title="Mike Hawthorn" label="Mike Hawthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q263428" start="12214" end="12226" title="Liz Sheridan" label="Liz Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q203215" start="12265" end="12278" title="Max von Sydow" label="Max von Sydow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="12312" end="12316" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q943109" start="12319" end="12333" title="Claude Bolling" label="Claude Bolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q468843" start="12390" end="12404" title="Dolores Huerta" label="Dolores Huerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887749" start="12440" end="12459" title="United Farm Workers" label="United Farm Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735273" start="12469" end="12482" title="Spede Pasanen" label="Spede Pasanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="12554" end="12558" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117321" start="12561" end="12576" title="Kishori Amonkar" label="Kishori Amonkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18743" start="12615" end="12619" title="1932" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q261456" start="12622" end="12637" title="Delphine Seyrig" label="Delphine Seyrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q124216" start="12639" end="12644" title="Swiss people" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561076" start="12645" end="12653" title="List of Alsatians and Lotharingians" label="Alsatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170515" start="12688" end="12699" title="Omar Sharif" label="Omar Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="12744" end="12748" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360115" start="12751" end="12762" title="Rokusuke Ei" label="Rokusuke Ei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702814" start="12812" end="12826" title="Helen McElhone" label="Helen McElhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="12859" end="12863" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q467156" start="12866" end="12882" title="David Halberstam" label="David Halberstam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="12926" end="12930" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146555" start="12933" end="12948" title="Patrick Garland" label="Patrick Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354229" start="12996" end="13014" title="Peter Hollingworth" label="Peter Hollingworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="13040" end="13069" title="Governor General of Australia" label="Governor General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q984098" start="13079" end="13096" title="Christos Yannaras" label="Christos Yannaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="13150" end="13154" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q361271" start="13157" end="13172" title="John A. Bennett" label="John A. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230475" start="13210" end="13224" title="David A. Hardy" label="David A. Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17386062" start="13250" end="13261" title="John Howell (athlete)" label="John Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345694" start="13292" end="13303" title="John Madden" label="John Madden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935593" start="13374" end="13385" title="Bobby Smith (rhythm and blues singer)" label="Bobby Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647" start="13414" end="13418" title="1937" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q253395" start="13421" end="13438" title="Bella Akhmadulina" label="Bella Akhmadulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="13511" end="13515" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q945081" start="13518" end="13530" title="Don Meredith" label="Don Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="13585" end="13589" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q274404" start="13592" end="13606" title="Claudio Magris" label="Claudio Magris"/>
<link wikidata="Q18633" start="13649" end="13653" title="1940" label="1940"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571392" start="13656" end="13672" title="Gloria Hunniford" label="Gloria Hunniford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="13709" end="13713" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617902" start="13716" end="13741" title="Chrysostomos II of Cyprus" label="Chrysostomos II of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5661558" start="13762" end="13773" title="Harold Long (politician)" label="Harold Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q510320" start="13814" end="13826" title="Paul Theroux" label="Paul Theroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="13886" end="13890" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339706" start="13893" end="13910" title="Nick Auf der Maur" label="Nick Auf der Maur"/>
<link wikidata="Q540463" start="13966" end="13979" title="Ian Callaghan" label="Ian Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626494" start="14009" end="14021" title="Stuart Dybek" label="Stuart Dybek"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="14072" end="14076" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q514755" start="14079" end="14095" title="Andrzej Badeński" label="Andrzej Badeński"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759805" start="14139" end="14157" title="Margaret Pemberton" label="Margaret Pemberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="14175" end="14179" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384683" start="14182" end="14193" title="Kevin Berry" label="Kevin Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="14225" end="14229" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295429" start="14232" end="14244" title="David Angell" label="David Angell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934325" start="14300" end="14310" title="Bob Watson" label="Bob Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q104807" start="14368" end="14384" title="Adolf Winkelmann (film director)" label="Adolf Winkelmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="14431" end="14435" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173495" start="14438" end="14452" title="David A. Adler" label="David A. Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q441203" start="14492" end="14504" title="Bunny Wailer" label="Bunny Wailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="14557" end="14561" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q970406" start="14564" end="14574" title="Mel Blount" label="Mel Blount"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745954" start="14610" end="14619" title="Jim Burns" label="Jim Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="14635" end="14639" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014409" start="14642" end="14656" title="Daniel Mangeas" label="Daniel Mangeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387652" start="14698" end="14709" title="Eric Troyer" label="Eric Troyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="14766" end="14770" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365718" start="14773" end="14789" title="Ken Griffey, Sr." label="Ken Griffey, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q540533" start="14837" end="14848" title="Eddie Hazel" label="Eddie Hazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="14880" end="14884" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234882" start="14887" end="14900" title="David Helvarg" label="David Helvarg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="14936" end="14940" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631470" start="14943" end="14955" title="Narayan Rane" label="Narayan Rane"/>
<link wikidata="Q221922" start="14981" end="15010" title="Chief Minister of Maharashtra" label="Chief Minister of Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059718" start="15020" end="15032" title="Masashi Sada" label="Masashi Sada"/>
<link wikidata="Q82110" start="15110" end="15123" title="Steven Seagal" label="Steven Seagal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="15171" end="15175" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175737" start="15178" end="15193" title="David Moorcroft" label="David Moorcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361787" start="15235" end="15248" title="Pamela Wallin" label="Pamela Wallin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="15305" end="15309" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q714222" start="15312" end="15323" title="Paul Bearer" label="Paul Bearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838773" start="15374" end="15385" title="Anne Lamott" label="Anne Lamott"/>
<link wikidata="Q299309" start="15425" end="15439" title="Peter MacNicol" label="Peter MacNicol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6301159" start="15465" end="15478" title="Juan Williams" label="Juan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="15523" end="15527" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q270793" start="15530" end="15543" title="Marit Breivik" label="Marit Breivik"/>
<link wikidata="Q24320" start="15590" end="15604" title="Lesley Garrett" label="Lesley Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3857453" start="15643" end="15654" title="Mike Rinder" label="Mike Rinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="15716" end="15720" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q56190" start="15723" end="15740" title="Carol V. Robinson" label="Carol V. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="15772" end="15776" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394965" start="15779" end="15792" title="Aliko Dangote" label="Aliko Dangote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3013553" start="15824" end="15837" title="Dangote Group" label="Dangote Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q328949" start="15847" end="15859" title="John M. Ford" label="John M. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612734" start="15905" end="15920" title="Steve Gustafson" label="Steve Gustafson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368376" start="15961" end="15974" title="Rosemary Hill" label="Rosemary Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="16006" end="16010" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q173531" start="16013" end="16021" title="Bob Bell (motorsport)" label="Bob Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344161" start="16056" end="16070" title="Yefim Bronfman" label="Yefim Bronfman"/>
<link wikidata="Q537423" start="16104" end="16122" title="Brigitte Holzapfel" label="Brigitte Holzapfel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="16144" end="16148" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q344983" start="16151" end="16159" title="Babyface (musician)" label="Babyface"/>
<link wikidata="Q3573373" start="16211" end="16223" title="Yvan Loubier" label="Yvan Loubier"/>
<link wikidata="Q453074" start="16268" end="16280" title="Brian Setzer" label="Brian Setzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="16324" end="16328" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611968" start="16331" end="16346" title="Steve Bisciotti" label="Steve Bisciotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731377" start="16381" end="16394" title="Allegis Group" label="Allegis Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q166769" start="16404" end="16421" title="Katrina Leskanich" label="Katrina Leskanich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984825" start="16474" end="16486" title="Terry Teagle" label="Terry Teagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="16516" end="16520" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028573" start="16523" end="16537" title="Nicky Campbell" label="Nicky Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11604" start="16584" end="16596" title="Carole Goble" label="Carole Goble"/>
<link wikidata="Q15222722" start="16647" end="16657" title="Mark Jones (basketball, born 1961)" label="Mark Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="16687" end="16691" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347350" start="16694" end="16706" title="Steve Tasker" label="Steve Tasker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="16751" end="16755" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256936" start="16758" end="16774" title="Warren DeMartini" label="Warren DeMartini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173940" start="16820" end="16829" title="Jeff Gray (baseball, born 1963)" label="Jeff Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q115442" start="16875" end="16889" title="Doris Leuthard" label="Doris Leuthard"/>
<link wikidata="Q318316" start="16926" end="16962" title="List of Presidents of the Swiss Confederation" label="President of the Swiss Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="16964" end="16968" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340415" start="16971" end="16984" title="Tim Alexander" label="Tim Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178461" start="17028" end="17047" title="Anna-Leena Härkönen" label="Anna-Leena Härkönen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="17066" end="17070" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q641408" start="17073" end="17091" title="Brad William Henke" label="Brad William Henke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612218" start="17146" end="17160" title="Steve Claridge" label="Steve Claridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="17209" end="17213" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407211" start="17216" end="17231" title="Donald Dufresne" label="Donald Dufresne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176398" start="17279" end="17291" title="David Rovics" label="David Rovics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="17321" end="17325" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395076" start="17328" end="17341" title="Metin Göktepe" label="Metin Göktepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q542069" start="17398" end="17411" title="Orlando Jones" label="Orlando Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="17457" end="17461" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612665" start="17464" end="17477" title="Steve Glasson" label="Steve Glasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463047" start="17511" end="17526" title="Ekaterini Koffa" label="Ekaterini Koffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="17544" end="17548" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q452677" start="17551" end="17565" title="Enrico Ciccone" label="Enrico Ciccone"/>
<link wikidata="Q930059" start="17603" end="17619" title="Leonard Doroftei" label="Leonard Doroftei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195227" start="17654" end="17669" title="Kenny Lattimore" label="Kenny Lattimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q42025" start="17707" end="17712" title="Q-Tip (musician)" label="Q-Tip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="17754" end="17758" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873708" start="17761" end="17774" title="Indro Olumets" label="Indro Olumets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704708" start="17815" end="17823" title="Al Reyes" label="Al Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="17861" end="17865" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q5981763" start="17868" end="17878" title="Ian Harvey" label="Ian Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403114" start="17910" end="17924" title="Priit Kasesalu" label="Priit Kasesalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q40984" start="17967" end="17972" title="Skype" label="Skype"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584926" start="17982" end="17997" title="Gordon Buchanan" label="Gordon Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="18020" end="18024" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q314403" start="18027" end="18042" title="Guillaume Canet" label="Guillaume Canet"/>
<link wikidata="Q429039" start="18079" end="18093" title="Roberto Carlos" label="Roberto Carlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q403889" start="18137" end="18149" title="Aidan Moffat" label="Aidan Moffat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113239" start="18188" end="18207" title="Christopher Simmons" label="Christopher Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="18267" end="18271" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386615" start="18274" end="18287" title="Eric Greitens" label="Eric Greitens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179101" start="18338" end="18353" title="Petros Passalis" label="Petros Passalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="18373" end="18377" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352011" start="18380" end="18394" title="Chris Carrabba" label="Chris Carrabba"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701944" start="18447" end="18461" title="Terence Lewis (choreographer)" label="Terrence Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q391359" start="18504" end="18517" title="David Harbour" label="David Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="18535" end="18539" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126131" start="18542" end="18557" title="Clare Buckfield" label="Clare Buckfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143649" start="18584" end="18598" title="Yoshino Kimura" label="Yoshino Kimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q267908" start="18637" end="18648" title="Sara Renner" label="Sara Renner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481" start="18666" end="18670" title="1977" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q750134" start="18673" end="18687" title="Stephanie Sheh" label="Stephanie Sheh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="18747" end="18751" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526343" start="18754" end="18766" title="Sir Christus" label="Sir Christus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="18797" end="18801" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q562663" start="18804" end="18815" title="Iván Alonso" label="Iván Alonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392941" start="18847" end="18861" title="Kenyon Coleman" label="Kenyon Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q195154" start="18897" end="18910" title="Rachel Corrie" label="Rachel Corrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q985899" start="18960" end="18975" title="Tsuyoshi Domoto" label="Tsuyoshi Domoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q216899" start="19023" end="19042" title="Sophie Ellis-Bextor" label="Sophie Ellis-Bextor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14925748" start="19080" end="19093" title="Pavlos Fyssas" label="Pavlos Fyssas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470836" start="19127" end="19140" title="Peter Kopteff" label="Peter Kopteff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="19162" end="19166" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q725726" start="19169" end="19179" title="Sean Avery" label="Sean Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q356294" start="19227" end="19241" title="Charlie Hunnam" label="Charlie Hunnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q482992" start="19267" end="19277" title="Shao Jiayi" label="Shao Jiayi"/>
<link wikidata="Q468429" start="19307" end="19318" title="Kasey Kahne" label="Kasey Kahne"/>
<link wikidata="Q335318" start="19354" end="19362" title="Andy Ram" label="Andy Ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919243" start="19395" end="19410" title="Bryce Soderberg" label="Bryce Soderberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="19457" end="19461" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q271765" start="19464" end="19480" title="Laura Bell Bundy" label="Laura Bell Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q258010" start="19519" end="19532" title="Liz McClarnon" label="Liz McClarnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q352540" start="19570" end="19582" title="Michael Pitt" label="Michael Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373105" start="19628" end="19642" title="Alexei Semenov (hockey player)" label="Alexei Semenov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="19671" end="19675" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189147" start="19678" end="19690" title="Andre Ethier" label="Andre Ethier"/>
<link wikidata="Q230765" start="19726" end="19738" title="Chyler Leigh" label="Chyler Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="19769" end="19773" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q232642" start="19776" end="19787" title="Jamie Chung" label="Jamie Chung"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756824" start="19815" end="19826" title="Andrew Dost" label="Andrew Dost"/>
<link wikidata="Q504075" start="19872" end="19885" title="Ryan Merriman" label="Ryan Merriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48626" start="19911" end="19928" title="Hannes Sigurðsson" label="Hannes Sigurðsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="19952" end="19956" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438299" start="19959" end="19975" title="Faustina Agolley" label="Faustina Agolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659482" start="20013" end="20027" title="Jeremy Barrett (figure skater)" label="Jeremy Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q187832" start="20061" end="20072" title="Mandy Moore" label="Mandy Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175948" start="20122" end="20132" title="David Obua" label="David Obua"/>
<link wikidata="Q211547" start="20162" end="20176" title="Damien Perquis" label="Damien Perquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q318243" start="20212" end="20236" title="Gonzalo Javier Rodríguez" label="Gonzalo Javier Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="20262" end="20266" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q15381644" start="20269" end="20281" title="Barkhad Abdi" label="Barkhad Abdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399750" start="20327" end="20338" title="Willo Flood" label="Willo Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q720908" start="20366" end="20377" title="Jesús Gámez" label="Jesús Gámez"/>
<link wikidata="Q739160" start="20407" end="20419" title="Dion Phaneuf" label="Dion Phaneuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="20449" end="20453" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q234500" start="20456" end="20469" title="Olivia Borlée" label="Olivia Borlée"/>
<link wikidata="Q187426" start="20497" end="20510" title="Fernando Gago" label="Fernando Gago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997263" start="20542" end="20554" title="Corey Kluber" label="Corey Kluber"/>
<link wikidata="Q201381" start="20591" end="20606" title="Vincent Kompany" label="Vincent Kompany"/>
<link wikidata="Q384542" start="20636" end="20652" title="Tore Reginiussen" label="Tore Reginiussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="20676" end="20680" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827483" start="20683" end="20706" title="Ahmed Adel Abdel Moneam" label="Ahmed Adel Abdel Moneam"/>
<link wikidata="Q234709" start="20737" end="20750" title="Shay Mitchell" label="Shay Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q231985" start="20788" end="20803" title="Hayley Westenra" label="Hayley Westenra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="20826" end="20830" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106869" start="20833" end="20845" title="Chris Heston" label="Chris Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193039" start="20882" end="20896" title="Kareem Jackson" label="Kareem Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q489856" start="20932" end="20949" title="Haley Joel Osment" label="Haley Joel Osment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="20967" end="20971" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960842" start="20974" end="20991" title="Charlie Culberson" label="Charlie Culberson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="21019" end="21023" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q312152" start="21026" end="21034" title="Ben Amos" label="Ben Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615391" start="21064" end="21075" title="Andile Jali" label="Andile Jali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332122" start="21111" end="21124" title="Ricky Leutele" label="Ricky Leutele"/>
<link wikidata="Q21622122" start="21173" end="21185" title="Maren Morris" label="Maren Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q295592" start="21212" end="21225" title="Alex Pettyfer" label="Alex Pettyfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="21242" end="21246" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q236066" start="21249" end="21260" title="AJ Michalka" label="AJ Michalka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="21291" end="21295" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q16229881" start="21298" end="21311" title="Jack Buchanan (rugby league)" label="Jack Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q209942" start="21353" end="21363" title="Sadio Mané" label="Sadio Mané"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088660" start="21397" end="21409" title="Chaz Mostert" label="Chaz Mostert"/>
<link wikidata="Q16738674" start="21446" end="21458" title="Daisy Ridley" label="Daisy Ridley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="21477" end="21481" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q18222476" start="21484" end="21496" title="Sofia Carson" label="Sofia Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="21527" end="21531" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776517" start="21534" end="21548" title="Siobhan Hunter" label="Siobhan Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="21571" end="21575" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q16236937" start="21578" end="21588" title="Ian Nelson (actor, born 1995)" label="Ian Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="21606" end="21610" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784554" start="21613" end="21631" title="Thanasi Kokkinakis" label="Thanasi Kokkinakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9637379" start="21667" end="21680" title="Audrey Whitby" label="Audrey Whitby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="21700" end="21704" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q33978290" start="21707" end="21722" title="Claire Wineland" label="Claire Wineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="21764" end="21768" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q892648" start="21771" end="21786" title="Anna Pogorilaya" label="Anna Pogorilaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="21811" end="21815" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q123220692" start="21818" end="21835" title="Fidias Panayiotou" label="Fidias Panayiotou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988" start="21880" end="21884" title="2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q28314458" start="21887" end="21897" title="Ky Baldwin" label="Ky Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43139030" start="21936" end="21945" title="Noa Kirel" label="Noa Kirel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25001" start="21990" end="21993" title="879" label="879"/>
<link wikidata="Q182840" start="21996" end="22015" title="Louis the Stammerer" label="Louis the Stammerer"/>
<link wikidata="Q24179" start="22049" end="22052" title="943" label="943"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587980" start="22055" end="22064" title="Landulf I of Benevento" label="Landulf I"/>
<link wikidata="Q24318" start="22098" end="22101" title="948" label="948"/>
<link wikidata="Q378763" start="22104" end="22117" title="Hugh of Italy" label="Hugh of Arles"/>
<link wikidata="Q19235" start="22134" end="22138" title="1008" label="1008"/>
<link wikidata="Q570452" start="22141" end="22156" title="Notker of Liège" label="Notker of Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373" start="22182" end="22186" title="1216" label="1216"/>
<link wikidata="Q365103" start="22189" end="22195" title="Eric X of Sweden" label="Eric X"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541" start="22223" end="22227" title="1282" label="1282"/>
<link wikidata="Q372411" start="22230" end="22244" title="Ahmad Fanakati" label="Ahmad Fanakati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="22267" end="22278" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726" start="22280" end="22284" title="1309" label="1309"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330477" start="22287" end="22311" title="Elisabeth von Rapperswil" label="Elisabeth von Rapperswil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166" start="22339" end="22343" title="1362" label="1362"/>
<link wikidata="Q447413" start="22346" end="22350" title="Maud, Countess of Leicester" label="Maud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126" start="22382" end="22386" title="1500" label="1500"/>
<link wikidata="Q672824" start="22389" end="22417" title="Michael Tarchaniota Marullus" label="Michael Tarchaniota Marullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6443" start="22443" end="22447" title="1533" label="1533"/>
<link wikidata="Q157789" start="22450" end="22461" title="Frederick I of Denmark" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531" start="22501" end="22505" title="1545" label="1545"/>
<link wikidata="Q937584" start="22508" end="22522" title="Costanzo Festa" label="Costanzo Festa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736" start="22542" end="22546" title="1585" label="1585"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="22549" end="22561" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800" start="22602" end="22606" title="1598" label="1598"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757022" start="22609" end="22623" title="Jacopo Mazzoni" label="Jacopo Mazzoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803" start="22656" end="22660" title="1599" label="1599"/>
<link wikidata="Q234911" start="22663" end="22687" title="Gabrielle d&amp;#x27;Estrées" label="Gabrielle d&amp;#x27;Estrées"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="22708" end="22726" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725" start="22754" end="22758" title="1601" label="1601"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766519" start="22761" end="22780" title="Mark Alexander Boyd" label="Mark Alexander Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804" start="22819" end="22823" title="1619" label="1619"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791372" start="22826" end="22838" title="Thomas Jones (bishop)" label="Thomas Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846056" start="22881" end="22907" title="Lord Chancellor of Ireland" label="Lord Chancellor of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901" start="22919" end="22923" title="1640" label="1640"/>
<link wikidata="Q395563" start="22926" end="22943" title="Agostino Agazzari" label="Agostino Agazzari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6920" start="22986" end="22990" title="1644" label="1644"/>
<link wikidata="Q864709" start="22993" end="23009" title="William Brewster (Mayflower passenger)" label="William Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930" start="23058" end="23062" title="1646" label="1646"/>
<link wikidata="Q118726" start="23065" end="23079" title="Santino Solari" label="Santino Solari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588" start="23121" end="23125" title="1667" label="1667"/>
<link wikidata="Q63864" start="23128" end="23143" title="Jan Marek Marci" label="Jan Marek Marci"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824" start="23183" end="23187" title="1704" label="1704"/>
<link wikidata="Q70876" start="23190" end="23218" title="Wilhelm Egon von Fürstenberg" label="Wilhelm Egon von Fürstenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632" start="23247" end="23251" title="1756" label="1756"/>
<link wikidata="Q545451" start="23254" end="23275" title="Giacomo Antonio Perti" label="Giacomo Antonio Perti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646" start="23305" end="23309" title="1760" label="1760"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173118" start="23312" end="23323" title="Jean Lebeuf" label="Jean Lebeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760" start="23364" end="23368" title="1786" label="1786"/>
<link wikidata="Q507665" start="23371" end="23381" title="John Byron" label="John Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483986" start="23420" end="23454" title="List of lieutenant governors of Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Commodore Governor of Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6903" start="23466" end="23470" title="1806" label="1806"/>
<link wikidata="Q365124" start="23473" end="23486" title="Horatio Gates" label="Horatio Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937" start="23524" end="23528" title="1813" label="1813"/>
<link wikidata="Q80222" start="23531" end="23552" title="Joseph-Louis Lagrange" label="Joseph-Louis Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976" start="23602" end="23606" title="1821" label="1821"/>
<link wikidata="Q705191" start="23609" end="23636" title="Gregory V of Constantinople" label="Gregory V of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988" start="23688" end="23692" title="1823" label="1823"/>
<link wikidata="Q112258" start="23695" end="23717" title="Karl Leonhard Reinhold" label="Karl Leonhard Reinhold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746" start="23764" end="23768" title="1871" label="1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697426" start="23771" end="23794" title="Lucio Norberto Mansilla" label="Lucio Norberto Mansilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831" start="23842" end="23846" title="1889" label="1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q16295190" start="23849" end="23865" title="William Crichton (engineer)" label="William Crichton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057" start="23931" end="23935" title="1909" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q315511" start="23938" end="23964" title="Algernon Charles Swinburne" label="Algernon Charles Swinburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="24024" end="24028" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q41718" start="24031" end="24046" title="Emiliano Zapata" label="Emiliano Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="24075" end="24079" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q61751" start="24082" end="24095" title="Moritz Cantor" label="Moritz Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="24143" end="24147" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q47737" start="24150" end="24163" title="Kahlil Gibran" label="Kahlil Gibran"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="24225" end="24229" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367024" start="24232" end="24251" title="Rosa Campbell Praed" label="Rosa Campbell Praed"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="24284" end="24288" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q313368" start="24291" end="24302" title="King Oliver" label="King Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="24353" end="24357" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q547604" start="24360" end="24375" title="Carl Schenstrøm" label="Carl Schenstrøm"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="24414" end="24418" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q497116" start="24421" end="24438" title="Andreas Faehlmann" label="Andreas Faehlmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="24487" end="24491" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q559440" start="24494" end="24518" title="Hendrik Nicolaas Werkman" label="Hendrik Nicolaas Werkman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="24561" end="24565" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q460952" start="24568" end="24584" title="Charles Nordhoff" label="Charles Nordhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="24636" end="24640" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q328331" start="24643" end="24655" title="Fevzi Çakmak" label="Fevzi Çakmak"/>
<link wikidata="Q474514" start="24699" end="24723" title="List of Prime Ministers of Turkey" label="Prime Minister of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="24735" end="24739" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q55965" start="24742" end="24757" title="Auguste and Louis Lumière" label="Auguste Lumière"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398800" start="24807" end="24821" title="Oscar Mathisen" label="Oscar Mathisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="24857" end="24861" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q189564" start="24864" end="24890" title="Pierre Teilhard de Chardin" label="Pierre Teilhard de Chardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="24946" end="24950" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q726440" start="24953" end="24965" title="Chuck Willis" label="Chuck Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="25005" end="25009" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847287" start="25012" end="25028" title="André Berthomieu" label="André Berthomieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="25074" end="25078" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q51491" start="25081" end="25095" title="Michael Curtiz" label="Michael Curtiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q204218" start="25172" end="25188" title="Stuart Sutcliffe" label="Stuart Sutcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="25230" end="25234" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866907" start="25237" end="25249" title="Lloyd Casner" label="Lloyd Casner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029684" start="25285" end="25313" title="Casner Motor Racing Division" label="Casner Motor Racing Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q234900" start="25333" end="25346" title="Linda Darnell" label="Linda Darnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="25376" end="25380" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q107002" start="25383" end="25395" title="Evelyn Waugh" label="Evelyn Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="25457" end="25461" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q506717" start="25464" end="25479" title="Gustavs Celmiņš" label="Gustavs Celmiņš"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="25526" end="25530" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q512883" start="25533" end="25544" title="Harley Earl" label="Harley Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="25578" end="25582" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q363308" start="25585" end="25597" title="Walker Evans" label="Walker Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q445018" start="25640" end="25653" title="Marjorie Main" label="Marjorie Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="25683" end="25687" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q571713" start="25690" end="25701" title="Hjalmar Mäe" label="Hjalmar Mäe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="25734" end="25738" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q214665" start="25741" end="25750" title="Nino Rota" label="Nino Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="25804" end="25808" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q468634" start="25811" end="25822" title="Kay Medford" label="Kay Medford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="25863" end="25867" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141604" start="25870" end="25884" title="Howard Thurman" label="Howard Thurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="25952" end="25956" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916219" start="25959" end="25972" title="Issam Sartawi" label="Issam Sartawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="26006" end="26010" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280500" start="26013" end="26025" title="Zisis Verros" label="Zisis Verros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="26081" end="26085" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q452483" start="26088" end="26099" title="Linda Creed" label="Linda Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="26139" end="26143" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482229" start="26146" end="26165" title="Ezekias Papaioannou" label="Ezekias Papaioannou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="26203" end="26207" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q361587" start="26210" end="26226" title="Kevin Peter Hall" label="Kevin Peter Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q766551" start="26262" end="26276" title="Martin Hannett" label="Martin Hannett"/>
<link wikidata="Q254588" start="26328" end="26343" title="Natalie Schafer" label="Natalie Schafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="26373" end="26377" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q333505" start="26380" end="26391" title="Sam Kinison" label="Sam Kinison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="26432" end="26436" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q547988" start="26439" end="26449" title="Chris Hani" label="Chris Hani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="26500" end="26504" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656192" start="26507" end="26523" title="Sam B. Hall, Jr." label="Sam B. Hall, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="26575" end="26579" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q218661" start="26582" end="26595" title="Morarji Desai" label="Morarji Desai"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="26620" end="26643" title="Prime Minister of India" label="Prime Minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="26655" end="26659" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360009" start="26662" end="26676" title="Michael Dorris" label="Michael Dorris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="26719" end="26723" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593381" start="26726" end="26744" title="Seraphim of Athens" label="Seraphim of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="26774" end="26778" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q106360" start="26781" end="26802" title="Heinz Fraenkel-Conrat" label="Heinz Fraenkel-Conrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174968" start="26864" end="26879" title="Jean Vander Pyl" label="Jean Vander Pyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="26926" end="26930" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q761490" start="26933" end="26944" title="Peter Jones (actor)" label="Peter Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347106" start="26996" end="27010" title="Larry Linville" label="Larry Linville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986" start="27038" end="27042" title="2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q450080" start="27045" end="27055" title="Little Eva" label="Little Eva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="27084" end="27088" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q561127" start="27091" end="27107" title="Jacek Kaczmarski" label="Jacek Kaczmarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q563432" start="27174" end="27187" title="Sakıp Sabancı" label="Sakıp Sabancı"/>
<link wikidata="Q902109" start="27237" end="27252" title="Sabancı Holding" label="Sabancı Holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="27264" end="27268" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q215654" start="27271" end="27286" title="Norbert Brainin" label="Norbert Brainin"/>
<link wikidata="Q883442" start="27326" end="27340" title="Scott Gottlieb (musician)" label="Scott Gottlieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566210" start="27378" end="27407" title="Archbishop Iakovos of America" label="Archbishop Iakovos of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704310" start="27427" end="27435" title="Al Lucas (American football)" label="Al Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476586" start="27481" end="27490" title="Wally Tax" label="Wally Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021" start="27527" end="27531" title="2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q12879116" start="27534" end="27547" title="Kleitos Kyrou" label="Kleitos Kyrou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="27586" end="27590" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959999" start="27593" end="27617" title="Charles Philippe Leblond" label="Charles Philippe Leblond"/>
<link wikidata="Q533622" start="27677" end="27690" title="Dakota Staton" label="Dakota Staton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="27719" end="27723" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408618" start="27726" end="27740" title="Deborah Digges" label="Deborah Digges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062136" start="27788" end="27803" title="Ioannis Patakis" label="Ioannis Patakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="27833" end="27837" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504398" start="27840" end="27901" title="List of casualties of the Smolensk air disaster" label="Casualties in the 2010 Polish Air Force Tu-154 crash included"/>
<link wikidata="Q55835" start="27906" end="27925" title="Ryszard Kaczorowski" label="Ryszard Kaczorowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054799" start="27962" end="27997" title="President of the Republic of Poland" label="President of the Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q215342" start="28011" end="28026" title="Maria Kaczyńska" label="Maria Kaczyńska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439222" start="28046" end="28066" title="First Lady of Poland" label="First Lady of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757" start="28080" end="28094" title="Lech Kaczyński" label="Lech Kaczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054799" start="28130" end="28149" title="President of Poland" label="President of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q240109" start="28163" end="28181" title="Anna Walentynowicz" label="Anna Walentynowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q240360" start="28243" end="28255" title="Dixie Carter" label="Dixie Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="28296" end="28300" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q567529" start="28303" end="28317" title="Raymond Aubrac" label="Raymond Aubrac"/>
<link wikidata="Q239469" start="28367" end="28383" title="Barbara Buchholz" label="Barbara Buchholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q207691" start="28392" end="28400" title="theremin" label="theremin"/>
<link wikidata="Q466023" start="28440" end="28455" title="Lili Chookasian" label="Lili Chookasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q504313" start="28510" end="28530" title="Luis Aponte Martínez" label="Luis Aponte Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4701050" start="28573" end="28588" title="Akin Omoboriowo" label="Akin Omoboriowo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="28632" end="28636" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q72874" start="28639" end="28656" title="Lorenzo Antonetti" label="Lorenzo Antonetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q914428" start="28694" end="28708" title="Raymond Boudon" label="Raymond Boudon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892544" start="28761" end="28783" title="Binod Bihari Chowdhury" label="Binod Bihari Chowdhury"/>
<link wikidata="Q104913" start="28825" end="28839" title="Robert Edwards (physiologist)" label="Robert Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="28876" end="28887" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087171" start="28916" end="28927" title="Olive Lewin" label="Olive Lewin"/>
<link wikidata="Q275775" start="28998" end="29011" title="Gordon Thomas (cyclist)" label="Gordon Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q241327" start="29048" end="29060" title="Angela Voigt" label="Angela Voigt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="29092" end="29096" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238159" start="29099" end="29115" title="Dominique Baudis" label="Dominique Baudis"/>
<link wikidata="Q644783" start="29169" end="29181" title="Jim Flaherty" label="Jim Flaherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251818" start="29220" end="29248" title="Minister of Finance (Canada)" label="Canadian Minister of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534871" start="29268" end="29283" title="Richard Hoggart" label="Richard Hoggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q261465" start="29332" end="29344" title="Sue Townsend" label="Sue Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="29387" end="29391" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739019" start="29394" end="29407" title="Richie Benaud" label="Richie Benaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q881175" start="29466" end="29484" title="Raúl Héctor Castro" label="Raúl Héctor Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q777288" start="29533" end="29552" title="Governor of Arizona" label="Governor of Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q213844" start="29572" end="29585" title="Judith Malina" label="Judith Malina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202416" start="29636" end="29654" title="The Living Theatre" label="The Living Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q270645" start="29674" end="29695" title="Rose Francine Rogombé" label="Rose Francine Rogombé"/>
<link wikidata="Q19109718" start="29729" end="29747" title="List of heads of state of Gabon" label="President of Gabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177577" start="29767" end="29778" title="Peter Walsh (Australian politician)" label="Peter Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865833" start="29818" end="29849" title="Minister for Finance (Australia)" label="Australian Minister for Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="29861" end="29865" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631875" start="29868" end="29880" title="Howard Marks" label="Howard Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q49622" start="29954" end="29958" title="2023" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q281728" start="29961" end="29970" title="Al Jaffee" label="Al Jaffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="30003" end="30007" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q44473" start="30010" end="30023" title="O. J. Simpson" label="O. J. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="30124" end="30133" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q529302" start="30137" end="30156" title="Fulbert of Chartres" label="Fulbert of Chartres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127955" start="30159" end="30187" title="James, Azadanus and Abdicius" label="James, Azadanus and Abdicius"/>
<link wikidata="Q215346" start="30190" end="30205" title="Mikael Agricola" label="Mikael Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q905917" start="30207" end="30215" title="Calendar of Saints (Lutheran)" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q189564" start="30219" end="30245" title="Pierre Teilhard de Chardin" label="Pierre Teilhard de Chardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019509" start="30247" end="30263" title="Calendar of saints (Episcopal Church)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q43936" start="30267" end="30284" title="William of Ockham" label="William of Ockham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019506" start="30286" end="30297" title="Calendar of saints (Church of England)" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177480" start="30301" end="30312" title="William Law" label="William Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="30314" end="30325" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781843" start="30329" end="30366" title="April 10 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="April 10 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q933504" start="30368" end="30386" title="Day of the Builder" label="Day of the Builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="30388" end="30398" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="30401" end="30461" title="Feast of the Third Day of the Writing of the Book of the Law" label="Feast of the Third Day of the Writing of the Book of the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="30463" end="30470" title="Thelema" label="Thelema"/>
<link wikidata="Q16270497" start="30473" end="30485" title="Siblings Day" label="Siblings Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111813" start="30487" end="30511" title="International observance" label="International observance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2573" wikidata="Q202177" url="?curid=2573" title="Angus, Scotland">
<text>Angus (; ) is one of the 32 local government council areas of Scotland, and a lieutenancy area. The council area borders Aberdeenshire, Dundee City and Perth and Kinross. Main industries include agriculture and fishing. Global pharmaceuticals company GSK has a significant presence in Montrose in the east of the county.

Angus was historically a province, and later a sheriffdom and county (called Forfarshire or the County of Forfar until 1928), bordering Kincardineshire to the north-east, Aberdeenshire to the north and Perthshire to the west; southwards it faced Fife across the Firth of Tay. The county included Dundee until 1894, when it was made a county of a city. The pre-1894 boundaries of Angus continue to be used as a registration county. Between 1975 and 1996 Angus was a lower-tier district within the Tayside region. The district took on its modern form and powers in 1996, since when the local authority has been Angus Council.

==History==
===Etymology===
The name &quot;Angus&quot; indicates the territory of the eighth-century Pictish king, Óengus I.

===Prehistory===
The area that now comprises Angus has been occupied since at least the Neolithic period. Material taken from postholes from an enclosure at Douglasmuir, near Friockheim, about five miles north of Arbroath has been radiocarbon dated to around 3500 BC. The function of the enclosure is unknown, but may have been for agriculture or for ceremonial purposes.

Bronze Age archaeology is to be found in abundance in the area. Examples include the short-cist burials found near West Newbigging, about a mile to the North of the town. These burials included pottery urns, a pair of silver discs and a gold armlet. Iron Age archaeology is also well represented, for example in the souterrain nearby Warddykes cemetery and at West Grange of Conan, as well as the better-known examples at Carlungie and Ardestie.

===Medieval and later history===
The county is traditionally associated with the Pictish territory of Circin, which is thought to have encompassed Angus and the Mearns. Bordering it were the kingdoms of Cé (Mar and Buchan) to the North, Fotla (Atholl) to the West, and Fib (Fife) to the South. The most visible remnants of the Pictish age are the numerous sculptured stones that can be found throughout Angus. Of particular note are the collections found at Aberlemno, St Vigeans, Kirriemuir and Monifieth.

Angus is first recorded as one of the provinces of Scotland in 937, when Dubacan, the Mormaer of Angus, is recorded in the &quot;Chronicle of the Kings of Alba&quot; as having died at the Battle of Brunanburh.

The signing of the Declaration of Arbroath at Arbroath Abbey in 1320 marked Scotland&#x27;s establishment as an independent nation. Partly on this basis, Angus is marketed as the birthplace of Scotland. It is an area of rich history from Pictish times onwards. Notable historic sites in addition to Arbroath Abbey include Glamis Castle, Arbroath Signal Tower museum and the Bell Rock Lighthouse, described as one of the Seven Wonders of the Industrial World.

===Administrative history===
Angus was one of the ancient provinces of Scotland, under the authority of the Mormaer or Earl of Angus. From at least the thirteenth century the area formed the basis for a shire (the area administered by a sheriff) based in Forfar: the Sheriff of Forfar.

Over time, Scotland&#x27;s shires became more significant than the old provinces, with more administrative functions being given to the sheriffs. The older territory called Angus was therefore gradually eclipsed in legal importance by the shire of Forfar (or Forfarshire) which covered the same area. In 1667 Commissioners of Supply were established for each shire, which would serve as the main administrative body for the area until the creation of county councils in 1890. Following the Acts of Union in 1707, the English term &#x27;county&#x27; came to be used interchangeably with the older term &#x27;shire&#x27;.
Elected county councils were established in 1890 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889, taking most of the functions of the commissioners (which were eventually abolished in 1930). The county&#x27;s five largest burghs, being Arbroath, Brechin, Dundee, Forfar, and Montrose, were deemed capable of managing their own affairs and so were excluded from the administrative area of the county council. The county council held its first official meeting on 22 May 1890 at the County Buildings (now known as Forfar Sheriff Court), the county&#x27;s main courthouse, which also served as the meeting place for the commissioners of supply. Robert Haldane-Duncan, 3rd Earl of Camperdown, a Liberal peer, was appointed the first chairman of the county council.

The 1889 Act also led to a review of boundaries, with exclaves being transferred to a county they actually bordered, and parishes which straddled more than one county being adjusted such that each parish was entirely in a single county. There were several such changes affecting the boundaries of Forfarshire.

Dundee was subsequently made a county of itself in 1894, also removing the city from Forfarshire for judicial and lieutenancy purposes. Arbroath, Brechin, Forfar and Montrose were brought within the administrative area of the county council in 1930, although Arbroath was classed as a large burgh, allowing its council to continue to deliver most local government functions itself.

In May 1928 the county council resolved to use the name &#x27;Angus&#x27; for the area rather than the &#x27;County of Forfar&#x27;. The council petitioned the government to officially change the name too. The government responded by directing all departments to use Angus, but noted that the legal name would remain Forfar until such time as it could be changed by statute. The statutory change of name from Forfar to Angus eventually took place in 1947 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1947.

Angus County Council was abolished in 1975 under the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, which replaced Scotland&#x27;s counties, burghs and landward districts with a two-tier structure of upper-tier regions and lower-tier districts. A new Angus district was created covering most of the pre-1975 county, with the exceptions being that Monifieth and a number of villages immediately north of Dundee were transferred to an enlarged City of Dundee district, and Kettins was transferred to Perth and Kinross. Angus District Council was a lower-tier district level authority subordinate to the Tayside Regional Council. A lieutenancy area covering the same area as the new district was created at the same time.

Further local government reforms in 1996 under the Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994 saw the regions and districts created in 1975 abolished and replaced with council areas providing all local government services. Angus district became one of the new council areas, taking on the functions of the abolished Tayside Regional Council. The council area regained Monifieth and the villages north of Dundee as part of the same reforms. The Angus lieutenancy area was adjusted to match the new council area in 1996. The Lord Lieutenant of Angus is appointed by the monarch. The boundaries of the historic county of Angus (as it was prior to the removal of Dundee in 1894) are still used for some limited official purposes connected with land registration, being a registration county.

==Geography==

Angus can be split into three geographic areas. To the north and west, the topography is mountainous. This is the area of the Grampian Mountains, Mounth hills and Five Glens of Angus, which is sparsely populated and where the main industry is hill farming. Glas Maol – the highest point in Angus at – can be found here, on the tripoint boundary with Perthshire and Aberdeenshire. To the south and east the topography consists of rolling hills (such as the Sidlaws) bordering the sea; this area is well populated, with the larger towns. In between lies Strathmore (&quot;the Great Valley&quot;), which is a fertile agricultural area noted for the growing of potatoes, soft fruit and the raising of Aberdeen Angus cattle.

Montrose in the north east of the county is notable for its tidal basin and wildlife. Angus&#x27;s coast is fairly regular, the most prominent features being the headlands of Scurdie Ness and Buddon Ness. The main bodies of water in the county are Loch Lee, Loch Brandy, Carlochy, Loch Wharral, Den of Ogil Reservoir, Loch of Forfar, Loch Fithie, Rescobie Loch, Balgavies Loch, Crombie Reservoir, Monikie Reservoirs, Long Loch, Lundie Loch, Loch of Kinnordy, Loch of Lintrathen, Backwater Reservoir, Auchintaple Loch, Loch Shandra.

==Demography==

===Population structure===

In the 2001 census, the population of Angus was recorded as 108,400. 20.14% were under the age of 16, 63.15% were between 16 and 65 and 18.05% were aged 65 or above.

Of the 16 to 74 age group, 32.84% had no formal qualifications, 27.08% were educated to &#x27;O&#x27; Grade/Standard Grade level, 14.38% to Higher level, 7.64% to HND or equivalent level and 18.06% to degree level.

===Language in Angus===
The most recent available census results (2001) show that Gaelic is spoken by 0.45% of the Angus population. This, similar to other lowland areas, is lower than the national average of 1.16%. These figures are self-reported and are not broken down into levels of fluency.

Meanwhile, the 2011 census found that 38.4% of the population in Angus can speak Scots, above the Scottish average of 30.1%. This puts Angus as the council area with the sixth highest proficiency in Scots, behind only Shetland, Orkney, Moray, Aberdeenshire, and East Ayrshire.

Historically, the dominant language in Angus was Pictish until the sixth to seventh centuries AD when the area became progressively gaelicised, with Pictish extinct by the mid-ninth century. Gaelic/Middle Irish began to retreat from lowland areas in the late-eleventh century and was absent from the Eastern lowlands by the fourteenth century. It was replaced there by Middle Scots, the contemporary local South Northern dialect of Modern Scots, while Gaelic persisted as a majority language in the Highlands and Hebrides until the 19th century.

Angus Council are planning to raise the status of Gaelic in the county by adopting a series of measures, including bilingual road signage, communications, vehicle livery and staffing.

==Government==
===Local government===

Angus Council is the local authority for the area.

===Political control===
The first election to Angus District Council was held in 1974, initially operating as a shadow authority alongside the outgoing authorities until the new system came into force on 16 May 1975. A shadow authority was again elected in 1995 ahead of the change to council areas which came into force on 1 April 1996. Political control since 1975 has been as follows:

=== Structure ===
The council&#x27;s civic head is the Provost of Angus. There have been seven Provosts since its establishment in 1996 – Frances Duncan, Bill Middleton, Ruth Leslie-Melville, Helen Oswald, Alex King, Ronnie Proctor and Brian Boyd.

===Leadership===
The role of provost is largely ceremonial in Angus. Political leadership is instead provided by the leader of the council. The leaders since 1996 have been:

===Composition===
Following the 2022 election and subsequent by-elections and changes of allegiance up to April 2024, the composition of the council was:

Two of the independent councillors form part of the council&#x27;s administration with the SNP. The next election is due in 2027.

===Elections===

Election results since 1995 have been as follows:

=== Wards ===
Angus is divided into 8 wards:
===Premises===

Council meetings are generally held at Forfar Town and County Hall at The Cross in the centre of Forfar. In 2007 the council moved its main offices to a new building called Angus House on Silvie Way in the Orchardbank Business Park on the outskirts of Forfar. The council also has offices in Arbroath.
Previously the council&#x27;s main offices had been at County Buildings, on Market Street in Forfar. When the county council was established in 1890 the name County Buildings was used for the Forfar Sheriff Court, built 1871, which was the council&#x27;s first meeting place. The council later moved its main offices into the adjoining converted former prison of 1843, which subsequently became known as County Buildings instead. County Buildings continued to serve as the headquarters of the county council until 1975 and the successor Angus District Council from 1975 to 1996. County Buildings continues to be used as secondary offices by the modern Angus Council.

==Community council areas==
 Angus is divided into 25 community council areas and all apart from Friockheim district have an active council. The areas are: Aberlemno; Auchterhouse; Carnoustie; City of Brechin &amp; District; Ferryden &amp; Craig; Friockheim &amp; District; Glamis; Hillside, Dun, &amp; Logie Pert; Inverarity; Inveresk; Kirriemuir; Kirriemuir Landward East; Kirriemuir Landward West; Letham &amp; District; Lunanhead &amp; District; Monifieth; Monikie &amp; Newbigging; Montrose; Muirhead, Birkhill and Liff; Murroes &amp; Wellbank; Newtyle &amp; Eassie; Royal Burgh of Arbroath; Royal Burgh of Forfar; Strathmartine; and Tealing.

==Parliamentary representation==

===UK Parliament===
Angus is represented by two MPs for the UK Parliament.

*Angus and Perthshire Glens – covers the following wards: Kirriemuir and Dean, Brechin and Edzell, Forfar and District, and Montrose and District, and parts of Monifieth and Sidlaw; currently represented by Dave Doogan of the Scottish National Party, who was also the MP for the old Angus constituency.
*Arbroath and Broughty Ferry – cover parts of Monifieth and Sidlaw and Carnoustie and District from the old Dundee East constituency, and Arbroath East and Lunan, Arbroath West, Letham and Friockheim, and Monifieth and Sidlaw, and a part of Carnoustie and District from the now-abolished Angus constituency; currently represented by Stephen Gethins of the Scottish National Party.

===Scottish Parliament===

Angus is represented by two constituency MSPs for the Scottish Parliament.

*Angus North and Mearns – covers the north of Angus and a southern portion of Aberdeenshire, is represented by Mairi Gougeon of the Scottish National Party.
*Angus South – covers the south of Angus, is represented by Graeme Dey of the Scottish National Party.

In addition to the two constituency MSPs, Angus is also represented by seven MSPs for the North East Scotland electoral region.

==Transport==
The Edinburgh-Aberdeen railway line runs along the coast, through Dundee and the towns of Monifieth, Carnoustie, Arbroath and Montrose.

There is a small airport at Dundee, which at present operates flights to London and Belfast.

==Settlements==

Arbroath is the largest town in the modern county, followed by Forfar, the county town and administrative centre, and Montrose.

Largest settlements by population:
==Historic parishes==
Forfarshire was divided into parishes, some of which share the name with current settlements:

==Education==
Secondary schools in Angus:
* Arbroath Academy
* Arbroath High School
* Brechin High School
* Carnoustie High School
* Forfar Academy 
* Monifieth High School 
* Montrose Academy 
* Webster&#x27;s High School

==Places of interest==
* Aberlemno Sculptured Stones
* Arbroath Abbey
* Barry Mill
* Brechin Cathedral
* Brechin Castle
* Brechin Round Tower
* Caledonian Railway (Brechin)
* Cairngorms National Park
* Corrie Fee National Nature Reserve
* Eassie Stone
* Edzell Castle
* Glamis Castle
* Glenesk Folk Museum
* House of Dun
* Loch of Kinnordy Nature Reserve
* Meffan Institute
* Monboddo House
* Montrose Air Station Heritage Centre
* Montrose Basin Nature Reserve
* Montrose Museum

==Sister areas==

* – Yantai, Shandong, China.

==Surnames==
Most common surnames in Angus (Forfarshire) at the time of the 1881 United Kingdom census:

# Smith
# Robertson
# Anderson
# Stewart
# Scott
# Mitchell
# Brown
# Duncan
# Milne
# Thomson

==See also==
*Earl of Angus
*List of places in Angus
*List of counties of Scotland 1890–1975
*Medieval Diocese of Angus
*Scheduled monuments in Angus
*List of Category A listed buildings in Angus

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="0" end="5" title="Angus, Scotland" label="Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q969045" start="28" end="44" title="Local government in Scotland" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q461231" start="45" end="70" title="council areas of Scotland" label="council areas of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q202435" start="78" end="94" title="Lieutenancy areas of Scotland" label="lieutenancy area"/>
<link wikidata="Q189912" start="121" end="134" title="Aberdeenshire" label="Aberdeenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="136" end="147" title="Dundee City (council area)" label="Dundee City"/>
<link wikidata="Q207679" start="152" end="169" title="Perth and Kinross" label="Perth and Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="195" end="206" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="211" end="218" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q212322" start="251" end="254" title="GlaxoSmithKline" label="GSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q420303" start="285" end="293" title="Montrose, Angus" label="Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q108392704" start="347" end="355" title="Provinces of Scotland" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494999" start="369" end="379" title="sheriffdom" label="sheriffdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350181" start="384" end="390" title="Shires of Scotland" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="399" end="410" title="Angus, Scotland" label="Forfarshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="418" end="434" title="Angus, Scotland" label="County of Forfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q376914" start="458" end="473" title="Kincardineshire" label="Kincardineshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290674" start="493" end="506" title="Aberdeenshire (historic)" label="Aberdeenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="524" end="534" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="568" end="572" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765455" start="584" end="596" title="Firth of Tay" label="Firth of Tay"/>
<link wikidata="Q104828357" start="656" end="672" title="county of city" label="county of a city"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309443" start="732" end="751" title="registration county" label="registration county"/>
<link wikidata="Q633294" start="818" end="825" title="Tayside" label="Tayside"/>
<link wikidata="Q202177" start="931" end="944" title="Angus Council" label="Angus Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="1048" end="1055" title="Picts" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q292929" start="1062" end="1070" title="Óengus I" label="Óengus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1161" end="1177" title="Neolithic period" label="Neolithic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109175" start="1199" end="1207" title="posthole" label="posthole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011829" start="1248" end="1258" title="Friockheim" label="Friockheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="1304" end="1320" title="radiocarbon date" label="radiocarbon date"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1446" end="1456" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="1696" end="1704" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q137937" start="1762" end="1772" title="souterrain" label="souterrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="1974" end="1981" title="Picts" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q107565119" start="1995" end="2001" title="Circin" label="Circin"/>
<link wikidata="Q376914" start="2054" end="2060" title="Kincardineshire" label="Mearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q21523635" start="2096" end="2098" title="Cé (Pictish territory)" label="Cé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666255" start="2249" end="2266" title="Pictish stones" label="sculptured stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293146" start="2351" end="2360" title="Aberlemno Sculptured Stones" label="Aberlemno"/>
<link wikidata="Q665556" start="2362" end="2372" title="St Vigeans Sculptured Stones Museum" label="St Vigeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15238594" start="2374" end="2384" title="Kirriemuir Sculptured Stones" label="Kirriemuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900144" start="2389" end="2398" title="Monifieth Sculptured Stones" label="Monifieth"/>
<link wikidata="Q108392704" start="2439" end="2460" title="provinces of Scotland" label="provinces of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310488" start="2474" end="2481" title="Dubacan of Angus" label="Dubacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277218" start="2487" end="2503" title="Mormaer of Angus" label="Mormaer of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q576241" start="2530" end="2560" title="Chronicle of the Kings of Alba" label="Chronicle of the Kings of Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246615" start="2589" end="2609" title="Battle of Brunanburh" label="Battle of Brunanburh"/>
<link wikidata="Q598496" start="2631" end="2654" title="Declaration of Arbroath" label="Declaration of Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q630683" start="2658" end="2672" title="Arbroath Abbey" label="Arbroath Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529151" start="2934" end="2947" title="Glamis Castle" label="Glamis Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305375" start="2986" end="3006" title="Bell Rock Lighthouse" label="Bell Rock Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006051" start="3032" end="3069" title="Seven Wonders of the Industrial World" label="Seven Wonders of the Industrial World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948262" start="3180" end="3187" title="Mormaer" label="Mormaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277218" start="3191" end="3204" title="Earl of Angus" label="Earl of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494998" start="3309" end="3316" title="Sheriff principal" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163555" start="3339" end="3356" title="Sheriff of Forfar" label="Sheriff of Forfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152837" start="3668" end="3691" title="Commissioners of Supply" label="Commissioners of Supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="3849" end="3862" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664029" start="4038" end="4074" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q254978" start="4200" end="4205" title="burgh" label="burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q630668" start="4214" end="4222" title="Arbroath" label="Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q45848" start="4224" end="4231" title="Brechin" label="Brechin"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="4233" end="4239" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q996509" start="4241" end="4247" title="Forfar" label="Forfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q420303" start="4253" end="4261" title="Montrose, Angus" label="Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q17775782" start="4459" end="4475" title="Forfar Sheriff Court" label="County Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345161" start="4620" end="4665" title="Robert Haldane-Duncan, 3rd Earl of Camperdown" label="Robert Haldane-Duncan, 3rd Earl of Camperdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="4669" end="4676" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="4794" end="4801" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q104828357" start="5082" end="5098" title="county of city" label="county of itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q202435" start="5165" end="5176" title="Lieutenancy areas of Scotland" label="lieutenancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489113" start="5336" end="5347" title="large burgh" label="large burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664036" start="5899" end="5935" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1947" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664037" start="5991" end="6027" title="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973" label="Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q383493" start="6163" end="6172" title="districts of Scotland" label="districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179174" start="6276" end="6285" title="Monifieth" label="Monifieth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395491" start="6400" end="6407" title="Kettins" label="Kettins"/>
<link wikidata="Q207679" start="6427" end="6444" title="Perth and Kinross" label="Perth and Kinross"/>
<link wikidata="Q633294" start="6530" end="6554" title="Tayside Regional Council" label="Tayside Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q202435" start="6558" end="6574" title="Lieutenancy areas of Scotland" label="lieutenancy area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258386" start="6700" end="6741" title="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994" label="Local Government etc. (Scotland) Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176207" start="6816" end="6828" title="council area" label="council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q11798198" start="7171" end="7195" title="Lord Lieutenant of Angus" label="Lord Lieutenant of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309443" start="7415" end="7434" title="registration county" label="registration county"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="7527" end="7537" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124736" start="7578" end="7596" title="Grampian Mountains" label="Grampian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326076" start="7598" end="7604" title="Mounth" label="Mounth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455944" start="7615" end="7634" title="Five Glens of Angus" label="Five Glens of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762411" start="7695" end="7707" title="hill farming" label="hill farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397722" start="7709" end="7718" title="Glas Maol" label="Glas Maol"/>
<link wikidata="Q316655" start="7779" end="7787" title="tripoint" label="tripoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483311" start="7908" end="7915" title="Sidlaws" label="Sidlaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622129" start="8004" end="8014" title="Strathmore, Angus" label="Strathmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q212348" start="8149" end="8163" title="Aberdeen Angus" label="Aberdeen Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632562" start="8233" end="8258" title="Montrose Basin" label="tidal basin and wildlife."/>
<link wikidata="Q106264002" start="8348" end="8360" title="Scurdie Ness" label="Scurdie Ness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8365" end="8376" title="Buddon Ness" label="Buddon Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349821" start="8421" end="8429" title="Loch Lee" label="Loch Lee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8431" end="8442" title="Loch Brandy" label="Loch Brandy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8444" end="8452" title="Carlochy" label="Carlochy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8454" end="8466" title="Loch Wharral" label="Loch Wharral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8468" end="8489" title="Den of Ogil Reservoir" label="Den of Ogil Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736965" start="8491" end="8505" title="Loch of Forfar" label="Loch of Forfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736964" start="8507" end="8518" title="Loch Fithie" label="Loch Fithie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314956" start="8520" end="8533" title="Rescobie Loch" label="Rescobie Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8535" end="8549" title="Balgavies Loch" label="Balgavies Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8551" end="8568" title="Crombie Reservoir" label="Crombie Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8570" end="8588" title="Monikie Reservoirs" label="Monikie Reservoirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q68098638" start="8590" end="8599" title="Long Loch (Angus)" label="Long Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8601" end="8612" title="Lundie Loch" label="Lundie Loch"/>
<link wikidata="Q65058560" start="8614" end="8630" title="Loch of Kinnordy" label="Loch of Kinnordy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24640708" start="8632" end="8650" title="Loch of Lintrathen" label="Loch of Lintrathen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839836" start="8652" end="8671" title="Backwater Reservoir" label="Backwater Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q24677429" start="8673" end="8689" title="Auchintaple Loch" label="Auchintaple Loch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8691" end="8703" title="Loch Shandra" label="Loch Shandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="9215" end="9221" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="9511" end="9516" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="9648" end="9656" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="9658" end="9664" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q211106" start="9666" end="9671" title="Moray" label="Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q189912" start="9673" end="9686" title="Aberdeenshire" label="Aberdeenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q209135" start="9692" end="9705" title="East Ayrshire" label="East Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q856383" start="9757" end="9764" title="Pictish language" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36116" start="9906" end="9918" title="Middle Irish" label="Middle Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327000" start="10077" end="10089" title="Middle Scots" label="Middle Scots"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10114" end="10128" title="South Northern" label="South Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888858" start="10140" end="10152" title="Modern Scots" label="Modern Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="10207" end="10216" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="10221" end="10229" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q969045" start="10500" end="10515" title="Local government in Scotland" label="local authority"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11286" end="11307" title="Local government in Scotland#Leader of the Council" label="leader of the council"/>
<link wikidata="Q111955441" start="11376" end="11389" title="2022 Angus Council election" label="2022 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q17775417" start="11798" end="11825" title="Forfar Town and County Hall" label="Forfar Town and County Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q630668" start="12051" end="12059" title="Arbroath" label="Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q56633416" start="12116" end="12132" title="County Buildings, Forfar" label="County Buildings"/>
<link wikidata="Q17775782" start="12253" end="12273" title="Forfar Sheriff Court" label="Forfar Sheriff Court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12783" end="12805" title="Community council#Scotland" label="community council area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978003" start="12885" end="12894" title="Aberlemno" label="Aberlemno"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819471" start="12896" end="12908" title="Auchterhouse" label="Auchterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012395" start="12910" end="12920" title="Carnoustie" label="Carnoustie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12922" end="12952" title="City of Brechin &amp;amp; District" label="City of Brechin &amp;amp; District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12954" end="12974" title="Ferryden &amp;amp; Craig" label="Ferryden &amp;amp; Craig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12976" end="13001" title="Friockheim &amp;amp; District" label="Friockheim &amp;amp; District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026782" start="13003" end="13009" title="Glamis" label="Glamis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13011" end="13042" title="Hillside, Dun, &amp;amp; Logie Pert" label="Hillside, Dun, &amp;amp; Logie Pert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060004" start="13044" end="13054" title="Inverarity" label="Inverarity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13056" end="13064" title="Inveresk (community council area)" label="Inveresk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011603" start="13066" end="13076" title="Kirriemuir" label="Kirriemuir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13078" end="13102" title="Kirriemuir Landward East" label="Kirriemuir Landward East"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13104" end="13128" title="Kirriemuir Landward West" label="Kirriemuir Landward West"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13130" end="13151" title="Letham &amp;amp; District" label="Letham &amp;amp; District"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13153" end="13177" title="Lunanhead &amp;amp; District" label="Lunanhead &amp;amp; District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179174" start="13179" end="13188" title="Monifieth" label="Monifieth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13190" end="13214" title="Monikie &amp;amp; Newbigging" label="Monikie &amp;amp; Newbigging"/>
<link wikidata="Q420303" start="13216" end="13224" title="Montrose, Angus" label="Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916475" start="13226" end="13234" title="Muirhead, Angus" label="Muirhead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13236" end="13253" title="Birkhill and Liff" label="Birkhill and Liff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13255" end="13277" title="Murroes &amp;amp; Wellbank" label="Murroes &amp;amp; Wellbank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13279" end="13299" title="Newtyle &amp;amp; Eassie" label="Newtyle &amp;amp; Eassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q630668" start="13301" end="13324" title="Arbroath" label="Royal Burgh of Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13326" end="13347" title="Royal Burgh of Forfar" label="Royal Burgh of Forfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622121" start="13349" end="13362" title="Strathmartine" label="Strathmartine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691396" start="13368" end="13375" title="Tealing" label="Tealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="13472" end="13485" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="UK Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q121143375" start="13489" end="13515" title="Angus and Perthshire Glens (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Angus and Perthshire Glens"/>
<link wikidata="Q89280288" start="13546" end="13565" title="Kirriemuir and Dean (ward)" label="Kirriemuir and Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q89275996" start="13567" end="13585" title="Brechin and Edzell (ward)" label="Brechin and Edzell"/>
<link wikidata="Q96378180" start="13587" end="13606" title="Forfar and District (ward)" label="Forfar and District"/>
<link wikidata="Q96393843" start="13612" end="13633" title="Montrose and District (ward)" label="Montrose and District"/>
<link wikidata="Q96393780" start="13648" end="13668" title="Monifieth and Sidlaw (ward)" label="Monifieth and Sidlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q75818967" start="13695" end="13706" title="Dave Doogan" label="Dave Doogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="13714" end="13737" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q750956" start="13771" end="13789" title="Angus (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Angus constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q121407346" start="13792" end="13819" title="Arbroath and Broughty Ferry (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Arbroath and Broughty Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q96374493" start="13862" end="13885" title="Carnoustie and District (ward)" label="Carnoustie and District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032268" start="13899" end="13923" title="Dundee East (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Dundee East constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372295" start="13929" end="13952" title="Arbroath East and Lunan (ward)" label="Arbroath East and Lunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372296" start="13954" end="13990" title="Arbroath West, Letham and Friockheim (ward)" label="Arbroath West, Letham and Friockheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q96374493" start="14032" end="14055" title="Carnoustie and District (ward)" label="Carnoustie and District"/>
<link wikidata="Q19882482" start="14124" end="14139" title="Stephen Gethins" label="Stephen Gethins"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="14147" end="14170" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="14254" end="14273" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q544582" start="14277" end="14299" title="Angus North and Mearns (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Angus North and Mearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q24014894" start="14387" end="14400" title="Mairi Gougeon" label="Mairi Gougeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="14408" end="14431" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q544610" start="14434" end="14445" title="Angus South (Scottish Parliament constituency)" label="Angus South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349075" start="14493" end="14503" title="Graeme Dey" label="Graeme Dey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10658" start="14511" end="14534" title="Scottish National Party" label="Scottish National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338307" start="14684" end="14715" title="Edinburgh–Aberdeen line" label="Edinburgh-Aberdeen railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655504" start="14834" end="14841" title="Dundee Airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q630668" start="14928" end="14936" title="Arbroath" label="Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q996509" start="14991" end="14997" title="Forfar" label="Forfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q420303" start="15046" end="15054" title="Montrose, Angus" label="Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="15223" end="15240" title="Secondary schools" label="Secondary schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784933" start="15272" end="15292" title="Arbroath High School" label="Arbroath High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q15204368" start="15295" end="15314" title="Brechin High School" label="Brechin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q15207643" start="15317" end="15339" title="Carnoustie High School" label="Carnoustie High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q24197216" start="15342" end="15356" title="Forfar Academy" label="Forfar Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900142" start="15360" end="15381" title="Monifieth High School" label="Monifieth High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906463" start="15385" end="15401" title="Montrose Academy" label="Montrose Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978853" start="15405" end="15431" title="Webster&amp;#x27;s High School" label="Webster&amp;#x27;s High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293146" start="15458" end="15485" title="Aberlemno Sculptured Stones" label="Aberlemno Sculptured Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q630683" start="15488" end="15502" title="Arbroath Abbey" label="Arbroath Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864515" start="15505" end="15515" title="Barry Mill" label="Barry Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307632" start="15518" end="15535" title="Brechin Cathedral" label="Brechin Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q9705138" start="15538" end="15552" title="Brechin Castle" label="Brechin Castle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15555" end="15574" title="Brechin Round Tower" label="Brechin Round Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019434" start="15577" end="15605" title="Caledonian Railway (Brechin)" label="Caledonian Railway (Brechin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025953" start="15608" end="15632" title="Cairngorms National Park" label="Cairngorms National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172957" start="15635" end="15669" title="Corrie Fee National Nature Reserve" label="Corrie Fee National Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648116" start="15672" end="15684" title="Eassie Stone" label="Eassie Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373236" start="15687" end="15700" title="Edzell Castle" label="Edzell Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529151" start="15703" end="15716" title="Glamis Castle" label="Glamis Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568488" start="15719" end="15738" title="Glenesk Folk Museum" label="Glenesk Folk Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148897" start="15741" end="15753" title="House of Dun" label="House of Dun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15756" end="15787" title="Loch of Kinnordy Nature Reserve" label="Loch of Kinnordy Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807940" start="15790" end="15806" title="Meffan Institute" label="Meffan Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898455" start="15809" end="15823" title="Monboddo House" label="Monboddo House"/>
<link wikidata="Q11838980" start="15826" end="15862" title="Montrose Air Station Heritage Centre" label="Montrose Air Station Heritage Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632562" start="15865" end="15894" title="Montrose Basin Nature Reserve" label="Montrose Basin Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906490" start="15897" end="15912" title="Montrose Museum" label="Montrose Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q210493" start="15936" end="15942" title="Yantai" label="Yantai"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="15944" end="15952" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="15954" end="15959" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887922" start="16038" end="16064" title="1881 United Kingdom census" label="1881 United Kingdom census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158446" start="16069" end="16074" title="Smith (surname)" label="Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159662" start="16077" end="16086" title="Robertson (surname)" label="Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848748" start="16089" end="16097" title="Anderson (surname)" label="Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801971" start="16100" end="16107" title="Stewart (name)" label="Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800811" start="16110" end="16115" title="Scott (name)" label="Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q179205" start="16118" end="16126" title="Mitchell (surname)" label="Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q13421990" start="16129" end="16134" title="Brown (surname)" label="Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158195" start="16137" end="16143" title="Duncan (surname)" label="Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16877148" start="16146" end="16151" title="Milne (surname)" label="Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803437" start="16154" end="16161" title="Thomson (surname)" label="Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277218" start="16177" end="16190" title="Earl of Angus" label="Earl of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633547" start="16192" end="16215" title="List of places in Angus" label="List of places in Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153615" start="16217" end="16255" title="List of counties of Scotland 1890–1975" label="List of counties of Scotland 1890–1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001210" start="16257" end="16282" title="Diocese of Brechin" label="Medieval Diocese of Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888449" start="16284" end="16312" title="Scheduled monuments in Angus" label="Scheduled monuments in Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566347" start="16314" end="16358" title="List of Category A listed buildings in Angus" label="List of Category A listed buildings in Angus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2575" wikidata="Q44368" url="?curid=2575" title="André the Giant">
<text>André René Roussimoff (; 19 May 1946 – 28 January 1993), better known by his ring name André the Giant, was a French professional wrestler and actor. Dubbed &quot;the Eighth Wonder of the World&quot;, Roussimoff was known for his great size, which was a result of gigantism caused by excess human growth hormone.

Beginning his career in 1966, Roussimoff relocated to North America in 1971. From 1973 to the mid-1980s, Roussimoff was booked by World Wide Wrestling Federation (WWWF) promoter Vincent J. McMahon as a roving &quot;special attraction&quot; who wrestled for promotions throughout the United States, as well as in Japan for New Japan Pro-Wrestling. During the 1980s wrestling boom, Roussimoff became a mainstay of the WWWF (by then renamed the World Wrestling Federation), being paired with the villainous manager Bobby Heenan and feuding with Hulk Hogan. The two headlined WrestleMania III in 1987, and in 1988, he defeated Hogan to win the WWF Championship, his sole world heavyweight championship, on the first episode of &quot;The Main Event&quot;. As his WWF career wound down after WrestleMania VI in 1990, Roussimoff wrestled primarily for All Japan Pro-Wrestling, usually alongside Giant Baba, until his sudden death.

After his death in 1993, Roussimoff became the inaugural inductee into the newly created WWF Hall of Fame. He was later a charter member of the &quot;Wrestling Observer Newsletter&quot; Hall of Fame and the Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame; the latter describes him as being &quot;one of the most recognizable figures in the world both as a professional wrestler and as a pop culture icon.&quot; Outside of wrestling, Roussimoff is best known for appearing as Fezzik, the giant in the 1987 film &quot;The Princess Bride&quot;.

== Early life ==
André René Roussimoff was born on 19 May 1946 in Coulommiers, Seine-et-Marne, the son of immigrants Boris Roussimoff (1907–1993) and Mariann Roussimoff Stoeff (1910–1997); his father was Bulgarian and his mother was Polish. He was raised Catholic. He had two older siblings and two younger. His childhood nickname was Dédé (, ). At birth, André weighed ; as a child, he displayed symptoms of gigantism, and was noted as &quot;a good head taller than other kids&quot;, with abnormally long hands. In a 1970s television interview, Roussimoff stated that his mother was tall and his father tall, and that according to his father his grandfather was tall. By the time he was 12, Roussimoff stood .

Roussimoff was an average student, though good at mathematics. When he was 14, Rousimoff decided against further schooling and joined the workforce, believing what he learned was sufficient for a career as a farmhand. He did not drop out of school, as compulsory education laws in France were no longer applicable to those aged 14 or older.

Roussimoff spent years working on his father&#x27;s farm in Molien, where, according to his brother Jacques, he could perform the work of three men. He also completed an apprenticeship in woodworking, and next worked in a factory that manufactured engines for hay balers. None of these brought him any satisfaction. While Roussimoff was growing up in the 1950s, the Irish playwright Samuel Beckett was one of several adults who sometimes drove local children to school, including Roussimoff and his siblings. They had a surprising amount of common ground and bonded over their love of cricket, with Roussimoff recalling that the two rarely talked about anything else.

== Professional wrestling career ==
=== Early career (1964–1973) ===

At the age of 18, Roussimoff moved to Paris and was taught professional wrestling by a local promoter, Robert Lageat, who recognized the earning potential of Roussimoff&#x27;s size. He trained at night and worked as a mover during the day to pay living expenses. Roussimoff was billed as &quot;Géant Ferré&quot;, a name based on the Picardian folk hero Grand Ferré. This later became &quot;Jean Ferre&quot;. Canadian promoter and wrestler Frank Valois met Roussimoff in 1966, years later to become his business manager and adviser.

Roussimoff began his career wrestling in his native France. He made his TV debut that year on French national television against Le Petit Prince. In 1968 he defeated Franz Van Buyten for the FFCP World Heavyweight Championship In 1969 he appeared on the United Kingdom&#x27;s &quot;World of Sport&quot; program&#x27;s regular wrestling slot and defeated Jim Hussey, father of Mark Rocco. Roussimoff also began making a name for himself wrestling in Germany, Australia, New Zealand, and Africa.

He made his Japanese debut for the International Wrestling Enterprise in 1970, billed as &quot;Monster Roussimoff&quot;. Wrestling as both a singles and tag team competitor, he quickly was made the IWA World Tag Team Champion alongside Michael Nador. During his time in Japan, doctors first informed Roussimoff that he suffered from acromegaly.

Roussimoff next moved to Montreal, Canada in 1971, where he became an immediate success, regularly selling out the Montreal Forum. Promoters eventually ran out of plausible opponents for him and, as the novelty of his size wore off, the gate receipts dwindled. Roussimoff was defeated by Adnan Al-Kaissie in Baghdad in 1971, and wrestled numerous times in 1971 for Verne Gagne&#x27;s American Wrestling Association (AWA) as a special attraction.

=== Touring special attraction (1973–1984) ===
In 1973, Vincent J. McMahon, founder of the World Wide Wrestling Federation (WWWF), became Rousimoff&#x27;s agent. McMahon suggested several changes to Roussimoff&#x27;s booking and presentation to enhance his starpower. He felt Roussimoff should be portrayed as a large, immovable monster, and to enhance the perception of his size, McMahon discouraged Roussimoff from performing maneuvers such as dropkicks (although he was capable of performing such agile maneuvers before his health deteriorated in later life). He also began billing Roussimoff as &quot;André the Giant&quot; and set up a travel-intensive schedule, lending him to wrestling associations around the world, to keep him from becoming overexposed in any area. Promoters had to guarantee Roussimoff a certain amount of money as well as pay McMahon&#x27;s WWF booking fee.

On 24 March 1973, Roussimoff debuted in the World Wide Wrestling Federation (later World Wrestling Federation) as a fan favorite, defeating Frank Valois and Bull Pometti in a handicap match in Philadelphia. Two days later he made his debut in New York&#x27;s Madison Square Garden, defeating Buddy Wolfe.

Roussimoff was one of professional wrestling&#x27;s most beloved babyfaces throughout the 1970s and early 1980s. As such, Gorilla Monsoon often stated that Roussimoff had not been defeated in 15 years by pinfall or submission prior to WrestleMania III. He had lost matches outside of the WWF: a loss to Adnan Al-Kaissie in Baghdad, Iraq in 1971, pinfall losses to Don Leo Jonathan in Montreal in 1972, Killer Kowalski in Quebec City in 1972 two draws and a countout loss to The Sheik in Toronto in 1974 after a fireball was thrown in Andre&#x27;s face, knockout to Jerry Lawler in Memphis in 1975 and a count out to Lawler in Louisville in 1977, draw with Bobo Brazil at a battle royal in Detroit in 1976, Ronnie Garvin in Knoxville in 1978, Stan Hansen by disqualification in Japan in 1981, Kamala by countout in Toronto in 1984 and Canek in Mexico in 1984 and submission losses in Japan to Strong Kobayashi in 1972 and Antonio Inoki in 1986. He also had sixty-minute time-limit draws with two of the three major world champions of the day, Harley Race in Houston in 1979 and Nick Bockwinkel in Chicago in 1976.
In 1976, at the second Showdown at Shea, Roussimoff fought professional boxer Chuck Wepner in an unscripted boxer-versus-wrestler fight. The wild fight was shown via telecast as part of the undercard of the Muhammad Ali versus Antonio Inoki fight and ended when he threw Wepner over the top rope and outside the ring and won via count-out.

In 1980, he feuded with Hulk Hogan, when, unlike their more famous matches in the late 1980s, Hogan was the villain and Roussimoff was the hero, wrestling him at Shea Stadium&#x27;s third Showdown at Shea event and in Pennsylvania, where after Roussimoff pinned Hogan to win the match, Hogan bodyslammed him much like their legendary WrestleMania III match in 1987. The feud continued in Japan in 1982 and 1983 with their roles reversed and with Antonio Inoki also involved.

One of Roussimoff&#x27;s feuds pitted him against the &quot;Mongolian Giant&quot; Killer Khan. According to the storyline, Khan snapped Roussimoff&#x27;s ankle during a match on 2 May 1981 in Rochester, New York by leaping off the top rope and crashing down upon it with his knee-drop. In reality, he had broken his ankle getting out of bed the morning before the match. The injury and subsequent rehabilitation was worked into the existing Roussimoff/Khan storyline. After a stay at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston, Roussimoff returned with payback on his mind. The two battled on 20 July 1981, at Madison Square Garden in a match that resulted in a double disqualification. Their feud continued as fans filled arenas up and down the east coast to witness their matches. On 14 November 1981 at the Philadelphia Spectrum, he decisively defeated Khan in what was billed as a &quot;Mongolian stretcher match&quot;, in which the loser must be taken to the dressing room on a stretcher. The same type of match was also held in Toronto. In early 1982 the two also fought in a series of matches in Japan with Arnold Skaaland in Roussimoff&#x27;s corner.

=== World Wrestling Federation (1984–1991) ===
==== Feud with the Heenan Family (1984–1987) ====
In 1982, Vincent J. McMahon sold the World Wide Wrestling Federation to his son, Vince McMahon As McMahon began to expand his newly acquired promotion to the national level, he required his wrestlers to appear exclusively for him. McMahon signed Roussimoff to these terms in 1984, although he still allowed him to work in Japan for New Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW).
Roussimoff feuded with Big John Studd over which of the two men was the &quot;true giant&quot; of wrestling. Throughout the early to mid-1980s, Roussimoff and Studd fought all over the world, battling to try to determine who the real giant of wrestling was. In 1984, Studd took the feud to a new level when he and partner Ken Patera knocked out Roussimoff during a televised tag-team match and proceeded to cut off his hair. After gaining revenge on Patera, Roussimoff met Studd in a &quot;body slam challenge&quot; at the first WrestleMania, held 31 March 1985, at Madison Square Garden in New York City. Roussimoff slammed Studd to win the match and collect the $15,000 prize, then proceeded to throw cash to the fans before having the bag taken from him by Studd&#x27;s manager, Bobby &quot;The Brain&quot; Heenan.

At WrestleMania 2 on 7 April 1986, Roussimoff continued to display his dominance by winning a twenty-man battle royal which featured top National Football League stars and wrestlers. He last eliminated Bret Hart to win the contest.

Following a final tour with New Japan Pro-Wrestling in mid-1986, and a win in Austria over CWA World champion Otto Wanz, Roussimoff began appearing exclusively with the World Wrestling Federation.

After WrestleMania 2, Roussimoff continued his feud with Studd and King Kong Bundy. Around this time, Roussimoff requested a leave of absence to tend to his health, since the effects from his acromegaly were beginning to take their toll, as well as to tour Japan. He had also been cast in the film &quot;The Princess Bride&quot;. To explain his absence, a storyline was developed in which Heenan—suggesting that Roussimoff was secretly afraid of Studd and Bundy, whom Heenan bragged were unbeatable—challenged Roussimoff and a partner of his choosing to wrestle Studd and Bundy in a televised tag-team match. When Roussimoff failed to show, WWF president Jack Tunney indefinitely suspended him. Later in the summer of 1986, upon Roussimoff&#x27;s return to the United States, he began wearing a mask and competing as the &quot;Giant Machine&quot; in a stable known as the Machines. Big Machine and Super Machine were the other members; Hulk Hogan (as &quot;Hulk Machine&quot;) and Roddy Piper (as &quot;Piper Machine&quot;) were also one-time members. The WWF&#x27;s television announcers sold the Machines—a gimmick that was copied from the New Japan Pro-Wrestling character &quot;Super Strong Machine&quot;, played by Japanese wrestler Junji Hirata, —as &quot;a new tag-team from Japan&quot; and claimed not to know the identities of the wrestlers, even though it was obvious to fans that it was Roussimoff competing as the Giant Machine. Heenan, Studd, and Bundy complained to Tunney, who eventually told Heenan that if it could be proven that Roussimoff and the Giant Machine were the same person, Roussimoff would be fired. Roussimoff thwarted Heenan, Studd, and Bundy at every turn. Then, in late 1986, the Giant Machine &quot;disappeared&quot; and Roussimoff was reinstated. Foreshadowing Roussimoff&#x27;s heel turn, Heenan expressed his approval of the reinstatement but did not explain why.

==== Alliance with Bobby Heenan and Ted DiBiase (1987–1989) ====

Roussimoff agreed to turn heel in early 1987 to be the counter to the biggest &quot;babyface&quot; in professional wrestling at that time, Hulk Hogan. On an edition of &quot;Piper&#x27;s Pit&quot; in 1987, Hogan was presented a trophy for being the WWF World Heavyweight Champion for three years; Roussimoff came out to congratulate him, shaking Hogan&#x27;s hand with a strong grip, which surprised the Hulkster. On the following week&#x27;s &quot;Piper&#x27;s Pit&quot;, Roussimoff was presented a slightly smaller trophy for being &quot;the only undefeated wrestler in wrestling history.&quot; Although he had suffered a handful of countout and disqualification losses in WWF, he had never been pinned or forced to submit in a WWF ring. Hogan came out to congratulate him and ended up being the focal point of the interview. Apparently annoyed, Roussimoff walked out in the midst of Hogan&#x27;s speech. A discussion between Roussimoff and Hogan was scheduled, and on a &quot;Piper&#x27;s Pit&quot; that aired 7 February 1987, the two met. Hogan was introduced first, followed by Roussimoff, who was led by longtime rival Bobby Heenan.

Speaking on behalf of his new protégé, Heenan accused Hogan of being Roussimoff&#x27;s friend only so he would not have to defend his title against him. Hogan tried to reason with Roussimoff, but his pleas were ignored as he challenged Hogan to a match for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship at WrestleMania III. Hogan was still seemingly in disbelief as to what Roussimoff was doing, prompting Heenan to say &quot;You can&#x27;t believe it? Maybe you&#x27;ll believe this, Hogan&quot; before Roussimoff ripped off the T-shirt and crucifix from Hogan, with the crucifix scratching Hogan&#x27;s chest, causing him to bleed.

Following Hogan&#x27;s acceptance of his challenge on a later edition of &quot;Piper&#x27;s Pit&quot;, the two were part of a 20-man over-the-top-rope battle-royal on 14 March edition of &quot;Saturday Night&#x27;s Main Event X&quot; at the Joe Louis Arena in Detroit. Although the battle royal was won by Hercules, Roussimoff claimed to have gained a psychological advantage over Hogan when he threw the WWF World Heavyweight Champion over the top rope. The match, which was actually taped on 21 February 1987, aired only two weeks before WrestleMania III to make it seem like Hogan had met his match in André the Giant.

At WrestleMania III, he was billed at , and the stress of such immense weight on his bones and joints resulted in constant pain. After recent back surgery, he was also wearing a brace underneath his wrestling singlet. In front of a record crowd, Hogan won the match after body-slamming Roussimoff (later dubbed &quot;the bodyslam heard around the world&quot;), followed by Hogan&#x27;s running leg drop finisher. Years later, Hogan claimed that Roussimoff was so heavy, he felt more like , and that he tore his latissimus dorsi muscle when slamming him.

Another myth about the match is that no one, not even WWF owner Vince McMahon, knew until the day of the event whether Roussimoff would lose the match. In reality, he agreed to lose the match sometime before, mostly for health reasons. Contrary to popular belief, it was not the first time that Hogan had successfully body-slammed him in a WWF match. A then-heel Hogan had slammed a then-face Roussimoff following their match at the Showdown at Shea on 9 August 1980, though Roussimoff was somewhat lighter (around ) and more athletic at the time (Hogan also slammed him in a match in Hamburg, Pennsylvania, a month later). This took place in the territorial days of American wrestling three years before WWF began national expansion, so many of those who watched WrestleMania III had never seen the Giant slammed (Roussimoff had also previously allowed Harley Race, El Canek and Stan Hansen, among others, to slam him).

By the time of WrestleMania III, the WWF went national, giving more meaning to the Roussimoff–Hogan match that took place then. The feud between Roussimoff and Hogan simmered during the summer of 1987, as Roussimoff&#x27;s health declined. The feud began heating up again when wrestlers were named the captains of rival teams at the inaugural Survivor Series event. During their approximately one minute of battling each other during the match, Hogan dominated Roussimoff and was on the brink of knocking him from the ring, but was tripped up by his partners, Bundy and One Man Gang, and would be counted out. Roussimoff went on to be the sole survivor of the match, pinning Bam Bam Bigelow before Hogan returned to the ring to attack André and knock him out of the ring. Roussimoff later got revenge when, after Hogan won a match against Bundy on &quot;Saturday Night&#x27;s Main Event&quot;, he snuck up from behind and began choking Hogan to the brink of unconsciousness, not letting go even after an army of seven face-aligned wrestlers ran to the ring to try to pull him away; it took Hacksaw Jim Duggan breaking a piece of wood over his back (which he no-sold) for him to let go, after which Hogan was pulled to safety. As was the case with the &quot;SNME&quot; battle royal a year earlier, the series of events was one of the pieces that helped build interest in a possible one-on-one rematch between Hogan and Roussimoff, and to make it seem that Roussimoff was certain to win easily when they did meet. Meanwhile, Rousimoff returned to Germany in December 1987 for another match with Wanz, which he lost by countout.

In the meantime, the &quot;Million Dollar Man&quot; Ted DiBiase failed to persuade Hogan to sell him the WWF World Heavyweight Championship. After failing to defeat Hogan in a subsequent series of matches, DiBiase turned to Roussimoff to win it for him. He and DiBiase had teamed several times in the past, including in Japan and in the WWF in the late 1970s and early 1980s when both were faces at the time, but this was not acknowledged during this new storyline. The earlier attack and DiBiase&#x27;s insertion into the feud set up the Hogan-Roussimoff rematch on &quot;The Main Event&quot;, to air 5 February 1988, on a live broadcast on NBC. Acting as his hired gun, Roussimoff won the WWF World Heavyweight Championship from Hogan (his first singles title) in a match where it was later revealed that appointed referee Dave Hebner was &quot;detained backstage&quot;, and a replacement (whom Hogan afterwards initially accused of having been paid by DiBiase to get plastic surgery to look like Dave, but was revealed to have been his evil twin brother, Earl Hebner), who made a three-count on Hogan while Hogan&#x27;s left shoulder was off the mat.

After winning, Roussimoff &quot;sold&quot; the title to DiBiase; the transaction was declared invalid by then-WWF president Jack Tunney and the title was declared vacant. This was shown on WWF&#x27;s NBC program &quot;The Main Event&quot;. At WrestleMania IV, Roussimoff and Hulk Hogan fought to a double disqualification in a WWF title tournament match (with the idea in the storyline saying that Roussimoff was again working on DiBiase&#x27;s behalf in giving DiBiase a clearer path in the tournament). Afterward, Roussimoff and Hogan&#x27;s feud died down after a steel cage match held at &quot;WrestleFest&quot; on 31 July 1988, in Milwaukee. Hogan was the winner.

At the inaugural SummerSlam pay-per-view held at Madison Square Garden, Roussimoff and DiBiase (billed as The Mega Bucks) faced Hogan and WWF World Heavyweight Champion &quot;Macho Man&quot; Randy Savage (known as The Mega Powers) in the main event, with Jesse &quot;The Body&quot; Ventura as the special guest referee. During the match, the Mega Powers&#x27; manager, Miss Elizabeth, distracted the Mega Bucks and Ventura when she climbed up on the ring apron, removed her yellow skirt and walked around in a pair of red panties. This allowed Hogan and Savage time to recover and eventually win the match with Hogan pinning DiBiase. Savage forced Ventura&#x27;s hand down for the final three-count, due to Ventura&#x27;s character historically being at odds with Hogan, and his unwillingness to count the fall.

Concurrent with the developing feud with the Mega Powers, Roussimoff was placed in a feud with Jim Duggan, which began after Duggan knocked out Roussimoff with a two-by-four board during a television taping. Despite Duggan&#x27;s popularity with fans, Roussimoff regularly got the upper hand in the feud.

Roussimoff&#x27;s next major feud was against Jake &quot;The Snake&quot; Roberts. In this storyline, it was said Roussimoff was afraid of snakes, something Roberts exposed on &quot;Saturday Night&#x27;s Main Event&quot; when he threw his snake, Damien, on the frightened Roussimoff; as a result, he suffered a kayfabe mild heart attack and vowed revenge. During the next few weeks, Roberts frequently walked to ringside carrying his snake in its bag during Roussimoff&#x27;s matches, causing the latter to run from the ring in fright. Throughout their feud (which culminated at WrestleMania V), Roberts constantly used Damien to gain a psychological edge over the much larger and stronger Roussimoff.

In 1989, Roussimoff and the returning Big John Studd briefly reprised their feud, beginning at WrestleMania V, when Studd was the referee in the match with Roberts, this time with Studd as a face and Roussimoff as the heel.

During the late summer and autumn of 1989, Roussimoff engaged in a brief feud, consisting almost entirely of house shows (non-televised events), and one televised match on 28 October 1989, at Madison Square Garden with then-WWF Intercontinental Champion The Ultimate Warrior. Roussimoff began to wear face paint with a similar design to The Warrior and began called himself &quot;The Ultimate Giant&quot; when he appeared on &quot;The Brother Love Show&quot;. The younger Warrior, the WWF&#x27;s rising star, regularly squashed the aging Roussimoff in an attempt to showcase his star quality and promote him as the &quot;next big thing&quot;.

==== Colossal Connection (1989–1990) ====

In late 1989, Roussimoff was joined with fellow Heenan Family member Haku to form a new tag team called the Colossal Connection, in part to fill a void left by the departure of Tully Blanchard and Arn Anderson (the Brain Busters, who were also members of Heenan&#x27;s stable) from the WWF, and also to continue to keep the aging Roussimoff in the main event spotlight. His last singles match was a loss to The Ultimate Warrior in 20 seconds at a house show in Cape Girardeau, Missouri on 11 December 1989. The Colossal Connection immediately targeted WWF Tag Team Champions Demolition (who had recently won the belts from the Brain Busters). At a television taping on 13 December 1989, the Colossal Connection defeated Demolition to win the titles. Roussimoff and Haku successfully defended their title, mostly against Demolition, until WrestleMania VI on 1 April 1990, when Demolition took advantage of a mistimed move by the champions to regain the belts. After the match, a furious Heenan blamed him for the title loss and after shouting at him, before Heenan slapped him in the face; an angry Roussimoff responded with a slap of his own that sent Heenan staggering from the ring. Roussimoff also caught Haku&#x27;s kick attempt, sending him reeling from the ring as well, prompting support and turning Roussimoff face for the first time since 1987. Due to his ongoing health issues, Roussimoff was unable to wrestle at the time of Wrestlemania VI and Haku actually wrestled the entire match against Demolition without tagging him in.

On weekend television shows following WrestleMania VI, Bobby Heenan vowed to spit in Roussimoff&#x27;s face when he came crawling back to the Heenan Family. He wrestled one more time with Haku, teaming up to face Demolition on a house show in Honolulu on 10 April, Roussimoff was knocked out of the ring and The Colossal Connection lost via count-out. After the match, Roussimoff and Haku would fight each other, marking the end of the team. His final WWF match of 1990 came at a combined WWF/All Japan/New Japan show on 13 April in Tokyo, Japan when he teamed with Giant Baba to defeat Demolition in a non-title match. Roussimoff would win by gaining the pinfall on Smash.

==== Sporadic appearances (1990–1991) ====
Roussimoff returned in the winter of 1990, but it was not to the World Wrestling Federation. Instead, Roussimoff made an interview appearance for Herb Abrams&#x27; fledgling Universal Wrestling Federation on 11 October in Reseda, California. (the segment aired in 1991). He appeared in an interview segment with Captain Lou Albano and put over the UWF. The following month on 30 November at a house show in Miami, Florida, the World Wrestling Federation announced his return as a participant in the 1991 Royal Rumble (to be held in Miami two months later). Roussimoff was also mentioned as a participant on television but would ultimately back out due to a leg injury.

His on-air return finally took place at the WWF&#x27;s &quot;Super-Stars &amp; Stripes Forever&quot; USA Network special on 17 March 1991, when he came out to shake the hand of Big Boss Man after an altercation with Mr. Perfect. The following week at WrestleMania VII, he came to the aid of the Boss Man in his match against Mr. Perfect. Roussimoff finally returned to action on 26 April 1991, in a six-man tag-team matchup when he teamed with The Rockers in a winning effort against Mr. Fuji and The Orient Express at a house show in Belfast, Northern Ireland. On 11 May 1991 he participated in a 17-man battle-royal at a house show in Detroit, which was won by Kerry Von Erich. This was Andre&#x27;s final WWF match, although he was involved in several subsequent storylines. His last major WWF storyline following WrestleMania VII had the major heel managers (Bobby Heenan, Sensational Sherri, Slick, and Mr. Fuji) trying to recruit Roussimoff one-by-one, only to be turned down in various humiliating ways (e.g. Heenan had his hand crushed, Sherri received a spanking, Slick got locked in the trunk of the car he was offering to Roussimoff, and Mr. Fuji got a pie in his face). Finally, Jimmy Hart appeared live on &quot;WWF Superstars&quot; to announce that he had successfully signed Roussimoff to tag-team with Earthquake. When asked to confirm this by Gene Okerlund, Roussimoff denied the claims. This led to Earthquake&#x27;s attacking Roussimoff from behind (injuring his knee). Jimmy Hart would later get revenge for the humiliation by secretly signing Tugboat and forming the Natural Disasters. This led to Roussimoff&#x27;s final major WWF appearance at SummerSlam 1991, where he seconded the Bushwhackers in their match against the Disasters. Roussimoff was on crutches at ringside, and after the Disasters won the match, they set out to attack him, but the Legion of Doom made their way to ringside and got in between them and the Giant, who was preparing to defend himself with one of his crutches. The Disasters left the ringside area as they were outnumbered by the Legion of Doom, the Bushwhackers and Roussimoff, who struck both Earthquake and Typhoon (the former Tugboat) with the crutch as they left. His final WWF appearance came at a house show in Paris, France, on 9 October 1991. He was in Davey Boy Smith&#x27;s corner as the Bulldog faced Earthquake; Smith hit Earthquake with Roussimoff&#x27;s crutch, allowing Smith to win.

=== All Japan Pro Wrestling; Universal Wrestling Association (1990–1992) ===
After WrestleMania VI, Roussimoff spent the rest of his in-ring career in All Japan Pro Wrestling (AJPW) and Mexico&#x27;s Universal Wrestling Association (UWA), where he performed under the name &quot;André el Gigante&quot;. He toured with AJPW three times per year, from 1990 to 1992, usually teaming with Giant Baba in tag-team matches.

Roussimoff made a couple of guest appearances for Herb Abrams&#x27; Universal Wrestling Federation, in 1991, feuding with Big John Studd, though he never had a match in the promotion.

In his last U.S. television appearance, Andre appeared on World Championship Wrestling&#x27;s (WCW) &quot;Clash of the Champions XX&quot; special that aired on TBS on 2 September 1992, where he gave a brief interview. During the same event, he appeared alongside Gordon Solie and was later seen talking with him during the gala celebrating the 20th anniversary of wrestling on TBS.

He did his final tour of Mexico in 1992 in a selection of six-man tag matches alongside Bam Bam Bigelow and a variety of Lucha Libre stars facing among others Bad News Allen and future WWF Champions Mick Foley and Yokozuna. Roussimoff made his final tour with AJPW from October to December 1992; he wrestled what became the final match of his career on 4 December 1992, teaming with Giant Baba and Rusher Kimura to defeat Haruka Eigen, Masanobu Fuchi, and Motoshi Okuma.

== Acting career ==
Roussimoff branched out into acting again in the 1970s and 1980s, after a 1967 French boxing film, making his USA acting debut playing a Sasquatch (&quot;Bigfoot&quot;) in a two-part episode aired in 1976 on the television series &quot;The Six Million Dollar Man&quot;. He appeared in other television shows, including &quot;The Greatest American Hero&quot;, &quot;B. J. and the Bear&quot;, &quot;The Fall Guy&quot; and 1990&#x27;s &quot;Zorro&quot;.

Towards the end of his career, Roussimoff appeared in several films. He had an uncredited appearance in the 1984 film &quot;Conan the Destroyer&quot; as Dagoth, the resurrected horned giant god who is killed by Conan (Arnold Schwarzenegger). That same year, he also made an appearance in &quot;Micki &amp; Maude&quot; (billed as André Rousimmoff). He appeared most notably as Fezzik, his own favorite role, in the 1987 film &quot;The Princess Bride&quot;. The fact that Roussimoff found that no one stared at him on set during production was a novel and particularly gratifying experience. Both the film and his performance retain a devoted following. In a short interview with Lanny Poffo, he stated that the movie meant so much to André that he made his wrestling pals watch an advanced copy of the VHS with him over and over again while supplying dinner, drinks, and sweetly asking each time, &quot;Did you like my performance?&quot;.

In his last film, he had a cameo role as a circus giant in the comedy &quot;Trading Mom&quot;, which was released in 1994, a year after his death.

=== Filmography ===
==Personal life==
Roussimoff was mentioned in the &quot;1974 Guinness Book of World Records&quot; as the then-highest-paid wrestler in history. He earned an annual salary of approximately $400,000 () at this time.

Robin Christensen is Roussimoff&#x27;s only child. Her mother Jean Christensen (who died in 2008) became acquainted with her father through the wrestling business around 1972 or 1973. Christensen had regular contact with her father, but saw him only five times in her life. After his death, Christensen spoke positively about her father and became a guardian of his image and legacy.

In 1989, Roussimoff was arrested and charged with assault after he attacked a KCRG-TV cameraman shooting his match with The Ultimate Warrior at Cedar Rapids, Iowa&#x27;s Five Seasons Center. While acquitted on the assault charge, he was fined $100 () for criminal mischief and ordered to pay KCRG $233 () in damage to its equipment.

William Goldman, the author of the novel and the screenplay of &quot;The Princess Bride&quot;, wrote in his nonfiction work &quot;Which Lie Did I Tell?&quot; that Roussimoff was one of the gentlest and most generous people he ever knew. Whenever Roussimoff ate with someone in a restaurant, he would pay, but he would also insist on paying when he was a guest. On one occasion, after Roussimoff attended a dinner with Arnold Schwarzenegger and Wilt Chamberlain, Schwarzenegger had quietly moved to the cashier to pay before Roussimoff could, but then found himself being physically lifted, carried from his table and deposited on top of his car by Roussimoff and Chamberlain.

Roussimoff owned a ranch in Ellerbe, North Carolina, looked after by two of his close friends. When he was not on the road, he loved spending time at the ranch, where he tended to his cattle, played with his dogs, and entertained friends. While there were custom-made chairs and a few other modifications in his home to accommodate his size, tales that everything in his home was custom-made for a large man are said to be exaggerated. Since Roussimoff could not easily go shopping due to his fame and size, he was known to spend hours watching and purchasing items from the shopping channel QVC.

=== Health ===
Roussimoff has been dubbed &quot;the greatest drunk on Earth&quot; for once consuming 119 beers (in total, over or 11.16 gallons) in six hours. In an appearance on &quot;Late Night with David Letterman&quot; on 23 January 1984, Roussimoff told David Letterman he once drank 117 beers. When Letterman asked if he was drunk, Roussimoff said he couldn&#x27;t remember because he passed out. He also said he quit drinking beer 14 months prior to this appearance on Letterman.

On an episode of WWE&#x27;s &quot;Legends of Wrestling&quot;, Mike Graham said Roussimoff once drank 156 beers (over or 19.5 gallons) in one sitting, which was confirmed by Dusty Rhodes. The Fabulous Moolah wrote in her autobiography that Roussimoff drank 127 beers at the bar of the Abraham Lincoln Hotel in Reading, Pennsylvania and later passed out in the lobby. The staff could not move him and had to leave him there until he awoke.

In a shoot interview, Ken Patera recalled an occasion where Roussimoff was challenged by Dick Murdoch to a beer drinking contest. After nine or so hours, Roussimoff had drunk 116 beers. A tale recounted by Cary Elwes in his book about the making of &quot;The Princess Bride&quot; has Roussimoff falling on top of somebody while drunk, after which the NYPD sent an undercover officer to follow Roussimoff around whenever he went out drinking in their city to make sure he did not fall on anyone again.

Another story also says prior to his famous WrestleMania III match, Roussimoff drank 14 bottles of wine. Hulk Hogan stated that Roussimoff drank a case of 12 bottles of Pouilly-Fuissé during a three-hour bus journey.

An urban legend exists surrounding Roussimoff&#x27;s 1987 surgery in which his size made it impossible for the anesthesiologist to estimate a dosage via standard methods; consequently, his alcohol tolerance was used as a guideline instead. Some reports claim this is true.

While some stories of Rousimoff&#x27;s eating have circulated, such as one dinner where he ate twelve 16-ounce steaks and fifteen lobsters in one sitting, according to his usual traveling partner, Tim White, Rousimoff only ate so much on occasion to show off, saying, &quot;He had a substantial appetite, but for his size, it was completely normal.&quot;

Roussimoff had severe pericardial effusion and underwent pericardiocentesis at Duke University Hospital in the 1980s.

==Death==
On the morning of 28 January 1993, Roussimoff died of congestive heart failure and an apparent heart attack in his sleep, likely associated with his untreated acromegaly, at a Paris hotel, at the age of 46. After he visited and played cards in Molien with some of his oldest friends on the night of 27 January 1993, he returned to his hotel room around 1 a.m. CET on 28 January. That afternoon, Roussimoff was found dead in his room by hotel management and his chauffeur. He was in Paris at the time to attend his father&#x27;s funeral. While there, he decided to extend his stay there to be with his mother on her birthday.

In his will, he specified that his remains should be cremated and &quot;disposed of&quot;. Upon his death in Paris, his family in France held a funeral for him, intending to bury him near his father. When they learned of his wish to be cremated, his body was flown to the United States, where he was cremated according to his wishes. His ashes were scattered at his ranch in Ellerbe, North Carolina. Additionally, in accordance with his will, he left his estate to his sole beneficiary: his daughter Robin.

== Other media ==

Roussimoff made numerous appearances as himself in video games, starting with &quot;WWF WrestleMania&quot;. He also appears posthumously in &quot;Virtual Pro Wrestling 64&quot;, &quot;WWF No Mercy&quot;, &quot;Legends of Wrestling&quot;, &quot;Legends of Wrestling II&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;WWE SmackDown! vs. Raw&quot;, &quot;WWE SmackDown! vs. Raw 2006&quot;, &quot;WWE Legends of WrestleMania&quot;, &quot;WWE All Stars&quot;, &quot;WWE 2K14&quot;, &quot;WWE 2K15&quot;, &quot;WWE 2K16&quot;, &quot;WWE 2K17&quot;, &quot;WWE 2K18&quot;, &quot;WWE 2K19&quot;, &quot;WWE 2K20, WWE 2K Battlegrounds, WWE 2K22, WWE 2K23, WWE 2K24&quot;, and many others.

In January 2005, WWE released &quot;André The Giant&quot;, a DVD focusing on the life and career of Roussimoff. The DVD is a reissue of the out-of-print &quot;André The Giant&quot; VHS made by Coliseum Video in 1985, with commentary by Michael Cole and Tazz replacing Gorilla Monsoon and Jesse Ventura&#x27;s commentary on his WrestleMania match with Big John Studd. The video is hosted by Lord Alfred Hayes. Later matches, including his battles against Hulk Hogan while a heel, are not included on this VHS.

== Legacy ==

* In 1993, when the then-World Wrestling Federation created the WWF Hall of Fame, André the Giant was the inaugural and sole inductee in the class of 1993.
* Roussimoff was the inspiration for the 1998 film &quot;My Giant&quot;, written by his friend Billy Crystal, whom he had met during the filming of &quot;The Princess Bride&quot;.
* Paul Wight, better known as Big Show, is more similar in body structure to Roussimoff than any other wrestler since Roussimoff&#x27;s death. He was originally billed as the son of André during his stint in WCW (when he was known as simply &quot;the Giant&quot;) despite there being no biological relationship. While also suffering from acromegaly, unlike Roussimoff, Wight did get surgery on his pituitary gland in the early 1990s, which successfully halted the progress of his condition. The former wrestler Giant González suffered from problems similar to those that Roussimoff had near the end of his life and died in 2010 due to diabetes complications.
* In 1999, he was the subject of an episode of &quot;A&amp;E Biography&quot;, titled &quot;André the Giant: Larger Than Life&quot;. The documentary covered his childhood and early life in France, as well as the beginning of his wrestling career, his struggles with acromegaly, his personal life, and his final years. His brother, Jacques Roussimoff, was interviewed for the documentary, as were fellow wrestling personalities Gorilla Monsoon, Tim White, Arnold Skaaland, Vince McMahon, Freddie Blassie, Killer Kowalski, Rene Goulet, and Frenchy Bernard, as well as wrestling historian Sheldon Goldberg. Several of his longtime hometown friends were interviewed as well. The documentary described Roussimoff as pro wrestling&#x27;s &quot;first and only international attraction&quot; and that &quot;on his broad shoulders, wrestling rose from its status as a questionable sport to become big business, and some might argue, performance art.&quot;
* The Obey brand icon originated from wheatpaste posters that artist Shepard Fairey created based upon a photo of André the Giant that he had found in a newspaper.
* Capcom&#x27;s video game character Hugo, from the &quot;Street Fighter&quot; series (known as Andore in the &quot;Final Fight&quot; series) is based on him.
* The 2014 graphic novel &quot;André The Giant: The Life and The Legend&quot; (First Second Books), written and drawn by Box Brown, tells the story of his life and career. Research for the book included interviews with his fellow wrestlers and actors such as Christopher Guest, Mandy Patinkin and others.
* In 2017, Showtime released &quot;Waiting for Andre&quot;,&quot;&quot; a semi-fictional movie about the friendship between playwright Samuel Beckett and Roussimoff during the time Beckett lived in Ussy-sur-Marne, outside of Paris. A novel of the movie was published the following year by Steffan Piper ( / 198075621X from Amazon print on demand).
* On 10 March 2014, episode of &quot;Raw&quot;, WrestleMania XXX host Hulk Hogan announced that in honor of Roussimoff&#x27;s legacy, WWE was establishing the André the Giant Memorial Battle Royal, that would take place at the event, with the winner receiving the André the Giant Memorial Trophy (made in the likeness of Roussimoff). On 6 April 2014, at WrestleMania XXX, Cesaro won the match after eliminating Big Show using a body slam similar to the body slam Hulk Hogan used on Roussimoff at WrestleMania III. The battle royal has since become a yearly WrestleMania Weekend tradition.

=== Biopics ===
* In 1999, &quot;Biography&quot; produced and aired a documentary called &quot;Andre The Giant: Larger Than Life&quot;.
* On 9 May 2016, it was announced that a movie based on the 2015 authorized graphic novel biography &quot;André the Giant: Closer to Heaven&quot; was in the plans made by Lion Forge Comics along with producers Scott Steindorff, Dylan Russell and consulted by Roussimoff&#x27;s daughter, Robin Christensen-Roussimoff.
* On 10 April 2018, HBO aired a documentary film called &quot;André the Giant&quot;.

== Championships and accomplishments ==
* 50th State Big Time Wrestling
** Texas Battle Royal (1977)
* All Japan Pro Wrestling
** World&#x27;s Strongest Tag Determination League East Sports Special Award (1991) – with Giant Baba
* Championship Wrestling from Florida
** NWA Florida Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Dusty Rhodes
* Fédération Française de Catch Professionnel
** World Heavyweight Championship (France) (1 time)
* Houston Wrestling
** Two-Ring Battle Royal (1974, 1975)
* International Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame
** Class of 2021
* International Wrestling Enterprise
** IWA World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Michael Nador
* NWA Hollywood Wrestling
** Los Angeles Battle Royal (1975, 1980)
* NWA San Francisco
** Cow Palace Battle Royal (1977)
* New Japan Pro-Wrestling
** International Wrestling Grand Prix (1985)
** MSG League (1982)
** MSG Tag League (1981) – with Rene Goulet
** Sagawa Express Cup (1986)
** Greatest 18 Club inductee
* NWA Tri-State
** NWA United States Tag Team Championship &quot;(Tri-State version)&quot; (1 time) – with Dusty Rhodes
* Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum
** Class of 2002
* Pro Wrestling Illustrated
** Most Popular Wrestler of the Year (1977, 1982)
** Match of the Year (1981) 
** Match of the Year (1988) 
** Most Hated Wrestler of the Year (1988)
** Editor&#x27;s Award (1993)
** Ranked No. 3 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the &quot;PWI Years&quot; in 2003
*Sports Illustrated
**Ranked No. 16 of the 20 Greatest WWE Wrestlers Of All Time 
* Stampede Wrestling
** Stampede Wrestling Hall of Fame (Class of 1995)
* World Championship Wrestling (Australia)
** NWA Austra-Asian Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Ron Miller
* World Wrestling Federation/WWE
** WWF World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
** WWF Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Haku
** WWE Bronze Statue (2013)
** Slammy Award (1 time)
*** Bobby &quot;The Brain&quot; Heenan Scholarship Award (1987) 
** WWF Hall of Fame (Class of 1993)
* Wrestling Observer Newsletter
** Feud of the Year (1981) 
** Most Embarrassing Wrestler (1989)
** Worst Feud of the Year (1984) 
** Worst Feud of the Year (1989) 
** Worst Worked Match of the Year (1987) 
** Worst Worked Match of the Year (1989) 
** Worst Tag Team (1990, 1991) 
** Worst Wrestler (1989, 1991, 1992)
** Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame (Class of 1996)
* Canadian Wrestling Hall of Fame
** Class of 2016

== See also ==
* List of tallest people
* List of premature professional wrestling deaths

== References ==
==Further reading==
* 

== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44368" start="0" end="21" title="André the Giant" label="André René Roussimoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132964" start="77" end="86" title="ring name" label="ring name"/>
<link wikidata="Q44368" start="87" end="102" title="André the Giant" label="André the Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="117" end="138" title="professional wrestler" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265619" start="167" end="193" title="Eighth Wonder of the World" label="Eighth Wonder of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q501829" start="264" end="273" title="gigantism" label="gigantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="291" end="311" title="human growth hormone" label="human growth hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514388" start="444" end="475" title="World Wide Wrestling Federation" label="World Wide Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q708554" start="492" end="510" title="Vincent J. McMahon" label="Vincent J. McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150494" start="636" end="659" title="New Japan Pro-Wrestling" label="New Japan Pro-Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q35489" start="672" end="692" title="1980s wrestling boom" label="1980s wrestling boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="756" end="782" title="World Wrestling Federation" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="807" end="817" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="villainous"/>
<link wikidata="Q888556" start="826" end="838" title="Bobby Heenan" label="Bobby Heenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073091" start="843" end="855" title="André the Giant–Hulk Hogan rivalry" label="feuding with"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="856" end="866" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50817" start="886" end="902" title="WrestleMania III" label="WrestleMania III"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="954" end="970" title="WWF Championship" label="WWF Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q721063" start="981" end="1011" title="world heavyweight championship (professional wrestling)" label="world heavyweight championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995036" start="1043" end="1057" title="WWF The Main Event" label="The Main Event"/>
<link wikidata="Q50850" start="1100" end="1115" title="WrestleMania VI" label="WrestleMania VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359107" start="1159" end="1182" title="All Japan Pro-Wrestling" label="All Japan Pro-Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387241" start="1202" end="1212" title="Giant Baba" label="Giant Baba"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="1328" end="1344" title="WWF Hall of Fame" label="WWF Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q373374" start="1383" end="1437" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame" label="&amp;quot;Wrestling Observer Newsletter&amp;quot; Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q865105" start="1446" end="1481" title="Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame" label="Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="1743" end="1761" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="The Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q251731" start="1836" end="1863" title="Coulommiers, Seine-et-Marne" label="Coulommiers, Seine-et-Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q133255" start="1974" end="1983" title="Bulgarians" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="2003" end="2009" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2025" end="2033" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q501829" start="2179" end="2188" title="gigantism" label="gigantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q511009" start="2734" end="2754" title="compulsory education" label="compulsory education"/>
<link wikidata="Q268711" start="2884" end="2890" title="Ussy-sur-Marne" label="Molien"/>
<link wikidata="Q816871" start="3012" end="3023" title="woodworking" label="woodworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552846" start="3084" end="3094" title="baler" label="hay balers"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="3207" end="3221" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="3409" end="3416" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249603" start="3896" end="3905" title="Picardy" label="Picardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113595" start="3916" end="3927" title="Grand Ferré" label="Grand Ferré"/>
<link wikidata="Q131750629" start="4002" end="4014" title="Frank Valois" label="Frank Valois"/>
<link wikidata="Q123460338" start="4124" end="4154" title="Professional wrestling in France" label="wrestling in his native France"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4225" end="4240" title=":fr:Daniel Dubail" label="Le Petit Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867711" start="4287" end="4291" title="Fédération Française de Catch Professionnel" label="FFCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036633" start="4372" end="4398" title="World of Sport (British TV programme)" label="&amp;quot;World of Sport&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11951" start="4472" end="4482" title="Mark Rocco" label="Mark Rocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799681" start="4626" end="4660" title="International Wrestling Enterprise" label="International Wrestling Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q121297693" start="4789" end="4816" title="IWA World Tag Team Championship (International Wrestling Enterprise)" label="IWA World Tag Team Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q189580" start="4924" end="4934" title="acromegaly" label="acromegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q367272" start="5052" end="5066" title="Montreal Forum" label="Montreal Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981764" start="5225" end="5241" title="Adnan Al-Kaissie" label="Adnan Al-Kaissie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="5245" end="5252" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q950279" start="5302" end="5313" title="Verne Gagne" label="Verne Gagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q467330" start="5321" end="5351" title="American Wrestling Association" label="American Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q708554" start="5440" end="5458" title="Vincent J. McMahon" label="Vincent J. McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514388" start="5475" end="5506" title="World Wide Wrestling Federation" label="World Wide Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051056" start="5830" end="5838" title="dropkick" label="dropkick"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="6386" end="6398" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="fan favorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="6529" end="6550" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984968" start="6562" end="6573" title="Buddy Wolfe" label="Buddy Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="6641" end="6650" title="Babyface (wrestling)" label="babyfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q705172" start="6698" end="6713" title="Gorilla Monsoon" label="Gorilla Monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q50817" start="6811" end="6827" title="WrestleMania III" label="WrestleMania III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981764" start="6879" end="6895" title="Adnan Al-Kaissie" label="Adnan Al-Kaissie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292996" start="6940" end="6956" title="Don Leo Jonathan" label="Don Leo Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q939657" start="6978" end="6993" title="Killer Kowalski" label="Killer Kowalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q783592" start="7050" end="7059" title="The Sheik (wrestler)" label="The Sheik"/>
<link wikidata="Q345019" start="7141" end="7153" title="Jerry Lawler" label="Jerry Lawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q888799" start="7232" end="7243" title="Bobo Brazil" label="Bobo Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441390" start="7282" end="7295" title="Ronnie Garvin" label="Ronnie Garvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033317" start="7318" end="7329" title="Stan Hansen" label="Stan Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q983418" start="7368" end="7374" title="Kamala (wrestler)" label="Kamala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438282" start="7410" end="7415" title="Canek (wrestler)" label="Canek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11312513" start="7468" end="7484" title="Strong Kobayashi" label="Strong Kobayashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45207" start="7497" end="7510" title="Antonio Inoki" label="Antonio Inoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q707647" start="7618" end="7629" title="Harley Race" label="Harley Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560090" start="7653" end="7668" title="Nick Bockwinkel" label="Nick Bockwinkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503209" start="7712" end="7728" title="Showdown at Shea (1976)" label="Showdown at Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q948595" start="7767" end="7779" title="Chuck Wepner" label="Chuck Wepner"/>
<link wikidata="Q36107" start="7896" end="7908" title="Muhammad Ali" label="Muhammad Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="8054" end="8064" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503209" start="8218" end="8234" title="Showdown at Shea (1980)" label="Showdown at Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407507" start="8588" end="8599" title="Killer Khan" label="Killer Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="8698" end="8717" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9156" end="9179" title="Professional wrestling#Disqualification" label="double disqualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085822" start="9304" end="9325" title="Spectrum (arena)" label="Philadelphia Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="9832" end="9845" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150494" start="10083" end="10106" title="New Japan Pro-Wrestling" label="New Japan Pro-Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q705183" start="10138" end="10152" title="Big John Studd" label="Big John Studd"/>
<link wikidata="Q711543" start="10437" end="10447" title="Ken Patera" label="Ken Patera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10605" end="10614" title="Professional wrestling throws#Body slam" label="body slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q50805" start="10644" end="10656" title="WrestleMania I" label="WrestleMania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="10779" end="10780" title="United States dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q888556" start="10897" end="10931" title="Bobby Heenan" label="Bobby &amp;quot;The Brain&amp;quot; Heenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50815" start="10937" end="10951" title="WrestleMania 2" label="WrestleMania 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q14944691" start="11039" end="11051" title="Battle royal (professional wrestling)" label="battle royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="11071" end="11095" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q81324" start="11136" end="11145" title="Bret Hart" label="Bret Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q832412" start="11258" end="11261" title="Catch Wrestling Association" label="CWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q85652" start="11277" end="11286" title="Otto Wanz" label="Otto Wanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="11336" end="11362" title="World Wrestling Federation" label="World Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q732671" start="11432" end="11447" title="King Kong Bundy" label="King Kong Bundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="11669" end="11687" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="The Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q10304746" start="12020" end="12031" title="Jack Tunney" label="Jack Tunney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749291" start="12233" end="12245" title="The Machines (professional wrestling)" label="the Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q586503" start="12247" end="12258" title="Blackjack Mulligan" label="Big Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q595075" start="12263" end="12276" title="Bill Eadie" label="Super Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q59630" start="12346" end="12357" title="Roddy Piper" label="Roddy Piper"/>
<link wikidata="Q461070" start="12474" end="12481" title="gimmick (professional wrestling)" label="gimmick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150494" start="12507" end="12530" title="New Japan Pro-Wrestling" label="New Japan Pro-Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977630" start="12603" end="12615" title="Junji Hirata" label="Junji Hirata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13354" end="13358" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#T" label="turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206729" start="13359" end="13363" title="Heel (professional wrestling)" label="heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q721663" start="13417" end="13425" title="Face (professional wrestling)" label="babyface"/>
<link wikidata="Q44176" start="13472" end="13482" title="Hulk Hogan" label="Hulk Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59630" start="13507" end="13523" title="Piper&amp;#x27;s Pit" label="Piper&amp;#x27;s Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="13582" end="13612" title="WWE World Championship" label="WWF World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13968" end="13976" title="Professional wrestling#Countout" label="countout"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13981" end="13997" title="Professional wrestling#Disqualification" label="disqualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q50817" start="14772" end="14788" title="WrestleMania III" label="WrestleMania III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783207" start="15294" end="15328" title="Saturday Night&amp;#x27;s Main Event X" label="Saturday Night&amp;#x27;s Main Event X"/>
<link wikidata="Q168579" start="15342" end="15357" title="Joe Louis Arena" label="Joe Louis Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q682224" start="15407" end="15415" title="Hercules (wrestler)" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q283673" start="16235" end="16258" title="latissimus dorsi muscle" label="latissimus dorsi muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="16343" end="16356" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7503209" start="16712" end="16728" title="Showdown at Shea (1980)" label="Showdown at Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181264" start="16864" end="16885" title="Hamburg, Pennsylvania" label="Hamburg, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q707647" start="17133" end="17144" title="Harley Race" label="Harley Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438282" start="17146" end="17154" title="Canek (wrestler)" label="El Canek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033317" start="17159" end="17170" title="Stan Hansen" label="Stan Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017557" start="17544" end="17559" title="Survivor Series (1987)" label="Survivor Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q720095" start="17771" end="17783" title="One Man Gang" label="One Man Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q447661" start="17876" end="17891" title="Bam Bam Bigelow" label="Bam Bam Bigelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443451" start="18359" end="18366" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms" label="no-sold"/>
<link wikidata="Q344997" start="18845" end="18891" title="Ted DiBiase" label="the &amp;quot;Million Dollar Man&amp;quot; Ted DiBiase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228934" start="19653" end="19664" title="Dave Hebner" label="Dave Hebner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531270" start="19886" end="19897" title="Earl Hebner" label="Earl Hebner"/>
<link wikidata="Q112988900" start="20093" end="20106" title="Professional wrestling authority figures" label="WWF president"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="20183" end="20186" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995036" start="20201" end="20215" title="The Main Event (1988)" label="The Main Event"/>
<link wikidata="Q50846" start="20226" end="20241" title="WrestleMania IV" label="WrestleMania IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="20702" end="20723" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750912" start="20759" end="20773" title="The Mega Bucks" label="The Mega Bucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q59635" start="20822" end="20856" title="Randy Savage" label="&amp;quot;Macho Man&amp;quot; Randy Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993764" start="20867" end="20882" title="The Mega Powers" label="The Mega Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q311161" start="20908" end="20942" title="Jesse Ventura" label="Jesse &amp;quot;The Body&amp;quot; Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q966588" start="21022" end="21036" title="Miss Elizabeth" label="Miss Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q164260" start="21561" end="21571" title="Jim Duggan" label="Jim Duggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q919492" start="21818" end="21852" title="Jake &amp;quot;The Snake&amp;quot; Roberts" label="Jake &amp;quot;The Snake&amp;quot; Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q387294" start="22082" end="22089" title="kayfabe" label="kayfabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q50848" start="22350" end="22364" title="WrestleMania V" label="WrestleMania V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140048" start="22808" end="22818" title="house show" label="house show"/>
<link wikidata="Q254198" start="22923" end="22952" title="WWF Intercontinental Champion" label="WWF Intercontinental Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q333421" start="22953" end="22973" title="The Ultimate Warrior" label="The Ultimate Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23218" end="23226" title="Glossary of professional wrestling terms#Squash" label="squashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924265" start="23434" end="23447" title="The Heenan Family" label="Heenan Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386431" start="23455" end="23459" title="Haku (wrestler)" label="Haku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897844" start="23490" end="23513" title="the Colossal Connection" label="the Colossal Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q651329" start="23563" end="23578" title="Tully Blanchard" label="Tully Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q690063" start="23583" end="23595" title="Arn Anderson" label="Arn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955744" start="23597" end="23614" title="the Brain Busters" label="the Brain Busters"/>
<link wikidata="Q333421" start="23793" end="23813" title="The Ultimate Warrior" label="The Ultimate Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186409" start="23961" end="23971" title="Demolition (professional wrestling)" label="Demolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q50850" start="24224" end="24239" title="WrestleMania VI" label="WrestleMania VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387241" start="25492" end="25502" title="Giant Baba" label="Giant Baba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270725" start="25593" end="25598" title="Smash (wrestler)" label="Smash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5732798" start="25790" end="25801" title="Herb Abrams" label="Herb Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670446" start="25818" end="25848" title="Universal Wrestling Federation (Herb Abrams)" label="Universal Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q556873" start="25956" end="25974" title="Captain Lou Albano" label="Captain Lou Albano"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="26176" end="26181" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q248713" start="26415" end="26426" title="USA Network" label="USA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q461317" start="26491" end="26503" title="Ray Traylor" label="Big Boss Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q282078" start="26530" end="26541" title="Curt Hennig" label="Mr. Perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q50852" start="26565" end="26581" title="WrestleMania VII" label="WrestleMania VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q980436" start="26758" end="26769" title="The Rockers" label="The Rockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q511484" start="26798" end="26806" title="Mr. Fuji" label="Mr. Fuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q191985" start="26811" end="26829" title="The Orient Express" label="The Orient Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="26951" end="26958" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412965" start="26977" end="26992" title="Kerry Von Erich" label="Kerry Von Erich"/>
<link wikidata="Q115343" start="27191" end="27209" title="Sensational Sherri" label="Sensational Sherri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814482" start="27211" end="27216" title="Slick (wrestling)" label="Slick"/>
<link wikidata="Q511484" start="27222" end="27230" title="Mr. Fuji" label="Mr. Fuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q529443" start="27505" end="27515" title="Jimmy Hart" label="Jimmy Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345719" start="27632" end="27642" title="John Tenta" label="Earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q955033" start="27674" end="27687" title="Gene Okerlund" label="Gene Okerlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q952706" start="27878" end="27885" title="Fred Ottman" label="Tugboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995027" start="27898" end="27919" title="the Natural Disasters" label="the Natural Disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q59291" start="27981" end="27996" title="SummerSlam 1991" label="SummerSlam 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955773" start="28016" end="28032" title="the Bushwhackers" label="the Bushwhackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359107" start="28920" end="28943" title="All Japan Pro Wrestling" label="All Japan Pro Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q604476" start="28969" end="29000" title="Universal Wrestling Association" label="Universal Wrestling Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387241" start="29154" end="29164" title="Giant Baba" label="Giant Baba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670446" start="29255" end="29285" title="Universal Wrestling Federation (Herb Abrams)" label="Universal Wrestling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q705183" start="29309" end="29323" title="Big John Studd" label="Big John Studd"/>
<link wikidata="Q130171" start="29430" end="29458" title="World Championship Wrestling" label="World Championship Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115547" start="29478" end="29503" title="Clash of the Champions XX" label="Clash of the Champions XX"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="29532" end="29535" title="TBS (American TV channel)" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391022" start="29635" end="29647" title="Gordon Solie" label="Gordon Solie"/>
<link wikidata="Q447661" start="29843" end="29858" title="Bam Bam Bigelow" label="Bam Bam Bigelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378867" start="29914" end="29928" title="Bad News Allen" label="Bad News Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10731" start="29954" end="29964" title="Mick Foley" label="Mick Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q314633" start="29969" end="29977" title="Yokozuna (wrestler)" label="Yokozuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q740186" start="30153" end="30166" title="Rusher Kimura" label="Rusher Kimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q11550184" start="30177" end="30189" title="Haruka Eigen" label="Haruka Eigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6782575" start="30191" end="30205" title="Masanobu Fuchi" label="Masanobu Fuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q44810" start="30401" end="30408" title="Bigfoot" label="Bigfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196836" start="30483" end="30509" title="The Six Million Dollar Man" label="The Six Million Dollar Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297720" start="30572" end="30598" title="The Greatest American Hero" label="The Greatest American Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987517" start="30612" end="30630" title="B. J. and the Bear" label="B. J. and the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659146" start="30644" end="30656" title="The Fall Guy" label="The Fall Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q780983" start="30685" end="30690" title="Zorro (1990 TV series)" label="Zorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q740516" start="30823" end="30842" title="Conan the Destroyer" label="Conan the Destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="30917" end="30938" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q550298" start="30993" end="31010" title="Micki &amp;amp; Maude" label="Micki &amp;amp; Maude"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="31129" end="31147" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="The Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805538" start="31377" end="31388" title="Lanny Poffo" label="Lanny Poffo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="31665" end="31675" title="Cameo appearance" label="cameo role"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879454" start="31714" end="31725" title="Trading Mom" label="Trading Mom"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="31862" end="31897" title="Guinness World Records" label="1974 Guinness Book of World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3191343" start="32484" end="32491" title="KCRG-TV" label="KCRG-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q333421" start="32526" end="32546" title="The Ultimate Warrior" label="The Ultimate Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q486439" start="32550" end="32568" title="Cedar Rapids, Iowa" label="Cedar Rapids, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863111" start="32576" end="32595" title="Five Seasons Center" label="Five Seasons Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q506885" start="32740" end="32755" title="William Goldman" label="William Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993547" start="32870" end="32891" title="Which Lie Did I Tell?" label="Which Lie Did I Tell?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="33158" end="33179" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q182455" start="33184" end="33200" title="Wilt Chamberlain" label="Wilt Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842501" start="33445" end="33468" title="Ellerbe, North Carolina" label="Ellerbe, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q440774" start="34009" end="34012" title="QVC" label="QVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806831" start="34200" end="34231" title="Late Night with David Letterman" label="Late Night with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847053" start="34565" end="34576" title="Mike Graham (wrestler)" label="Mike Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q361235" start="34676" end="34688" title="Dusty Rhodes" label="Dusty Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q256279" start="34690" end="34709" title="The Fabulous Moolah" label="The Fabulous Moolah"/>
<link wikidata="Q111945653" start="34787" end="34808" title="Abraham Lincoln Hotel" label="Abraham Lincoln Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q237896" start="34812" end="34833" title="Reading, Pennsylvania" label="Reading, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q711543" start="34964" end="34974" title="Ken Patera" label="Ken Patera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026618" start="35031" end="35043" title="Dick Murdoch" label="Dick Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q311093" start="35148" end="35158" title="Cary Elwes" label="Cary Elwes"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="35293" end="35297" title="NYPD" label="NYPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q50817" start="35488" end="35504" title="WrestleMania III" label="WrestleMania III"/>
<link wikidata="Q390514" start="35613" end="35627" title="Pouilly-Fuissé" label="Pouilly-Fuissé"/>
<link wikidata="Q615057" start="35773" end="35789" title="anesthesiologist" label="anesthesiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306218" start="36314" end="36334" title="pericardial effusion" label="pericardial effusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070910" start="36349" end="36367" title="pericardiocentesis" label="pericardiocentesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312894" start="36371" end="36395" title="Duke University Hospital" label="Duke University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="36475" end="36499" title="Heart failure" label="congestive heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q189580" start="36580" end="36590" title="acromegaly" label="acromegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="37100" end="37108" title="cremated" label="cremated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1842501" start="37422" end="37445" title="Ellerbe, North Carolina" label="Ellerbe, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470724" start="37658" end="37674" title="WWF WrestleMania (1989 video game)" label="WWF WrestleMania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560853" start="37720" end="37744" title="Virtual Pro Wrestling 64" label="Virtual Pro Wrestling 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484974" start="37758" end="37770" title="WWF No Mercy (video game)" label="WWF No Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441907" start="37784" end="37804" title="Legends of Wrestling" label="Legends of Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q290981" start="37818" end="37841" title="Legends of Wrestling II" label="Legends of Wrestling II"/>
<link wikidata="Q934720" start="37869" end="37891" title="WWE SmackDown! vs. Raw" label="WWE SmackDown! vs. Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q577532" start="37905" end="37932" title="WWE SmackDown! vs. Raw 2006" label="WWE SmackDown! vs. Raw 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723946" start="37946" end="37973" title="WWE Legends of WrestleMania" label="WWE Legends of WrestleMania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186739" start="37987" end="38000" title="WWE All Stars" label="WWE All Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156776" start="38014" end="38022" title="WWE 2K14" label="WWE 2K14"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048749" start="38036" end="38044" title="WWE 2K15" label="WWE 2K15"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953622" start="38058" end="38066" title="WWE 2K16" label="WWE 2K16"/>
<link wikidata="Q24292173" start="38080" end="38088" title="WWE 2K17" label="WWE 2K17"/>
<link wikidata="Q30348876" start="38102" end="38110" title="WWE 2K18" label="WWE 2K18"/>
<link wikidata="Q53678016" start="38124" end="38132" title="WWE 2K19" label="WWE 2K19"/>
<link wikidata="Q66144450" start="38146" end="38154" title="WWE 2K20" label="WWE 2K20"/>
<link wikidata="Q96097221" start="38156" end="38176" title="WWE 2K Battlegrounds" label="WWE 2K Battlegrounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q106460549" start="38178" end="38186" title="WWE 2K22" label="WWE 2K22"/>
<link wikidata="Q116393383" start="38188" end="38196" title="WWE 2K23" label="WWE 2K23"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313307" start="38198" end="38206" title="WWE 2K24" label="WWE 2K24"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474463" start="38425" end="38439" title="WWE Home Video" label="Coliseum Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q57296" start="38468" end="38480" title="Michael Cole (wrestling)" label="Michael Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q470015" start="38485" end="38489" title="Tazz" label="Tazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q345692" start="38622" end="38639" title="Lord Alfred Hayes" label="Lord Alfred Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="38820" end="38836" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWF Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="38897" end="38910" title="WWE Hall of Fame (1993)" label="class of 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q938790" start="38969" end="38977" title="My Giant" label="My Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q186485" start="39007" end="39020" title="Billy Crystal" label="Billy Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44378" start="39122" end="39130" title="Big Show" label="Big Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="39490" end="39505" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q420803" start="39603" end="39617" title="Jorge González (wrestler)" label="Giant González"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="39727" end="39735" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914885" start="39804" end="39821" title="Biography (TV series)" label="A&amp;amp;E Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q705172" start="40177" end="40192" title="Gorilla Monsoon" label="Gorilla Monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804482" start="40194" end="40203" title="Tim White (wrestling)" label="Tim White"/>
<link wikidata="Q696313" start="40205" end="40220" title="Arnold Skaaland" label="Arnold Skaaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44430" start="40222" end="40235" title="Vince McMahon" label="Vince McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379790" start="40237" end="40252" title="Freddie Blassie" label="Freddie Blassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q939657" start="40254" end="40269" title="Killer Kowalski" label="Killer Kowalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004287" start="40271" end="40282" title="Rene Goulet" label="Rene Goulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2848904" start="40703" end="40707" title="Andre the Giant Has a Posse" label="Obey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332698" start="40766" end="40780" title="Shepard Fairey" label="Shepard Fairey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14428" start="40863" end="40869" title="Capcom" label="Capcom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40898" end="40902" title="Hugo (Street Fighter)" label="Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q288035" start="40919" end="40933" title="Street Fighter" label="Street Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716989" start="40977" end="40988" title="Final Fight" label="Final Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951487" start="41141" end="41150" title="Box Brown" label="Box Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q336074" start="41279" end="41296" title="Christopher Guest" label="Christopher Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q267097" start="41298" end="41312" title="Mandy Patinkin" label="Mandy Patinkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="41336" end="41344" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="41460" end="41474" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q268711" start="41523" end="41537" title="Ussy-sur-Marne" label="Ussy-sur-Marne"/>
<link wikidata="Q18754" start="41710" end="41713" title="WWE Raw" label="Raw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879177" start="41721" end="41737" title="WrestleMania XXX" label="WrestleMania XXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q28200846" start="41937" end="41968" title="André the Giant Memorial Trophy" label="André the Giant Memorial Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123969" start="42045" end="42051" title="Cesaro (wrestler)" label="Cesaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914885" start="42290" end="42311" title="Biography (TV program)" label="&amp;quot;Biography&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009462" start="42609" end="42625" title="Scott Steindorff" label="Scott Steindorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795288" start="42627" end="42640" title="Dylan Russell" label="Dylan Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="42736" end="42739" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q52158077" start="42778" end="42793" title="André the Giant (film)" label="André the Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q48839918" start="42844" end="42873" title="50th State Big Time Wrestling" label="50th State Big Time Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359107" start="42905" end="42928" title="All Japan Pro Wrestling" label="All Japan Pro Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387241" start="43020" end="43030" title="Giant Baba" label="Giant Baba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061457" start="43033" end="43068" title="Championship Wrestling from Florida" label="Championship Wrestling from Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955783" start="43072" end="43105" title="NWA Florida Tag Team Championship" label="NWA Florida Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43107" end="43113" title="NWA Florida Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q361235" start="43122" end="43134" title="Dusty Rhodes" label="Dusty Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867711" start="43137" end="43180" title="Fédération Française de Catch Professionnel" label="Fédération Française de Catch Professionnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880813" start="43235" end="43252" title="Houston Wrestling" label="Houston Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769687" start="43293" end="43342" title="International Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame" label="International Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799681" start="43362" end="43396" title="International Wrestling Enterprise" label="International Wrestling Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q121297693" start="43400" end="43431" title="IWA World Tag Team Championship (International Wrestling Enterprise)" label="IWA World Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036531" start="43464" end="43487" title="NWA Hollywood Wrestling" label="NWA Hollywood Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q43401815" start="43531" end="43548" title="NWA San Francisco" label="NWA San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150494" start="43585" end="43608" title="New Japan Pro-Wrestling" label="New Japan Pro-Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q877257" start="43612" end="43646" title="G1 Climax" label="International Wrestling Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43648" end="43652" title="G1 Climax#1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43669" end="43673" title="G1 Climax#1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512667" start="43678" end="43699" title="G1 Tag League" label="MSG Tag League (1981)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004287" start="43707" end="43718" title="Rene Goulet" label="Rene Goulet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43751" end="43767" title="New Japan Pro-Wrestling#Greatest 18 Club" label="Greatest 18 Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4520528" start="43779" end="43792" title="Universal Wrestling Federation (Bill Watts)" label="NWA Tri-State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955897" start="43796" end="43867" title="NWA Tri-State Tag Team Championship" label="NWA United States Tag Team Championship &amp;quot;(Tri-State version)&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q865105" start="43899" end="43945" title="Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43949" end="43962" title="Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame and Museum#Inductees" label="Class of 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156863" start="43965" end="43990" title="Pro Wrestling Illustrated" label="Pro Wrestling Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43994" end="44027" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Most Popular Wrestler of the Year" label="Most Popular Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44044" end="44061" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Match of the Year" label="Match of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44102" end="44133" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards#Most Hated Wrestler of the Year" label="Most Hated Wrestler of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383468" start="44144" end="44163" title="List of Pro Wrestling Illustrated awards" label="Editor&amp;#x27;s Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="44258" end="44276" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189642" start="44341" end="44359" title="Stampede Wrestling" label="Stampede Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44363" end="44394" title="Stampede Wrestling#Hall of Fame" label="Stampede Wrestling Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035488" start="44413" end="44453" title="World Championship Wrestling (Australia)" label="World Championship Wrestling (Australia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6955747" start="44457" end="44495" title="NWA Austra-Asian Tag Team Championship" label="NWA Austra-Asian Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44497" end="44503" title="NWA Austra-Asian Tag Team Championship#Title history" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490899" start="44512" end="44522" title="Ron Miller (wrestler)" label="Ron Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="44525" end="44555" title="WWE" label="World Wrestling Federation/WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="44559" end="44593" title="WWE Championship" label="WWF World Heavyweight Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331393" start="44595" end="44601" title="List of WWE Champions" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057833" start="44606" end="44631" title="World Tag Team Championship (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="WWF Tag Team Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823152" start="44633" end="44639" title="List of World Tag Team Champions (WWE, 1971–2010)" label="1 time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386431" start="44648" end="44652" title="Tonga Fifita" label="Haku"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44656" end="44673" title="WrestleMania Axxess#Hall of Fame statue" label="WWE Bronze Statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q964292" start="44684" end="44696" title="Slammy Award" label="Slammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q888556" start="44710" end="44744" title="Bobby Heenan" label="Bobby &amp;quot;The Brain&amp;quot; Heenan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44764" end="44768" title="Slammy Award#1987 Slammy Awards" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="44774" end="44790" title="WWE Hall of Fame" label="WWF Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q36001" start="44792" end="44805" title="WWE Hall of Fame (1993)" label="Class of 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q43898963" start="44809" end="44838" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44842" end="44858" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Feud of the Year" label="Feud of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44870" end="44896" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Most Embarrassing Wrestler" label="Most Embarrassing Wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44907" end="44929" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst Feud of the Year" label="Worst Feud of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44975" end="45005" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst Worked Match of the Year" label="Worst Worked Match of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45059" end="45073" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst Tag Team" label="Worst Tag Team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45091" end="45105" title="List of Wrestling Observer Newsletter awards#Worst Wrestler" label="Worst Wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q373374" start="45128" end="45170" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame" label="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45172" end="45185" title="Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame#Inductees" label="Class of 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q902502" start="45189" end="45220" title="Canoe.com" label="Canadian Wrestling Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516402" start="45256" end="45278" title="List of tallest people" label="List of tallest people"/>
<link wikidata="Q29915489" start="45281" end="45328" title="List of premature professional wrestling deaths" label="List of premature professional wrestling deaths"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2577" wikidata="Q16757" url="?curid=2577" title="Adrastea (moon)">
<text>Adrastea (), also known as , is the second by distance, and the smallest of the four inner moons of Jupiter. It was discovered in photographs taken by &quot;Voyager 2&quot; in 1979, making it the first natural satellite to be discovered from images taken by an interplanetary spacecraft, rather than through a telescope. It was officially named after the mythological Adrasteia, foster mother of the Greek god Zeus—the equivalent of the Roman god Jupiter.

Adrastea is one of the few moons in the Solar System known to orbit its planet in less than the length of that planet&#x27;s day. It orbits at the edge of Jupiter&#x27;s main ring and is thought to be the main contributor of material to the rings of Jupiter. Despite observations made in the 1990s by the &quot;Galileo&quot; spacecraft, very little is known about the moon&#x27;s physical characteristics other than its size and the fact that it is tidally locked to Jupiter.

== Discovery and observations ==
Adrastea was discovered by David C. Jewitt and G. Edward Danielson in &quot;Voyager 2&quot; probe photographs taken on July 8, 1979, and received the designation . Although it appeared only as a dot, it was the first moon to be discovered by an interplanetary spacecraft. Soon after its discovery, two other of the inner moons of Jupiter (Thebe and Metis) were observed in the images taken a few months earlier by &quot;Voyager 1&quot;. The &quot;Galileo&quot; spacecraft was able to determine the moon&#x27;s shape in 1998, but the images remain poor. In 1983, Adrastea was officially named after the Greek nymph Adrastea, the daughter of Zeus and his lover Ananke.

Although the &quot;Juno&quot; orbiter, which arrived at Jupiter in 2016, has a camera called JunoCam, it is almost entirely focused on observations of Jupiter itself. However, if all goes well, it should be able to capture some limited images of the moons Metis and Adrastea.
== Physical characteristics ==
Adrastea has an irregular shape and measures 20×16×14 km across. A surface area estimate would be between 840 and 1,600 (~1,200) km2. This makes it the smallest of the four inner moons. The bulk, composition, and mass of Adrastea are not known, but assuming that its mean density is like that of Amalthea, around 0.86 g/cm3, its mass can be estimated at 2 kg. Amalthea&#x27;s density implies that the moon is composed of water ice with a porosity of 10–15%, and Adrastea may be similar.

No surface details of Adrastea are known, due to the low resolution of available images.

== Orbit ==
Adrastea is the smallest and second-closest member of the inner Jovian satellite family. It orbits Jupiter at 70,200 mph at a radius of about (1.806 Jupiter radii) at the exterior edge of the planet&#x27;s main ring. Its orbit has a very small eccentricity of around 0.0015 and an inclination relative to Jupiter&#x27;s equator of 0.03°, respectively.

Due to tidal locking, Adrastea rotates synchronously with its orbital period, keeping one face always looking toward the planet. Its long axis is aligned towards Jupiter, this being the lowest energy configuration.

The orbit of Adrastea lies inside Jupiter&#x27;s synchronous orbit radius (as does Metis&#x27;s), and as a result, tidal forces are slowly causing its orbit to decay so that it will one day impact Jupiter. If its density is similar to Amalthea&#x27;s then its orbit would actually lie within the fluid Roche limit. However, since it is not breaking up, it must still lie outside its rigid Roche limit.

== Relationship with Jupiter&#x27;s rings ==
Adrastea is the largest contributor to material in Jupiter&#x27;s rings. This appears to consist primarily of material that is ejected from the surfaces of Jupiter&#x27;s four small inner satellites by meteorite impacts. It is easy for the impact ejecta to be lost from these satellites into space. This is due to the satellites&#x27; low density and their surfaces lying close to the edge of their Hill spheres.

It seems that Adrastea is the most copious source of this ring material, as evidenced by the densest ring (the main ring) being located at and within Adrastea&#x27;s orbit. More precisely, the orbit of Adrastea lies near the outer edge of Jupiter&#x27;s main ring. The exact extent of visible ring material depends on the phase angle of the images: in forward-scattered light Adrastea is firmly outside the main ring, but in back-scattered light (which reveals much bigger particles) there appears to also be a narrow ringlet outside Adrastea&#x27;s orbit.

== Notes==

==References==
Cited sources
* 
* 
* (discovery)
* (naming the moon)
* 

==External links==
* Adrastea Profile by NASA&#x27;s Solar System Exploration</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16757" start="0" end="8" title="Adrastea (moon)" label="Adrastea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16757" start="27" end="27" title="Adrastea (moon)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1946" start="85" end="107" title="Inner satellites of Jupiter" label="inner moons of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="157" end="166" title="Voyager 2" label="Voyager 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="202" end="219" title="natural satellite" label="natural satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="276" end="286" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057954" start="368" end="377" title="Adrasteia" label="Adrasteia"/>
<link wikidata="Q516588" start="400" end="409" title="Greek god" label="Greek god"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="410" end="414" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="437" end="446" title="Roman god" label="Roman god"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="447" end="454" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="497" end="509" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="612" end="636" title="Rings of Jupiter#Main ring" label="Jupiter&amp;#x27;s main ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060" start="698" end="714" title="rings of Jupiter" label="rings of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q105425030" start="762" end="792" title="Galileo (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Galileo&amp;quot; spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q109144" start="906" end="920" title="tidally locked" label="tidally locked"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="924" end="931" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q382992" start="994" end="1009" title="David Jewitt" label="David C. Jewitt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1014" end="1033" title="G. Edward Danielson" label="G. Edward Danielson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48475" start="1043" end="1052" title="Voyager 2" label="Voyager 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946" start="1288" end="1304" title="moons of Jupiter" label="moons of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16765" start="1306" end="1311" title="Thebe (moon)" label="Thebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16755" start="1316" end="1321" title="Metis (moon)" label="Metis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48469" start="1387" end="1396" title="Voyager 1" label="Voyager 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q105425030" start="1408" end="1438" title="Galileo spacecraft" label="&amp;quot;Galileo&amp;quot; spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057954" start="1581" end="1589" title="Adrastea (mythology)" label="Adrastea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="1607" end="1611" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332246" start="1626" end="1632" title="Ananke (mythology)" label="Ananke"/>
<link wikidata="Q48546" start="1654" end="1658" title="Juno (spacecraft)" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314027" start="1728" end="1735" title="JunoCam" label="JunoCam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16755" start="1891" end="1896" title="Metis (moon)" label="Metis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257" start="2238" end="2246" title="Amalthea (moon)" label="Amalthea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23392" start="2369" end="2372" title="ice" label="ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q622669" start="2380" end="2388" title="porosity" label="porosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946" start="2590" end="2619" title="inner satellites of Jupiter" label="inner Jovian satellite family"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="2631" end="2638" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2738" end="2747" title="Rings of Jupiter#Main ring" label="main ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="2776" end="2788" title="orbital eccentricity" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112212" start="2813" end="2824" title="inclination" label="inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q109144" start="2892" end="2905" title="tidal locking" label="tidal locking"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="3135" end="3142" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q940979" start="3150" end="3167" title="synchronous orbit" label="synchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16755" start="3184" end="3189" title="Metis (moon)" label="Metis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477230" start="3216" end="3227" title="tidal deceleration" label="tidal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q232086" start="3403" end="3414" title="Roche limit" label="Roche limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060" start="3600" end="3620" title="rings of Jupiter" label="Jupiter&amp;#x27;s rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q498792" start="3948" end="3959" title="Hill sphere" label="Hill sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473287" start="4315" end="4338" title="forward scattering" label="forward-scattered light"/>
<link wikidata="Q916258" start="4388" end="4408" title="Backscatter" label="back-scattered light"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2578" wikidata="Q103872149" url="?curid=2578" title="Amalthea">
<text>Amalthea may refer to:

*Amalthea (mythology), the foster-mother of Zeus in Greek mythology
*Amalthea (moon), a moon of Jupiter
*113 Amalthea, a main-belt asteroid
*Cumaean Sibyl or Amalthea, a priestess presiding over the Apollonian oracle at Cumae, a Greek colony near Naples, Italy
*Lady Amalthea, a character in &quot;The Last Unicorn&quot;
*Amalthea Cellars, a winery in New Jersey, United States

==Ships==
*&quot;Amalthea&quot; (1863), a barquentine bombed by Anton Nilson in 1908
*&quot;Amalthea&quot; (1881), a steam yacht built as &quot;Iolanthe&quot;, renamed &quot;Amalthæa&quot;, and later renamed 
* (1985), a cargo ship</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q103872149" start="0" end="8" title="Amalthea" label="Amalthea"/>
<link wikidata="Q107785" start="25" end="45" title="Amalthea (mythology)" label="Amalthea (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257" start="93" end="108" title="Amalthea (moon)" label="Amalthea (moon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q136256" start="129" end="141" title="113 Amalthea" label="113 Amalthea"/>
<link wikidata="Q762835" start="165" end="178" title="Cumaean Sibyl" label="Cumaean Sibyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q967268" start="322" end="338" title="The Last Unicorn" label="The Last Unicorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705426" start="346" end="362" title="Amalthea Cellars" label="Amalthea Cellars"/>
<link wikidata="Q592199" start="467" end="479" title="Anton Nilson" label="Anton Nilson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2580" wikidata="Q225462" url="?curid=2580" title="Ananke (disambiguation)">
<text>Ananke is a deity in Greek mythology. Ananke may also refer to:

*Ananke (moon), a moon of Jupiter
*Ananke group, a group of satellites of Jupiter that follow similar orbits to Ananke
*&quot;Ananke&quot;, a short story by Stanisław Lem from &quot;Tales of Pirx the Pilot&quot;
*&quot;Cosmopterix ananke&quot;, a moth of family Cosmopterigidae</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q332246" start="0" end="6" title="Ananke" label="Ananke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16960" start="66" end="79" title="Ananke (moon)" label="Ananke (moon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108916" start="100" end="112" title="Ananke group" label="Ananke group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="247" end="270" title="Tales of Pirx the Pilot#Stories" label="Tales of Pirx the Pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174392" start="284" end="302" title="Cosmopterix ananke" label="Cosmopterix ananke"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2581" wikidata="Q11354" url="?curid=2581" title="Apache HTTP Server">
<text>The Apache HTTP Server ( ) is a free and open-source cross-platform web server, released under the terms of Apache License 2.0. It is developed and maintained by a community of developers under the auspices of the Apache Software Foundation.

The vast majority of Apache HTTP Server instances run on a Linux distribution, but current versions also run on Microsoft Windows, OpenVMS, and a wide variety of Unix-like systems. Past versions also ran on NetWare, OS/2 and other operating systems, including ports to mainframes.

Originally based on the NCSA HTTPd server, development of Apache began in early 1995 after work on the NCSA code stalled. Apache played a key role in the initial growth of the World Wide Web, quickly overtaking NCSA HTTPd as the dominant HTTP server. In 2009, it became the first web server software to serve more than 100 million websites.

, Netcraft estimated that Apache served 23.04% of the million busiest websites, while Nginx served 
22.01%; Cloudflare at 19.53% and Microsoft Internet Information Services at 5.78% rounded out the top four. For some of Netcraft&#x27;s other stats, Nginx is ahead of Apache. According to W3Techs&#x27; review of all web sites, in June 2022 Apache was ranked second at 31.4% and Nginx first at 33.6%, with Cloudflare Server third at 21.6%.

==Name==
According to The Apache Software Foundation, its name was chosen &quot;from respect for the various Native American nations collectively referred to as Apache, well-known for their superior skills in warfare strategy and their inexhaustible endurance&quot;. This was in a context in which it seemed that the open internet—based on free exchange of open source code—appeared to be soon subjected to a kind of conquer by proprietary software vendor Microsoft; Apache co-creator Brian Behlendorf—originator of the name—saw his effort somewhat parallel that of Geronimo, Chief of the last of the free Apache peoples. But it conceded that the name &quot;also makes a cute pun on &#x27;a patchy web server&#x27;—a server made from a series of patches&quot;.

There are other sources for the &quot;patchy&quot; software pun theory, including the project&#x27;s official documentation in 1995, which stated: &quot;Apache is a cute name which stuck. It was based on some existing code and a series of software patches, a pun on &#x27;A PAtCHy&#x27; server.&quot;

But in an April 2000 interview, Behlendorf asserted that the origins of Apache were not a pun, stating:

In January 2023, the US-based non-profit Natives in Tech accused the Apache Software Foundation of cultural appropriation and urged them to change the foundation&#x27;s name, and consequently also the names of the software projects it hosts.

When Apache is running under Unix, its process name is , which is short for &quot;HTTP daemon&quot;.

==Feature overview==
Apache supports a variety of features, many implemented as compiled modules which extend the core functionality. These can range from authentication schemes to supporting server-side programming languages such as Perl, Python, Tcl and PHP. Popular authentication modules include mod_access, mod_auth, mod_digest, and mod_auth_digest, the successor to mod_digest. A sample of other features include Secure Sockets Layer and Transport Layer Security support (mod_ssl), a proxy module (mod_proxy), a URL rewriting module (mod_rewrite), custom log files (mod_log_config), and filtering support (mod_include and mod_ext_filter).

Popular compression methods on Apache include the external extension module, mod_gzip, implemented to help with reduction of the size (weight) of web pages served over HTTP. ModSecurity is an open source intrusion detection and prevention engine for Web applications. Apache logs can be analyzed through a Web browser using free scripts, such as AWStats/W3Perl or Visitors.

Virtual hosting allows one Apache installation to serve many different websites. For example, one computer with one Apache installation could simultaneously serve codice_1, codice_2, codice_3, etc.

Apache features configurable error messages, DBMS-based authentication databases, content negotiation and supports several graphical user interfaces (GUIs).

It supports password authentication and digital certificate authentication. Because the source code is freely available, anyone can adapt the server for specific needs, and there is a large public library of Apache add-ons.

A more detailed list of features is provided below:
* Loadable Dynamic Modules
* Multiple Request Processing modes (MPMs) including Event-based/Async, Threaded and Prefork.
* Highly scalable (easily handles more than 10,000 simultaneous connections)
* Handling of static files, index files, auto-indexing and content negotiation
* .htaccess per-directory configuration support
* Reverse proxy with caching
** Load balancing with in-band health checks
** Multiple load balancing mechanisms
** Fault tolerance and Failover with automatic recovery
** WebSocket, FastCGI, SCGI, AJP and uWSGI support with caching
** Dynamic configuration
* TLS/SSL with SNI and OCSP stapling support, via OpenSSL or wolfSSL.
* Name- and IP address-based virtual servers
* IPv6-compatible
* HTTP/2 support
* Fine-grained authentication and authorization access control
* gzip compression and decompression
* URL rewriting
* Headers and content rewriting
* Custom logging with rotation
* Concurrent connection limiting
* Request processing rate limiting
* Bandwidth throttling
* Server Side Includes
* IP address-based geolocation
* User and Session tracking
* WebDAV
* Embedded Perl, PHP and Lua scripting
* CGI support
* codice_4 per-user web-pages
* Generic expression parser
* Real-time status views
* FTP support (by a separate module)

==Performance==
Instead of implementing a single architecture, Apache provides a variety of MultiProcessing Modules (MPMs), which allow it to run in either a process-based mode, a hybrid (process and thread) mode, or an event-hybrid mode, in order to better match the demands of each particular infrastructure. Choice of MPM and configuration is therefore important. Where compromises in performance must be made, Apache is designed to reduce latency and increase throughput relative to simply handling more requests, thus ensuring consistent and reliable processing of requests within reasonable time-frames.

For delivering static pages, Apache 2.2 series was considered significantly slower than nginx and varnish. To address this issue, the Apache developers created the Event MPM, which mixes the use of several processes and several threads per process in an asynchronous event-based loop. This architecture as implemented in the Apache 2.4 series performs at least as well as event-based web servers, according to Jim Jagielski and other independent sources. However, some independent but significantly outdated benchmarks show that it is still half as fast as nginx, e.g.

==Licensing==
The Apache HTTP Server codebase was relicensed to the Apache 2.0 License (from the previous 1.1 license) in January 2004, and Apache HTTP Server 1.3.31 and 2.0.49 were the first releases using the new license.

The OpenBSD project did not like the change and continued the use of pre-2.0 Apache versions, effectively forking Apache 1.3.x for its purposes. They initially replaced it with Nginx, and soon after made their own replacement, OpenBSD Httpd, based on the Relayd project.

===Versions===

Version 1.1:
The Apache License 1.1 was approved by the ASF in 2000: The primary change from the 1.0 license is in the &#x27;advertising clause&#x27; (section 3 of the 1.0 license); derived products are no longer required to include attribution in their advertising materials, only in their documentation.

Version 2.0:
The ASF adopted the Apache License 2.0 in January 2004. The stated goals of the license included making the license easier for non-ASF projects to use, improving compatibility with GPL-based software, allowing the license to be included by reference instead of listed in every file, clarifying the license on contributions, and requiring a patent license on contributions that necessarily infringe a contributor&#x27;s own patents.

==Development==

The Apache HTTP Server Project is a collaborative software development effort aimed at creating a robust, commercial-grade, feature-rich and freely available source code implementation of an HTTP (Web) server. The project is jointly managed by a group of volunteers located around the world, using the Internet and the Web to communicate, plan, and develop the server and its related documentation. This project is part of the Apache Software Foundation. In addition, hundreds of users have contributed ideas, code, and documentation to the project.

Apache 2.4 dropped support for BeOS, TPF, A/UX, NeXT, and Tandem platforms.

==Security==

Apache, like other server software, can be hacked and exploited. The main Apache attack tool is Slowloris, which exploits a bug in Apache software. It creates many sockets and keeps each of them alive and busy by sending several bytes (known as &quot;keep-alive headers&quot;) to let the server know that the computer is still connected and not experiencing network problems. The Apache developers have addressed Slowloris with several modules to limit the damage caused; the Apache modules mod_limitipconn, mod_qos, mod_evasive, mod security, mod_noloris, and mod_antiloris have all been suggested as means of reducing the likelihood of a successful Slowloris attack. Since Apache 2.2.15, Apache ships the module mod_reqtimeout as the official solution supported by the developers.

==See also==

* .htaccess
* .htpasswd
* ApacheBench
* Comparison of web server software
* IBM HTTP Server
* LAMP (software bundle)
* XAMPP
* List of Apache modules
*List of free and open-source software packages
* POSSE project
* suEXEC
* Apache Tomcat - another web server developed by the Apache Software Foundation

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11354" start="4" end="22" title="Apache HTTP Server" label="Apache HTTP Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="32" end="52" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="68" end="78" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q616526" start="108" end="126" title="Apache License" label="Apache License 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q489709" start="214" end="240" title="Apache Software Foundation" label="Apache Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="302" end="320" title="Linux distribution" label="Linux distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="355" end="372" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q479882" start="374" end="381" title="OpenVMS" label="OpenVMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="405" end="414" title="Unix-like" label="Unix-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q691990" start="450" end="457" title="NetWare" label="NetWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="459" end="463" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q970894" start="549" end="559" title="NCSA HTTPd" label="NCSA HTTPd"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="701" end="715" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="763" end="767" title="HTTP" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="856" end="863" title="website" label="website"/>
<link wikidata="Q681027" start="869" end="877" title="Netcraft" label="Netcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q306144" start="953" end="958" title="Nginx" label="Nginx"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778915" start="975" end="985" title="Cloudflare" label="Cloudflare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="1000" end="1009" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q11341" start="1010" end="1039" title="Internet Information Services" label="Internet Information Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q489709" start="1329" end="1359" title="The Apache Software Foundation" label="The Apache Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="1416" end="1431" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="1468" end="1474" title="Apache" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="1763" end="1772" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q93016" start="1792" end="1808" title="Brian Behlendorf" label="Brian Behlendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791" start="1873" end="1881" title="Geronimo" label="Geronimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="1983" end="1986" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="2005" end="2015" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q208218" start="2053" end="2060" title="Patch (computing)" label="patches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193258" start="2575" end="2597" title="cultural appropriation" label="cultural appropriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="2748" end="2752" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q308980" start="2806" end="2812" title="Daemon (computing)" label="daemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="2901" end="2909" title="Compiler" label="compiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453666" start="2910" end="2917" title="Modular programming" label="modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q212108" start="2976" end="2990" title="authentication" label="authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q146813" start="3013" end="3024" title="server-side" label="server-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q292390" start="3055" end="3059" title="mod perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q288423" start="3061" end="3067" title="mod python" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288" start="3069" end="3072" title="Tcl" label="Tcl"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="3077" end="3080" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3240" end="3260" title="Transport Layer Security#SSL 1.0, 2.0, and 3.0" label="Secure Sockets Layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="3265" end="3289" title="Transport Layer Security" label="Transport Layer Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254048" start="3299" end="3306" title="mod_ssl" label="mod_ssl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11189" start="3311" end="3316" title="proxy server" label="proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887981" start="3325" end="3334" title="mod_proxy" label="mod_proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188382" start="3339" end="3352" title="URL rewriting" label="URL rewriting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="3635" end="3639" title="HTTP" label="HTTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122672" start="3641" end="3652" title="ModSecurity" label="ModSecurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q300240" start="3813" end="3820" title="AWStats" label="AWStats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564573" start="3821" end="3827" title="W3Perl" label="W3Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q588365" start="3842" end="3857" title="Virtual hosting" label="Virtual hosting"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="3913" end="3921" title="websites" label="websites"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="4086" end="4090" title="Database management system" label="DBMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128629" start="4123" end="4142" title="content negotiation" label="content negotiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="4164" end="4188" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q274758" start="4239" end="4258" title="digital certificate" label="digital certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135914" start="4556" end="4573" title="Event driven programming" label="Event-based/Async"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474734" start="4631" end="4672" title="c10k problem" label="more than 10,000 simultaneous connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192309" start="4803" end="4816" title="Reverse proxy" label="Reverse proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q575614" start="4833" end="4847" title="Load balancing (computing)" label="Load balancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140932" start="4916" end="4931" title="Fault-tolerant design" label="Fault tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q859938" start="4972" end="4981" title="WebSocket" label="WebSocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397631" start="4983" end="4990" title="FastCGI" label="FastCGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538532" start="4992" end="4996" title="Simple Common Gateway Interface" label="SCGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q616890" start="4998" end="5001" title="Apache JServ Protocol" label="AJP"/>
<link wikidata="Q30894456" start="5006" end="5011" title="uWSGI" label="uWSGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="5060" end="5067" title="Transport Layer Security" label="TLS/SSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q906028" start="5073" end="5076" title="Server Name Indication" label="SNI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072382" start="5081" end="5094" title="OCSP stapling" label="OCSP stapling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="5108" end="5115" title="OpenSSL" label="OpenSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197351" start="5119" end="5126" title="wolfSSL" label="wolfSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551624" start="5175" end="5179" title="IPv6" label="IPv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q739120" start="5193" end="5199" title="HTTP/2" label="HTTP/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q283647" start="5273" end="5277" title="gzip" label="gzip"/>
<link wikidata="Q478819" start="5457" end="5477" title="Bandwidth throttling" label="Bandwidth throttling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411939" start="5480" end="5500" title="Server Side Includes" label="Server Side Includes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="5503" end="5513" title="IP address" label="IP address"/>
<link wikidata="Q638949" start="5520" end="5531" title="geolocation" label="geolocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q564329" start="5562" end="5568" title="WebDAV" label="WebDAV"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="5580" end="5584" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="5586" end="5589" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q207316" start="5594" end="5597" title="Lua (programming language)" label="Lua"/>
<link wikidata="Q264364" start="5610" end="5613" title="Common Gateway Interface" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="5707" end="5710" title="FTP" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q205663" start="5901" end="5908" title="Process (computing)" label="process"/>
<link wikidata="Q213092" start="5943" end="5949" title="Thread (computing)" label="thread"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6186" end="6193" title="Latency (engineering)#Computer hardware and operating systems" label="latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383412" start="6207" end="6217" title="throughput" label="throughput"/>
<link wikidata="Q306144" start="6442" end="6447" title="nginx" label="nginx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602447" start="6452" end="6459" title="Varnish (software)" label="varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25203946" start="6608" end="6620" title="Asynchrony (computer programming)" label="asynchronous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349935" start="6621" end="6637" title="Event loop" label="event-based loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195869" start="6764" end="6777" title="Jim Jagielski" label="Jim Jagielski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425187" start="6961" end="6969" title="codebase" label="codebase"/>
<link wikidata="Q24885225" start="6974" end="6984" title="Software relicensing" label="relicensed"/>
<link wikidata="Q616526" start="6992" end="7010" title="Apache License" label="Apache 2.0 License"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211457" start="7116" end="7124" title="Software release life cycle" label="releases"/>
<link wikidata="Q34215" start="7153" end="7160" title="OpenBSD" label="OpenBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q332903" start="7255" end="7262" title="Fork (software development)" label="forking"/>
<link wikidata="Q306144" start="7326" end="7331" title="Nginx" label="Nginx"/>
<link wikidata="Q489709" start="8634" end="8660" title="The Apache Software Foundation" label="Apache Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q62563" start="8789" end="8793" title="BeOS" label="BeOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426122" start="8795" end="8798" title="Transaction Processing Facility" label="TPF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140097" start="8800" end="8804" title="A/UX" label="A/UX"/>
<link wikidata="Q308993" start="8806" end="8810" title="NeXT" label="NeXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783846" start="8816" end="8822" title="Tandem_Computers" label="Tandem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848546" start="8945" end="8954" title="Slowloris (computer security)" label="Slowloris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941724" start="9357" end="9364" title="mod_qos" label="mod_qos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122672" start="9379" end="9391" title="mod security" label="mod security"/>
<link wikidata="Q159900" start="9649" end="9658" title=".htaccess" label=".htaccess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996704" start="9661" end="9670" title=".htpasswd" label=".htpasswd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4778888" start="9673" end="9684" title="ApacheBench" label="ApacheBench"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508366" start="9687" end="9720" title="Comparison of web server software" label="Comparison of web server software"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536917" start="9723" end="9738" title="IBM HTTP Server" label="IBM HTTP Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q191342" start="9741" end="9763" title="LAMP (software bundle)" label="LAMP (software bundle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q324073" start="9766" end="9771" title="XAMPP" label="XAMPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561788" start="9774" end="9796" title="List of Apache modules" label="List of Apache modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q565552" start="9798" end="9844" title="List of free and open-source software packages" label="List of free and open-source software packages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120036" start="9847" end="9860" title="POSSE project" label="POSSE project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941728" start="9863" end="9869" title="suEXEC" label="suEXEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q507430" start="9872" end="9885" title="Apache Tomcat" label="Apache Tomcat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2582" wikidata="Q4734855" url="?curid=2582" title="Alph">
<text>Alph may refer to:
*Alpheus River, a river on the Peloponnese
*Alph River, a river in Antarctica
*Alph Lake, a lake in Antarctica
*Alph, a fictional river in the poem &quot;Kubla Khan&quot; by Samuel Taylor Coleridge
*Alph, a character from &quot;Luminous Arc&quot;
*Alph, a character from the game &quot;Pikmin 3&quot;

==See also==
*ALF (disambiguation)
*Alph Lyla, the in-house band of video game developer Capcom</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4734855" start="0" end="4" title="Alph" label="Alph"/>
<link wikidata="Q941745" start="20" end="33" title="Alfeios" label="Alpheus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840070" start="63" end="73" title="Alph River" label="Alph River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840070" start="98" end="107" title="Alph Lake" label="Alph Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089037" start="173" end="183" title="Kubla Khan" label="Kubla Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178243" start="247" end="259" title="Luminous Arc (video game)" label="Luminous Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662707" start="305" end="313" title="Pikmin 3" label="Pikmin 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q219288" start="335" end="355" title="ALF (disambiguation)" label="ALF (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734865" start="357" end="366" title="Alph Lyla" label="Alph Lyla"/>
</links>
</doc>
