<doc id="2257" wikidata="Q49482" url="?curid=2257" title="Apostolic succession">
<text>Apostolic succession is the method whereby the ministry of the Christian Church is considered by some Christian denominations to be derived from the apostles by a continuous succession, which has usually been associated with a claim that the succession is through a series of bishops. Those of the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Church of the East, Scandinavian Lutheran, Anglican, Moravian, Hussite, and Old Catholic traditions maintain that a bishop&#x27;s orders are neither regular nor valid without consecration through apostolic succession. These traditions do not always consider the episcopal consecrations of all of the other traditions as valid.

This series was seen originally as that of the bishops of a particular see founded by one or more of the apostles. According to historian Justo L. González, apostolic succession is generally understood today as meaning a series of bishops, regardless of see, each consecrated by other bishops, themselves consecrated similarly in a succession going back to the apostles. According to the Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church, &quot;apostolic succession&quot; means more than a mere transmission of powers. It is succession in a church which witnesses to the apostolic faith, in communion with the other churches, witnesses of the same apostolic faith. The &quot;see (&quot;cathedra&quot;) plays an important role in inserting the bishop into the heart of ecclesial apostolicity&quot;, but once ordained, the bishop becomes in his church the guarantor of apostolicity and becomes a successor of the apostles.

Those who hold for the importance of apostolic succession via episcopal laying on of hands appeal to the New Testament which, they say, implies a personal apostolic succession, from Paul to Timothy and Titus, for example. They appeal as well to other documents of the early Church, especially the Epistle of Clement. In this context, Clement explicitly states that the apostles appointed bishops as successors and directed that these bishops should in turn appoint their own successors; given this, such leaders of the Church were not to be removed without cause and not in this way. Further, proponents of the necessity of the personal apostolic succession of bishops within the Church point to the universal practice of the undivided early Church, up to AD 431, before it was divided into the Church of the East, Oriental Orthodoxy, the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Roman Catholic Church.

Some Christians, including many Protestants, deny the need for this type of continuity and severely question the historical claims involved; Anglican academic Eric G. Jay comments that the account given of the emergence of the episcopate in Chapter III of the dogmatic constitution &quot;Lumen gentium&quot; (1964) &quot;is very sketchy, and many ambiguities in the early history of the Christian ministry are passed over&quot;.

== Definitions ==
Michael Ramsey, an English Anglican bishop and the Archbishop of Canterbury (1961–1974), described three meanings of &quot;apostolic succession&quot;:
# One bishop succeeding another in the same see meant that there was a continuity of teaching: &quot;while the Church as a whole is the vessel into which the truth is poured, the Bishops are an important organ in carrying out this task&quot;.
# The bishops were also successors of the apostles in that &quot;the they performed of preaching, governing and ordaining were the same as the Apostles had performed&quot;.
# It is also used to signify that &quot;grace is transmitted from the Apostles by each generation of bishops through the imposition of hands&quot;.
He adds that this last has been controversial in that it has been claimed that this aspect of the doctrine is not found before the time of Augustine of Hippo, while others allege that it is implicit in the Church of the second and third centuries.

In its 1982 statement on Baptism, Eucharist and Ministry, the Faith and Order Commission of the World Council of Churches stated that &quot;the primary manifestation of apostolic succession is to be found in the apostolic tradition of the Church as a whole. ... Under the particular historical circumstances of the growing Church in the early centuries, the succession of bishops became one of the ways, together with the transmission of the Gospel and the life of the community, in which the apostolic tradition of the Church was expressed.&quot; It spoke of episcopal succession as something that churches that do not have bishops can see &quot;as a sign, though not a guarantee, of the continuity and unity of the Church&quot; and that all churches can see &quot;as a sign of the apostolicity of the life of the whole church&quot;.

The Porvoo Common Statement (1996), agreed to by the Anglican churches of the British Isles and most of the Lutheran churches of Scandinavia and the Baltic, echoed the Munich (1982) and Finland (1988) statements of the Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue between the Roman Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church by stating that &quot;the continuity signified in the consecration of a bishop to episcopal ministry cannot be divorced from the continuity of life and witness of the diocese to which he is called&quot;.

Some Anglicans, in addition to other Protestants, held that apostolic succession &quot;may also be understood as a continuity in doctrinal teaching from the time of the apostles to the present&quot;. For example, the British Methodist Conference locates the &quot;true continuity&quot; with the Church of past ages in &quot;the continuity of Christian experience, the fellowship in the gift of the one Spirit; in the continuity in the allegiance to one Lord, the continued proclamation of the message; the continued acceptance of the mission&quot;.

The teaching of the Second Vatican Council on apostolic succession has been summed up as follows:

==In the early Fathers==
According to International Theological Commission (ITC), conflicts could not always be avoided between individuals among the New Testament communities; Paul appealed to his apostolic authority when there was a disagreement about the Gospel or principles of Christian life. How the development of apostolic government proceeded is difficult to say accurately because of the paucity of relevant documents. ITC says that the apostles or their closest assistants or their successors directed the local colleges of &quot;episkopoi&quot; and &quot;presbyteroi&quot; by the end of the first century; while by the beginning of the second century the figure of a single bishop, as the head of the communities, appears explicitly in the letters of Ignatius of Antioch ( 35-107). In the &quot;Epistle to the Smyrnaeans&quot;, Ignatius wrote about three degrees ministry:
Ramsey says that the doctrine was formulated in the second century in the first of the three senses given by him, originally as a response to Gnostic claims of having received secret teaching from Christ or the apostles; it emphasised the public manner in which the apostles had passed on authentic teaching to those whom they entrusted with the care of the churches they founded and that these in turn had passed it on to their successors. Ramsey argues that only later was it given a different meaning, a process in which Augustine (Bishop of Hippo Regis, 395–430) played a part by emphasising the idea of &quot;the link from consecrator to consecrated whereby the grace of order was handed on&quot;.

Writing in about AD 94, Clement of Rome states that the apostles appointed successors to continue their work where they had planted churches and for these in their turn to do the same because they foresaw the risk of discord: &quot;Our Apostles, too, by the instruction of our Lord Jesus Christ, knew that strife would arise concerning the dignity of a bishop; and on this account, having received perfect foreknowledge, they appointed the above-mentioned as bishops and deacons: and then gave a rule of succession, in order that, when they had fallen asleep, other men, who had been approved, might succeed to their ministry.&quot; According to Anglican Eric G. Jay, the interpretation of his writing is disputed, but it is clear that he supports some sort of approved continuation of the ministry exercised by the apostles which in its turn was derived from Christ.

Hegesippus (180?) and Irenaeus (180) introduce explicitly the idea of the bishop&#x27;s succession in office as a guarantee of the truth of what he preached in that it could be traced back to the apostles, and they produced succession lists to back this up. That this succession depended on the fact of ordination to a vacant see and the status of those who administered the ordination is seldom commented on. Woollcombe also states that no one questioned the apostolicity of the See of Alexandria despite the fact that its popes were consecrated by the college of presbyters up till the time of the Council of Nicaea in 325. On the contrary, other sources clearly state that Mark the Evangelist is the first bishop of Alexandria (Pope of Alexandria); then he ordained Annianus as his successor bishop (2nd Pope) as told by Eusebius.

James F. Puglisi, director of Centro Pro Unione, made a conclusion about Irenaeus&#x27; writings: &quot;the terms &quot;episkopos&quot; and &quot;presbyteros&quot; are interchangeable, but the term &quot;episkopos&quot; [bishop] is applied to the person who is established in every Church by the apostles and their successors&quot;. According to Eric G. Jay, Irenaeus also refers to a succession of presbyters who preserve the tradition &quot;which originates from the apostles&quot; and later goes on to speak of their having &quot;an infallible gift of truth&quot; [&quot;charisma veritatis certum&quot;]. Jay comments that this is sometimes seen as an early reference to the idea of the transmission of grace through the apostolic succession which in later centuries was understood as being specifically transmitted through the laying on of hands by a bishop within the apostolic succession (the &quot;pipeline theory&quot;). He warns that this is open to the grave objection that it makes grace a (quasi)material commodity and represents an almost mechanical method of imparting what is by definition a free gift. He adds that the idea cannot be squeezed out of Irenaeus&#x27; words.
Writing a little later, Tertullian makes the same main point but adds expressly that recently founded churches (such as his own in Carthage) could be considered apostolic if they had &quot;derived the tradition of faith and the seeds of doctrine&quot; from an apostolic church. His disciple, Cyprian (Bishop of Carthage 248–58) appeals to the same fundamental principle of election to a vacant see in the aftermath of the Decian Persecution when denying the legitimacy of his rigorist rival in Carthage and that of the anti-pope Novatian in Rome.

The emphasis is now on legitimating Cyprian&#x27;s episcopal ministry as a whole and specifically his exclusive right to administer discipline to the lapsed rather than on the content of what is taught. Cyprian also laid great emphasis on the fact that any minister who broke with the Church lost &quot;ipso facto&quot; the gift of the Spirit which had validated his orders. This meant that the minister would have no power or authority to celebrate an efficacious sacrament.

==As transmission of grace==
For the adherents of this understanding of apostolic succession, grace is transmitted during episcopal consecrations (the ordination of bishops) by the laying on of hands of bishops previously consecrated within the apostolic succession. They hold that this lineage of ordination derives from the Twelve Apostles, thus making the Church the continuation of the early Apostolic Christian community. They see it as one of four elements that define the true Church of Jesus Christ, and legitimize the ministry of its clergy, since only a bishop within the succession can perform valid ordinations and only bishops and presbyters (priests) ordained by bishops in the apostolic succession can validly celebrate (or &quot;confect&quot;) several of the other sacraments, including the Eucharist, reconciliation of penitents, confirmation and anointing of the sick. Everett Ferguson argued that Hippolytus, in &quot;Apostolic Tradition 9&quot;, is the first known source to state that only bishops have the authority to ordain; and normally at least three bishops were required to ordain another bishop. Cyprian also asserts that &quot;if any one is not with the bishop, he is not in the church&quot;.

This position was stated by John Henry Newman, before his conversion from Anglicanism to Roman Catholicism, in &quot;Tracts for the Times&quot;:
We [priests of the Church of England] have been born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. The Lord Jesus Christ gave His Spirit to His Apostles; they in turn laid their hands on those who should succeed them; and these again on others; and so the sacred gift has been handed down to our present bishops, who have appointed us as their assistants, and in some sense representatives. ... we must necessarily consider none to be ordained who have not been ordained.

Ferguson, in &quot;Encyclopedia of Early Christianity&quot;, says that example of James and the elders (presbyters) of the Jerusalem Church (Acts 21:18) may have provided a model for the development of &#x27;monepiscopacy&#x27;, in which James&#x27; position has figured conspicuously in modern theories about the rise of the monepiscopacy. Raymond E. Brown says that in the earlier stage (before the third century and perhaps earlier) there were plural bishops or overseers (&quot;presbyter-bishops&quot;) in an individual community; in the later stage changed to only one bishop per community. Little is known about how the early bishops were formally chosen or appointed; afterwards the Church developed a regularized pattern of selection and ordination of bishops, and from the third century on that was universally applied. Brown asserts that the ministry was not ordained by the Church to act on its own authority, but as an important part to continue the ministry of Jesus Christ and helps to make the Church what it is.

Raymond E. Brown also states that by the early second century, as written in the letters of Ignatius of Antioch, in the threefold structure of the single bishop, plural presbyters, and plural deacons, the celebration of the Eucharist is assigned to the bishop alone; the bishop may delegate others when he goes away. At the Last Supper, Jesus says to those present, who were or included the Twelve Apostles, &quot;Do this in remembrance of me,&quot; Brown presumes that the Twelve were remembered as presiding at the Eucharist. But they could scarcely have been present at all the Eucharists of the first century, and no information in New Testament whether a person was regularly assigned to do this task and, if so, who that person was. After all the Church regulated and regularized the celebration of the Eucharist, as that was an inevitable establishment if communities were to be provided regularly with the &#x27;bread of life&#x27;, since it could not rely on gratuitous provision.

===Objections to the transmission of grace theory===
According to William Griffith Thomas, some Protestants have objected that this theory is not explicitly found in Scripture, and the New Testament uses &#x27;bishop&#x27; and &#x27;presbyter&#x27; as alternative names for the same office. Michael Ramsey argued it is not clearly found in the writings of the Fathers before Augustine in the fourth century and there were attempts to read it back as implicit in earlier writers.

For example, C. K. Barrett points out that the Pastoral Epistles are concerned that ministers of the generation of Timothy and Titus should pass on the doctrine they had received to the third generation. According to Barrett, teaching and preaching are &quot;the main, almost the only, activities of ministry&quot;. He argues that in Clement of Rome ministerial activity is liturgical: the undifferentiated &#x27;presbyter-bishops&#x27; are to &quot;make offerings to the Lord at the right time and in the right places&quot; something which is simply not defined by the evangelists. He mentions the change in the use of sacrificial language as a more significant still: for Paul the Eucharist is a receiving of gifts from God, the Christian sacrifice is the offering of one&#x27;s body. 

Moving on to Ignatius of Antioch, Barrett states that a sharp distinction is found between &#x27;presbyter&#x27; and &#x27;bishop&#x27;: the latter now stands out as &quot;an isolated figure&quot; who is to be obeyed and without whom it is not lawful to baptise or hold a love-feast. He points out that when Ignatius writes to the Romans, there is no mention of a bishop of the Roman Church, &quot;which we may suppose had not yet adopted the monarchical episcopate&quot;. Jalland comes to a similar conclusion and locates the change from the &quot;polyepiscopacy&quot; of the house church model in Rome, to monepiscopacy as occurring before the middle of the second century.

Similar objections are voiced by Harvey A.E. who comments that there is a &quot;strong and ancient tradition&quot; that the presence of an ordained man is necessary for the celebration of the Eucharist. But, according to him, there is &quot;certainly no evidence for this view in the New Testament&quot; and in the case of Clement of Rome and Ignatius of Antioch the implication is not that it be celebrated by anyone else, but that it not. Harvey says in the third century this &quot;concern for propriety&quot; begins to be displaced by the concept of &#x27;power&#x27; to do so which means that in the absence of such a man it is &quot;literally impossible&quot; for a Eucharist to be celebrated.

==Apostolicity as doctrinal and related continuity==
Some Protestant denominations, not including Scandinavian Lutherans, Anglicans and Moravians, deny the need of maintaining episcopal continuity with the early Church, holding that the role of the apostles was that, having been chosen directly by Jesus as witnesses of his resurrection, they were to be the &quot;special instruments of the Holy Spirit in founding and building up the Church&quot;. Anglican theologian E. A. Litton argues that the Church is &quot;built upon &#x27;the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles&#x27;, but a foundation does not repeat itself&quot;; therefore he says that when the apostles died, they were replaced by their writings. To share with the apostles the same faith, to believe their word as found in the Scriptures, to receive the same Holy Spirit, is to many Protestants the only meaningful &quot;continuity&quot;. The most meaningful &quot;apostolic succession&quot; for them, then, is a &quot;faithful succession&quot; of apostolic teaching.

Max Thurian, before his conversion to Roman Catholicism in 1988, described the classic Reformed/Presbyterian concept of apostolic succession in the following terms. &quot;The Christian ministry is not derived from the people but from the pastors; a scriptural ordinance provides for this ministry being renewed by the ordination of a presbyter by presbyters; this ordinance originates with the apostles, who were themselves presbyters, and through them it goes back to Christ as its source.&quot;. Then he continued:
&quot;it does not guarantee the continuity and faithfulness of the Church. A purely historical or mechanical succession of ministers, bishops or pastors would not mean &quot;ipso facto&quot; true apostolic succession in the church, Reformed tradition, following authentic Catholic tradition, distinguishes four realities which make up the true apostolic succession, symbolized, but not absolutely guaranteed, by ministerial succession.&quot; At the same time Thurian argued that the realities form a &quot;composite faithfulness&quot; and are (i) &quot;perseverance in the apostolic doctrine&quot;; (ii) &quot;the will to proclaim God&#x27;s word&quot;; (iii) &quot;communion in the fundamental continuity of the Church, the Body of Christ, the faithful celebration of Baptism and the Eucharist&quot;; (iv) &quot;succession in the laying on of hands, the sign of ministerial continuity&quot;.

According to Walter Kasper, the Reformed-Catholic dialogue came to belief that there is an apostolic succession which is important to the life of the Church, though both sides distinguish the meaning of that succession. Besides, the dialogue states that apostolic succession &quot;consists at least in continuity of apostolic doctrine, but this is not in opposition to succession through continuity of ordained ministry&quot;. While the Lutheran-Catholic dialogue distinguished between apostolic succession in faith (in substantive meaning) and apostolic succession as ministerial succession of bishops, it agreed that &quot;succession in the sense of the succession of ministers must be seen within the succession of the whole church in the apostolic faith&quot;.

The Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church asserts that apostolic succession means something more than just a transmission of authorities; it witnesses to the apostolic faith from the same apostolic faith, and in communion with other churches (attached to the apostolic communion). Apostolic tradition deals with the community, not only an ordained bishop as an isolated person. Since the bishop, once ordained, becomes the guarantor of apostolicity and successor of the apostles; he joins all the bishops, thus maintaining &quot;episkope&quot; of the local churches derived from the college of the apostles.

==Churches claiming apostolic succession==

Churches that claim some form of episcopal apostolic succession, dating back to the apostles or to leaders from the apostolic era, include:
* the Roman Catholic Church
* the Eastern Orthodox Church
* the Oriental Orthodox Churches
* the Church of the East
* the Moravian Church
* the Anglican Communion
* many Lutheran churches 
* Old Catholics and other Independent Catholics (those incorporating the term &quot;Catholic&quot;)
* some churches in the Convergence Movement

Those Lutheran churches, as well as the Anglican Communion and other Anglican denominations , that claim apostolic succession exclusively practice episcopal ordination. While some Anglicans claim it for their communion, their views are often nuanced and there is widespread reluctance to &#x27;unchurch&#x27; Christian bodies which lack it. After the English Reformation, Anglicanism &quot;followed the major continental Reformers in their doctrine of the true church, identifiable by the authentic ministry of word and sacrament, in their rejection of the jurisdiction of the pope, and in their alliance with the civil authority (&#x27;the magistrate&#x27;)&quot;. The Church of England historically recognized as true churches the Continental Reformed Churches, participating in the Synod of Dort in 1618–1619. 

Roman Catholics recognize the validity of the apostolic successions of the bishops, and therefore the rest of the clergy, of the Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Church of the East, Old Catholics (except the ordination of women), and Polish National Catholic Church. The Orthodox generally recognize Roman Catholic clerical orders as being of apostolic lineage, but have a different concept of the apostolic succession as it exists outside the canonical borders of the Eastern Orthodox Church, extending the term only to bishops who have maintained communion, received ordination from a line of apostolic bishops, and preserved the catholic faith once delivered through the apostles and handed down as holy tradition. The lack of apostolic succession through bishops is the primary basis on which Protestant denominations (barring some like Lutherans and Anglicans) are not called &quot;churches&quot;, in the proper sense, by the Orthodox and Roman Catholic churches, the latter referring to them as &quot;ecclesial communities&quot; in the official documents of the Second Vatican Council.

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints also claims apostolic succession. According to Latter-day Saint tradition, in 1829, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery received the priesthood from a visit from heaven of John the Baptist, conferring the Aaronic priesthood, followed by Jesus&#x27; Apostles, Peter, James, and John, conferring the Melchizedek priesthood. After its establishment, each subsequent prophet and leader of the church have received the authority passed down by the laying on of hands, or through apostolic succession.

==Apostolic founders==
An early understanding of apostolic succession is represented by the traditional beliefs of various churches, as organised around important episcopal sees, to have been founded by specific apostles. On the basis of these traditions, the churches hold they have inherited specific authority, doctrines or practices on the authority of their founding apostle(s), which is understood to be continued by the bishops of the apostolic throne of the church that each founded and whose original leader he was. Thus:
* The See of Rome, the head see of the Catholic Church, states that it was founded by Simon Peter (traditionally called &quot;Prince of the Apostles&quot; and &quot;Chief of the Apostles&quot;) and Paul the Apostle. Although Peter also founded the See of Antioch, the See of Rome claims the full authority of Peter (who, according to Catholic doctrine, was the visible head of the church and the sole chief of the Apostles) exclusively for itself, because Peter died as the Bishop of Rome, and not of another see.
* The Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, the primary patriarchate of the Eastern Orthodox Church, states that Apostle Andrew (elder brother of Simon Peter) was its founder.
* Each Patriarchate of Alexandria (the Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria, the Coptic Catholic Church, and the Coptic Orthodox Church) states that it was founded by Mark the Evangelist.
* Each Patriarchate of Antioch (the Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch, the Syriac Orthodox Church, the Maronite Church, the Melkite Greek Catholic Church, and the Syriac Catholic Church) states that it was founded by Simon Peter.
* The Eastern Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem states that it was founded by James the Just.
* Each Armenian Church (the Armenian Apostolic Church, based at Etchmiadzin, and the Armenian Catholic Church, whose patriarchal see is Cilicia but is based at Beirut) states that it was founded by the Apostles Bartholomew and Jude Thaddeus.
* The following bodies state they were founded by the Apostle Thomas: the Assyrian Church of the East, the Ancient Church of the East and the Chaldean Catholic Church, originating in or around Mesopotamia, and churches based in Kerala, India having Syriac roots and generically known as the Saint Thomas Christians: the Syro-Malabar Catholic Church, the Syro-Malankara Catholic Church, the Jacobite Syrian Christian Church, the Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church, and the Mar Thoma Syrian Church.
* The Orthodox Tewahedo churches (the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church and the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church) state that they were founded by Philip the Evangelist and Mark the Evangelist.
* The Orthodox Church of Georgia states that the Apostles Andrew and Simon the Zealot were its founders.
* The Orthodox Church of Cyprus, based at Nova Justiniana (Erdek), states that it was founded by the Apostles Paul and Barnabas.
*The Bulgarian Orthodox Church states that it has a connection with Andrew the Apostle.
* The Russian Orthodox Church states that it has a connection with the Apostle Andrew, who is said to have visited the area where the city of Kyiv later arose.

==Teachings==
Teachings on the nature of apostolic succession vary depending on the ecclesiastic body, especially within various Protestant denominations. Christians of the Catholic Church, Church of the East, Oriental Orthodox, and the Eastern Orthodox Church teach apostolic succession. Among the previously mentioned churches opinions vary as to the validity of succession within Old Catholic, Lutheran, Anglican and Moravian communities.

===Catholic Church===
In Catholic theology, the doctrine of apostolic succession is that the apostolic tradition – including apostolic teaching, preaching, and authority – is handed down from the college of apostles to the college of bishops through the laying on of hands, as a permanent office in the Church. Historically, this has been understood as a succession in office, a succession of valid ordinations, or a succession of the entire college. It is understood as a sign and guarantee that the Church, both local and universal, is in diachronic continuity with the apostles; a necessary but insufficient guarantor thereof.
Papal primacy is different though related to apostolic succession as described here. The Catholic Church has traditionally claimed a unique leadership role for the Apostle Peter, believed to have been named by Jesus as head of the Apostles and as a focus of their unity, who became the first Bishop of Rome, and whose successors inherited the role and accordingly became the leaders of the worldwide Church as well. Even so, Catholicism acknowledges the papacy is built on apostolic succession, not the other way around. As such, apostolic succession is a foundational doctrine of authority in the Catholic Church. Peter was succeeded by Linus, Linus by Clement, Clement by Anacletus, Anacletus by Evaristus...&quot; The Catholic position is summarised this way: &quot;The Lord says to Peter: &#x27;I say to you,&#x27; he says, &#x27;that you are Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell will not overcome it ...&#x27; On him [Peter] he builds the Church, and to him he gives the command to feed the sheep, and although he assigns a like power to all the apostles, yet he founded a single chair [cathedra], and he established by his own authority a source and an intrinsic reason for that unity... If someone [today] does not hold fast to this unity of Peter, can he imagine that he still holds the faith? If he [should] desert the chair of Peter upon whom the Church was built, can he still be confident that he is in the Church?&quot;

Catholicism holds that Christ entrusted the Apostles with the leadership of the community of believers, and the obligation to transmit and preserve the &quot;deposit of faith&quot;. The experience of Christ and his teachings contained in the doctrinal tradition handed down from the time of the apostles and the written portion, which is Scripture. The apostles then passed on this office and authority by ordaining bishops to follow after them.

Catholic theology holds that the apostolic succession affects the power and authority to administer the sacraments except for baptism and matrimony. Baptism may be administered by anyone and matrimony by the couple to each other. Authority to so administer such sacraments is passed on only through the sacrament of Holy Orders, a rite by which a priest is ordained. Ordination can be conferred only by bishop. The bishop must be from an unbroken line of bishops stemming from the original apostles selected by Jesus Christ. Thus, apostolic succession is necessary for the valid celebration of the sacraments.

====Views concerning other churches====
In the Catholic Church, Pope Leo XIII stated in his 1896 bull &quot;Apostolicae curae&quot; that the Catholic Church believes specifically that Anglican orders were to be considered &quot;absolutely null and utterly void&quot;.

His argument was as follows. First, the ordination rite of Edward VI had removed the language of a sacrificial priesthood. Ordinations using this new rite occurred for over a century and, because the restoration of the language of &quot;priesthood&quot; a century later in the ordination rite &quot;was introduced too late, as a century had already elapsed since the adoption of the Edwardine Ordinal ... the Hierarchy had become extinct, there remained no power of ordaining.&quot; With this extinction of validly ordained bishops in England, &quot;the true Sacrament of Order as instituted by Christ lapsed, and with it the hierarchical succession.&quot; As a result, the pope&#x27;s final judgment was that Anglican ordinations going forward were to be considered &quot;absolutely null and utterly void&quot;. Anglican clergy were from then on to be ordained as Catholic priests upon entry into the Catholic Church.

A reply from the Archbishops of Canterbury and York (1896) was issued to counter Pope Leo&#x27;s arguments: &quot;Saepius officio: Answer of the Archbishops of Canterbury and York to the Bull Apostolicae Curae of H. H. Leo XIII&quot;. They argued that if the Anglican orders were invalid, then the Roman orders were as well since the Pope based his case on the fact that the Anglican ordinals used did not contain certain essential elements but these were not found in the early Roman rites either. Catholics argue, this argument does not consider the sacramental intention involved in validating Holy Orders. In other words, Catholics believe that the ordination rites were reworded so as to invalidate the ordinations because the intention behind the alterations in the rite was a fundamental change in Anglican understanding of the priesthood.

It is Catholic doctrine that the teaching of &quot;Apostolicae curae&quot; is a truth to be &quot;held definitively, but are not able to be declared as divinely revealed&quot;, as stated in a commentary by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith. Cardinal Basil Hume explained the conditional character of his ordination of Graham Leonard, former Anglican bishop of the Diocese of London, to the priesthood in the following way: &quot;While firmly restating the judgement of &quot;Apostolicae Curae&quot; that Anglican ordination is invalid, the Catholic Church takes account of the involvement, in some Anglican episcopal ordinations, of bishops of the Old Catholic Church of the Union of Utrecht who are validly ordained. In particular and probably rare cases the authorities in Rome may judge that there is a &#x27;prudent doubt&#x27; concerning the invalidity of priestly ordination received by an individual Anglican minister ordained in this line of succession.&quot; 

At the same time, he stated: &quot;Since the church must be in no doubt of the validity of the sacraments celebrated for the Roman Catholic community, it must ask all who are chosen to exercise the priesthood in the Catholic Church to accept sacramental ordination in order to fulfill their ministry and be integrated into the apostolic succession.&quot; Since &quot;Apostolicae curae&quot; was issued many Anglican jurisdictions have revised their ordinals, bringing them more in line with ordinals of the early Church.

Timothy Dufort, writing in &quot;The Tablet&quot; in 1982, attempted to present an ecumenical solution to the problem of how the Catholic Church might accept Anglican orders without needing to formally repudiate &quot;Apostolicae curae&quot; at all. Dufort argued that by 1969 all Anglican bishops had acquired apostolic succession fully recognized by Rome, since from the 1930s Old Catholic bishops (the validity of whose orders the Vatican has never questioned) have acted as co-consecrators in the ordination of Anglican bishops. This view has not yet been considered formally by the Holy See, but after Anglican Bishop Graham Leonard converted to Catholicism, he was only reordained in 1994 because of the presence of Old Catholic bishops at his ordination.

The question of the validity of Anglican orders has been further complicated by the Anglican ordination of women. In a document it published in July 1998, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith stated that the Catholic Church&#x27;s declaration on the invalidity of Anglican ordinations is a teaching that the church has definitively propounded and that therefore every Catholic is required to give &quot;firm and definitive assent&quot; to this matter. This being said, in May 2017, Cardinal Francesco Coccopalmerio, President of the Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts, has asked whether the current Catholic position on invalidity could be revised in the future.

===Eastern Orthodox===
While Eastern Orthodox sources often refer to the bishops as &quot;successors of the apostles&quot; under the influence of Scholastic theology, strict Orthodox ecclesiology and theology hold that all legitimate bishops are properly successors of Peter. This also means that presbyters (or &quot;priests&quot;) are successors of the apostles. As a result, Eastern Orthodox theology makes a distinction between a geographical or historical succession and proper ontological or ecclesiological succession. Hence, the bishops of Rome and Antioch can be considered successors of Peter in a historical sense on account of Peter&#x27;s presence in the early community. This does not imply that these bishops are more successors of Peter than all others in an ontological sense.

The Eastern Orthodox have often permitted non-Eastern Orthodox clergy to be rapidly ordained within Orthodoxy as a matter of pastoral necessity and economia. Priests entering Eastern Orthodoxy from Oriental Orthodoxy and Catholicism have usually been received by &quot;vesting&quot; and have been allowed to function immediately within Eastern Orthodoxy as priests. Recognition of Catholic orders by the Russian Orthodox Church was stipulated in 1667 by the Synod of Moscow, but this position is not universal within the Eastern Orthodox communion. 

For example, Fr. John Morris of the Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America, states that &quot;Apostolic Succession is not merely a historical pedigree, but also requires Apostolic Faith. This is because Apostolic Succession is not the private possession of a bishop, but is the attribute of a local Church. A bishop who goes in schism or is cast out of office due to heresy does not take his Apostolic Succession with him as a private possession.&quot; The validity of a priest&#x27;s ordination is decided by each autocephalous Eastern Orthodox church.

In 1922 the Eastern Orthodox Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople recognised Anglican orders as valid, holding that they carry &quot;the same validity as the Roman, Old Catholic and Armenian churches possess&quot;. In the encyclical &quot;From the Oecumenical Patriarch to the Presidents of the Particular Eastern Orthodox churches&quot;, Meletius IV of Constantinople, the Oecumenical Patriarch, wrote: &quot;That the Orthodox theologians who have scientifically examined the question have almost unanimously come to the same conclusions and have declared themselves as accepting the validity of Anglican Orders.&quot; Following this declaration, in 1923, the Eastern Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem, as well as the Eastern Orthodox Church of Cyprus agreed by &quot;provisionally acceding that Anglican priests should not be re-ordained if they became Orthodox&quot;; in 1936, the Romanian Orthodox Church &quot;endorsed Anglican Orders&quot;.

Succeeding judgements have been more conflicting. The Eastern Orthodox churches require a totality of common teaching to recognise orders and in this broader view find ambiguities in Anglican teaching and practice problematic. Accordingly, in some parts of the Eastern Orthodox Church, Anglican clergy who convert to Orthodoxy are reordained, rather than vested.

=== Oriental Orthodox Churches ===
The Armenian Apostolic Church, which is one of the Oriental Orthodox churches, recognises Catholic episcopal consecrations without qualification.

===Lutheran churches===
Lutherans universally believe that &quot;no one should publicly teach in the Church or administer the Sacraments unless he be regularly called&quot;. The Lutheran churches in Scandinavia, and those established in other parts of the world as a result of Scandinavian Lutheran missionary activity (such as the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Kenya), practice &quot;episcopal&quot; succession in which the bishop whose holy orders can be traced back for centuries performs ordinations. On the other hand, certain Lutheran theologians, such as Arthur Carl Piepkorn, have held to the conception of a succession of presbyters in contradistinction to a succession of bishops. German Lutheran churches and their subsequent offspring in the United States practice succession of presbyters in which another priest is the one who confers the priesthood onto another. This low view results from the Prussian state-ordered union with Reformed (Calvinist) churches in 1817.

====Lutheran claims to apostolic succession ====
In Scandinavia and the Baltic region, Lutheran churches participating in the Porvoo Communion (those of Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Estonia, and Lithuania), as well as non-Porvoo membership Lutheran churches in the region (including those of Latvia, and Russia), and the confessional Communion of Nordic Lutheran Dioceses, believe that they ordain their bishops in apostolic succession in lines stemming from the original apostles. &quot;The New Westminster Dictionary of Church History&quot; states that &quot;In Sweden the apostolic succession was preserved because the Catholic bishops were allowed to stay in office, but they had to approve changes in the ceremonies.&quot;

The Lutheran Church of Finland was at that time one with the Church of Sweden and so holds the same view regarding the see of Åbo/Turku.

In 2001, Francis Aloysius Sullivan wrote: &quot;To my knowledge, the Catholic Church has never officially expressed its judgement on the validity of orders as they have been handed down by episcopal succession in these two national Lutheran churches.&quot; In 2007, the Holy See declared: &quot;Christian Communities born out of the Reformation of the sixteenth century [...] do not enjoy apostolic succession in the sacrament of Orders, and are, therefore, deprived of a constitutive element of the Church.&quot; This statement speaks of the Protestant movement as a whole, not specifically of the Lutheran churches in Sweden and Finland. The 2010 report from the Roman Catholic – Lutheran Dialogue Group for Sweden and Finland, &quot;Justification in the Life of the Church&quot;, states: &quot;The Evangelical-Lutheran churches in Sweden and Finland [...] believe that they are part of an unbroken apostolic chain of succession. The Catholic Church does however question how the ecclesiastical break in the 16th century has affected the apostolicity of the churches of the Reformation and thus the apostolicity of their ministry.&quot; Emil Anton interprets this report as saying that the Catholic Church does not deny or approve the apostolic succession directly, but will continue with further inquiries about the matter.

Negotiated at Järvenpää, Finland, and inaugurated with a celebration of the Eucharist at Porvoo Cathedral in 1992, the Porvoo Communion agreement of unity includes the mutual recognition of the traditional apostolic succession among the following churches:
* Lutheran churches: Evangelical Lutheran Church of Iceland, Church of Norway, Church of Sweden, Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland, Estonian Evangelical Lutheran Church, Evangelical Lutheran Church of Lithuania, Church of Denmark, The Lutheran Church in Great Britain observer: Evangelical Lutheran Church of Latvia.
* Anglican Communion: Church of Ireland, Scottish Episcopal Church, Church of England, the Church in Wales, the Lusitanian Catholic Apostolic Evangelical Church, and the Spanish Reformed Episcopal Church.

At least one of the Scandinavian Lutheran churches in the Porvoo Communion of churches, the Church of Denmark has bishops, but strictly speaking they were not in the historic apostolic succession prior to their entry into the Porvoo Communion, since their episcopate and holy orders derived from Johannes Bugenhagen, who was a pastor, not a bishop. In 2010, the Church of Denmark joined the Porvoo Communion of churches, after a process of mutual consecrations of bishops had led to the introduction of historic apostolic succession. The Lutheran Church in Great Britain also joined the Porvoo Agreement, in 2014.

In Scandinavia, where High Church Lutheranism and Pietist Lutheranism has been highly influential, the Evangelical Lutheran Mission Diocese of Finland, Mission Province of the Church of Sweden, and the Evangelical Lutheran Diocese of Norway entered into schism with their national churches due to &quot;the secularization of the national/state churches in their respective countries involving matters of both Christian doctrine and ethics&quot;; these have altar and pulpit fellowship through the Communion of Nordic Lutheran Dioceses and are members of the confessional International Lutheran Council with their bishops having lines of apostolic succession from other traditional Lutheran Churches, such as the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Kenya.

Similarly, in the High Church Lutheranism of Germany, some religious brotherhoods such as Hochkirchliche St. Johannes-Bruderschaft and Hochkirchlicher Apostolat St. Ansgar have managed to arrange for their own bishop to be re-ordained in apostolic succession. The members of these brotherhoods do not form into separate ecclesia.

The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, North America&#x27;s largest Lutheran body, gained apostolic succession through Lutheran bishops in the historic episcopate; this allowed for full communion with the Episcopal Church in 2000, upon the signing of &quot;Called to Common Mission&quot;. By this document the full communion between the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America and the Episcopal Church was established. As such, &quot;all episcopal installations in the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America take place with the participation of bishops in the apostolic succession.&quot; The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America is headed by a presiding bishop who is elected by the churchwide assembly for a six-year term.

The Evangelical Catholic Church, a Lutheran denomination of Evangelical Catholic churchmanship based in North America, taught:

A number of Lutheran churches of the Evangelical Catholic and High Church Lutheran churchmanship based in the United States of America possess apostolic succession, with lineage generally being from the Independent Catholic churches. These include:
* The Lutheran Evangelical Protestant Church (LEPC) were some of the earliest Lutherans in America. They have autonomous and congregationally oriented ministries and consecrate male and female deacons, priests and bishops in apostolic succession with the laying on of hands during celebration of Word and Sacrament. 
* The Lutheran Church - International is another North American Lutheran church that possesses and teaches the doctrine of apostolic succession.
* The Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church recovered the apostolic succession from Old Catholic and Independent Catholic churches, and adopted a strict episcopal polity. All of its clergy have been ordained (or re-ordained) into the historic apostolic succession. This Church was formed in 1997, with its headquarters in Kansas City, Missouri.
* The Lutheran Orthodox Church, founded in 2004 traces its historic lineage of apostolic succession through Lutheran, Anglican, and Old Catholic lines.

====Indifference to the issue====
Many German Lutherans appear to demur on this issue, which may be sourced in the church governance views of Martin Luther. Luther&#x27;s reform movement usually did not abrogate the ecclesiastic office of bishop. An important historical context to explicate the difference regarding apostolic succession among between the Scandinavian Lutheran churches and the German Lutheran churches is the Prussian Union of 1817, whereby the civil government directed the Lutheran churches in Prussia to merge with non-Lutheran Reformed Churches in Prussia. The Reformed (Calvinist) churches generally oppose on principle the traditional doctrine of ecclesiastic Apostolic Succession, e.g., not usually even recognising the church office of bishop. 

Later in the 19th century, other Lutheran and Reformed congregations merged to form united church bodies in some of the other 39 states of the German Confederation, e.g., in Anhalt, Baden, Bremen, Hesse and Nassau, Hesse-Kassel and Waldeck, and the Palatinate. Yet the partial nature of this list also serves to show that in Germany there remained many Lutherans who never united with the Reformed.

Other Lutheran churches are indifferent as a matter of doctrine regarding this particular issue of ecclesiastical governance. In America, the conservative Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod (LCMS) places its church authority in the congregation rather than in the bishop, and ordinations are typically performed by another pastor, although its founder, C. F. W. Walther, while establishing congregational polity for the LCMS, considered polity (a church&#x27;s form of government) to be a matter of adiaphora (something indifferent).

===Anglican Communion===
The Anglican Communion &quot;has never officially endorsed any one particular theory of the origin of the historic episcopate, its exact relation to the apostolate, and the sense in which it should be thought of as God given, and in fact tolerates a wide variety of views on these points&quot;. Its claim to apostolic succession is rooted in the Church of England&#x27;s evolution as part of the Western Church. Apostolic succession is viewed not so much as conveyed mechanically through an unbroken chain of the laying-on of hands, but as expressing continuity with the unbroken chain of commitment, beliefs and mission starting with the first apostles; and as hence emphasising the enduring yet evolving nature of the Church.

When Henry VIII broke away from the jurisdiction of Rome in 1533/4, the English Church () claimed the episcopal polity and apostolic succession inherent in its Catholic past. Reformed theology gained a certain foothold, and under his successor, Edward VI what had been an administrative schism – as the Church under Henry was separated from Rome but remained essentially Catholic in its theology and practice – became a reformation under the guiding hand of Thomas Cranmer. 

Although care was taken to maintain the unbroken sequence of episcopal consecrations – particularly in the case of Matthew Parker, who was consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury in 1559 by two bishops who had been ordained in the 1530s with the Roman Pontifical and two ordained with the Edwardine Ordinal of 1550 – apostolic succession was not seen as a major concern that a true ministry could not exist without episcopal consecrations: English Reformers such as Richard Hooker rejected the Roman position that Apostolic Succession is divinely commanded or necessary for true Christian ministry. American Episcopal theologian Richard A. Norris argues that the &quot;&quot;foreign&quot; Reformed [Presbyterian] churches&quot; were genuine ones despite the lack of apostolic succession because they had been abandoned by their bishops at the Reformation. 

In very different ways both James II and William III of England made it plain that the Church of England could no longer count on the &#x27;godly prince&#x27; to maintain its identity and traditions and the &#x27;High Church&#x27; clergy of the time began to look to the idea of apostolic succession as a basis for the church&#x27;s life. For William Beveridge (Bishop of St Asaph, 1704–8) the importance of this lay in the fact that Christ himself is &quot;continually present at such imposition of hands; thereby transferring the same Spirit, which He had first breathed into His Apostles, upon others successively after them&quot;, but the doctrine did not really come to the fore until the time of the Tractarians.

In 1833, before his conversion to Catholicism, Newman wrote about the apostolic succession: &quot;We must necessarily consider none to be ordained who has not been ordained&quot;. After quoting this, Michael Ramsey continues: &quot;With romantic enthusiasm, the Tractarians propagated this doctrine. In doing so they involved themselves in some misunderstandings of history and in some confusion of theology&quot;. He explained that they ascribed to early Anglican authors a far more exclusive version of the doctrine than was the case. They blurred the distinction between succession in office (Irenaeus) and succession in consecration (Augustine). They spoke of apostolic succession as the channel of grace in a way that failed to do justice to His gracious activity within all the dispensations of the New Covenant. 

J. B. Lightfoot argued that monarchial episcopacy evolved upwards from a college of presbyters by the elevation of one of their number to be the episcopal president. A.C. Headlam laid great stress on Irenaeus&#x27; understanding of succession which had been lost from sight behind the Augustinian &#x27;pipe-line theory&#x27;.

===Methodist churches===

In the beginnings of the Methodist movement, adherents were instructed to receive the sacraments within the Anglican Church since the Methodists were still a movement and not as yet a separate church in England until 1805. The American Methodists soon petitioned to receive the sacraments from the local preachers who conducted worship services and revivals. The Bishop of London refused to ordain Methodist priests and deacons in the British American colonies. John Wesley, the founder of the movement, was reluctant to allow unordained preachers to administer the sacraments:
Some scholars argue that in 1763, Greek Orthodox bishop Erasmus of the Diocese of Arcadia, who was visiting London at the time, consecrated John Wesley a bishop, and ordained several Methodist lay preachers as priests, including John Jones. According to these arguments, Wesley could not openly announce his episcopal consecration without incurring the penalty of the Præmunire Act. In light of Wesley&#x27;s alleged episcopal consecration, the Methodist Church could lay claim on apostolic succession, as understood in the traditional sense. Since John Wesley &quot;ordained and sent forth every Methodist preacher in his day, who preached and baptized and ordained, and since every Methodist preacher who has ever been ordained as a Methodist was ordained in this direct &#x27;succession&#x27; from Wesley, then the Methodist Church teaches that it has all the direct merits coming from apostolic succession, if any such there be.&quot;

Most Methodists view apostolic succession outside its high church sense. This is because Wesley believed that the offices of bishop and presbyter constituted one order, citing an ancient opinion from the Church of Alexandria; Jerome, a Church Father, wrote: &quot;For even at Alexandria from the time of Mark the Evangelist until the episcopates of Heraclas and Dionysius the presbyters always named as bishop one of their own number chosen by themselves and set in a more exalted position, just as an army elects a general, or as deacons appoint one of themselves whom they know to be diligent and call him archdeacon. For what function, excepting ordination, belongs to a bishop that does not also belong to a presbyter?&quot; (Letter CXLVI). John Wesley thus argued that for two centuries the succession of bishops in the Church of Alexandria, which was founded by Mark the Evangelist, was preserved through ordination by presbyters alone and was considered valid by that ancient Church.

Since the Bishop of London refused to ordain ministers in the British American colonies, this constituted an emergency and as a result, on 2 September 1784, Wesley, along with a priest from the Anglican Church and two other elders, operating under the ancient Alexandrian habitude, ordained Thomas Coke a superintendent, although Coke embraced the title bishop.

Today, the United Methodist Church follows this ancient Alexandrian practice as bishops are elected from the presbyterate: the &quot;Discipline of the Methodist Church&quot;, in ¶303, affirms that &quot;ordination to this ministry is a gift from God to the Church. In ordination, the Church affirms and continues the apostolic ministry through persons empowered by the Holy Spirit.&quot; It also uses sacred scripture in support of this practice, namely, 1 Timothy 4:14, which states: 
The Methodist Church also buttresses this argument with the leg of sacred tradition of the Wesleyan Quadrilateral by citing the Church Fathers, many of whom concur with this view.

In addition to the aforementioned arguments – or perhaps instead of them – in 1937 the annual Conference of the British Methodist Church located the &quot;true continuity&quot; with the Church of past ages in &quot;the continuity of Christian experience, the fellowship in the gift of the one Spirit; in the continuity in the allegiance to one Lord, the continued proclamation of the message; the continued acceptance of the mission;...&quot; [through a long chain which goes back to] &quot;the first disciples in the company of the Lord Himself ... This is our doctrine of apostolic succession&quot; [which neither depends on, nor is secured by,] &quot;an official succession of ministers, whether bishops or presbyters, from apostolic times, but rather by fidelity to apostolic truth&quot;.

The Church of North India, Church of Pakistan and Church of South India are members of the World Methodist Council and the clergy of these three united Protestant churches possess lines of apostolic succession, according to the Anglican understanding of this doctrine, through the Church of India, Burma and Ceylon (CIBC), which finished merging with these three in the 1970s.

In June 2014, the Church of Ireland, a province of the Anglican Communion, extended its lines of apostolic succession into the Methodist Church in Ireland, as &quot;the Archbishop of Dublin and Bishop of Down and Dromore took part in the installation of the new President of the Methodist Church of Ireland, the Rev. Peter Murray.&quot; In May 2014, the &quot;Church of Ireland&#x27;s General Synod approved an agreement signed with the Methodist Church that provided for the interchangeability of clergy, allowing an ordained minister of either church to come under the discipline and oversight of the other.&quot;

===Hussite Church and Moravian Church===
The Moravian Church, as with the Hussite Church, teaches the doctrine of apostolic succession. The Moravian Church claims apostolic succession as a legacy of the old Unity of the Brethren. In order to preserve the succession, three Bohemian Brethren were consecrated bishops by Bishop Stephen of Austria, a Waldensian bishop who had been ordained by a Catholic bishop in 1434. These three consecrated bishops returned to Litice in Bohemia and then ordained other brothers, thereby preserving the historic episcopate.

===Presbyterian/Reformed churches===
&quot;Jus Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici&quot; (English translation: The Divine Right of Church Government), which was promulgated by Presbyterian clergy in 1646, holds that historic ministerial succession is necessary for legitimate ministerial authority. It states that ministerial succession is conferred by elders through the laying on of hands, in accordance with Timothy 4:14. The Westminster Assembly held that &quot;There is one general church visible&quot; and that &quot;every minister of the word is to be ordained by imposition of hands, and prayer, with fasting, by those preaching presbyters to whom it doth belong&quot;.

The Church of North India, Church of Pakistan and Church of South India are members of the World Alliance of Reformed Churches and the clergy of these three united Protestant churches possess lines of apostolic succession, according to the Anglican understanding of this doctrine, through the Church of India, Burma and Ceylon (CIBC), which finished merging with these three in the 1970s.

===Pentecostal churches===
On 6 February 2003, K. J. Samuel, the moderator bishop of the Church of South India (a United Protestant denomination that holds membership worldwide Anglican Communion in addition to the World Communion of Reformed Churches), along with P.M. Dhotekar, bishop of Nagpur of the Church of North India, and Bancha Nidhi Nayak, bishop of Phulbani of the Church of North India, consecrated Pentecostal minister K. P. Yohannan as a bishop in Anglican lines of apostolic succession; K.P. Yohannan thereafter became the first metropolitan of the Believers Eastern Church, a Pentecostal denomination which acquired an episcopal polity of ecclesiastical governance.

Many other Pentecostal Christians teach that &quot;the sole guarantor of apostolic faith, which includes apostolic life, is the Holy Spirit.&quot; In addressing the Church of God General Assembly, Ambrose Jessup Tomlinson stated that &quot;Although we do not claim a line of succession from the holy apostles, we do believe we are following in their example.&quot;

===Latter Day Saint movement===

Denominations within the Latter Day Saint movement preach the necessity of apostolic succession and claim it through the process of restoration. According to their teaching, a period of universal apostasy followed the death of the Twelve Apostles. Without apostles or prophets left on the earth with the legitimate Priesthood Authority, many of the true teachings and practices of Christianity were lost. Eventually these were restored to the prophet Joseph Smith and various others in a series of divine conferrals and ordinations by angelic men who had held this authority during their lifetimes (&quot;see this partial list of restoration events&quot;). As it relates to apostolic succession, Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery said that the apostles Peter, James, and John appeared to them in 1829 and conferred upon them the Melchizedek Priesthood and with it &quot;the keys of the kingdom, and of the dispensation of the fullness of times&quot;.

For the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), the largest denomination in the Latter-day Saint movement, Apostolic Succession involves the leadership of the church being established through the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. Each time the President of the Church dies, the most senior apostle, who is designated as the President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, is set apart as the new church president.

==Criticism==
Some Protestants, particularly those in the Calvinist tradition, deny the doctrine of apostolic succession, believing that it is neither taught in Scripture nor necessary for Christian teaching, life, and practice. Accordingly, these Protestants strip the notion of apostolic succession from the definition of &quot;apostolic&quot; or &quot;apostolicity&quot;. For them, to be apostolic is simply to be in submission to the teachings of the original twelve apostles as recorded in Scripture. This doctrinal stance reflects the Protestant view of authority, embodied in the doctrine known as Sola Scriptura.

Among the first who rejected the doctrine of apostolic succession was John Calvin. He said that the episcopacy was inadequate to address corruption, doctrinal or otherwise, and that this inadequacy justified the intervention of the church of lay people.

Some Protestants feel that such claims of apostolic succession are proven false by the differences in traditions and doctrines between these churches: Roman Catholics and Eastern Orthodox consider both the Church of the East and the Oriental Orthodox churches to be heretical, having been anathematized in the early ecumenical councils of Ephesus (431) and Chalcedon (451) respectively. Churches that claim apostolic succession in ministry distinguish this from doctrinal orthodoxy, holding that &quot;it is possible to have valid orders coming down from the apostles, and yet not to have a continuous spiritual history coming down from the apostles&quot;.

All Christians who have a genuine relationship with God through and in Christ are part of the &quot;true Church&quot;, according to evangelical Protestant theology, notwithstanding condemnation of the Catholic Church by some Protestants. The propriety of the Church as a temporal institution deriving its legitimacy from apostolic succession is greatly diminished under this theological view.

===Certain parts of Confessional Lutheranism===
Parts of Confessional Lutheranism have retained apostolic succession, such as the Mission Province (Missionsprovinsen), Evangelical Lutheran Church of Ingria and Evangelical Lutheran Church in Kenya, for example (see Lutheran churches); these are members of the International Lutheran Council.

Certain other Confessional Lutheran churches including Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod (WELS) and Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod (LCMS) reject Apostolic Succession as a biblical doctrine. These churches teach that the Bible contains no evidence showing that the office must be conveyed by laying-on of hands and no Biblical command that it must be by a special class of bishops. The Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod teaches that there is no evidence the Popes have historic succession from Peter other than their own claim that it is so.

The Wisconsin Synod acknowledges:

However, the Synod states that there are a number of major problems with this Roman Catholic view on apostolic succession:

* There is no evidence the popes have historic succession to Peter other than their own claim that it is so.
* The bishops claiming succession have not preserved apostolic doctrine, therefore they have no meaningful apostolic succession.
* There is no evidence that the apostles were ordained by laying on of hands when they entered their office.
* There is no evidence in Scripture that the office must be conveyed by laying on of hands and no command that it must be by a special class of bishops.
* Acts 1 actually proves the opposite of what the Catholic Church claims; it proves there cannot be &quot;apostolic successors&quot; today because Judas&#x27; replacement had to be an eyewitness of Jesus&#x27; ministry.

WELS holds that it&#x27;s their custom that ordination of pastors is by other pastors, and that neither the Bible nor the Lutheran confessions make this the only divinely mandated way of entering the pastoral ministry: &quot;It is the call of the church that is the essential element, more specifically, the call of Christ through the church.&quot;

==See also==
* Baptist successionism
* &quot;Episcopi vagantes&quot;
* Lineage (Buddhism), A similar practice in Buddhist tradition
* List of bishops
* New Apostolic Church
* Pope Linus
* Valid but illicit

== References ==
==Further reading==
*

== External links ==
* Against Heresies, Online-text, Irenaeus, &quot;Against Heresies&quot;
* Apostolicity in the &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;
* Discussion of the Papacy by Scott Hahn
* &quot;Was Wesley Ordained By Bishop Erasmus?&quot; &quot;The Methodist Quarterly Review&quot; (1878)
* Methodist/Anglican Thoughts On Apostolic Succession by The Reverend Dr. Gregory S. Neal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="0" end="20" title="Apostolic succession" label="Apostolic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729207" start="47" end="55" title="Christian ministry" label="ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q34651" start="63" end="79" title="Christian Church" label="Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="102" end="124" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="149" end="157" title="Twelve Apostles" label="apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="276" end="282" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="298" end="306" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="308" end="324" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="326" end="343" title="Oriental Orthodox Churches" label="Oriental Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="345" end="363" title="Church of the East" label="Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="365" end="386" title="Lutheranism" label="Scandinavian Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="388" end="396" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="398" end="406" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060869" start="408" end="415" title="Czechoslovak Hussite Church" label="Hussite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="421" end="433" title="Old Catholic Church" label="Old Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="607" end="616" title="Episcopal polity" label="episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147274" start="733" end="786" title="Apostolic see" label="particular see founded by one or more of the apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278184" start="811" end="828" title="Justo L. González" label="Justo L. González"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269267" start="1061" end="1168" title="Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church" label="Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138500" start="1417" end="1425" title="cathedra" label="cathedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492902" start="1725" end="1743" title="Christian laying on of hands" label="laying on of hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="1758" end="1771" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="1835" end="1839" title="Paul of Tarsus" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q212647" start="1843" end="1850" title="Saint Timothy" label="Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q320136" start="1855" end="1860" title="Apostle Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="1921" end="1933" title="early Christianity" label="early Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993949" start="1950" end="1968" title="Epistle of Clement" label="Epistle of Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="2448" end="2466" title="Church of the East" label="Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="2468" end="2486" title="Oriental Orthodoxy" label="Oriental Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="2492" end="2515" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2524" end="2545" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2580" end="2591" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123050" start="2661" end="2678" title="Historical episcopate" label="historical claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q21933630" start="2707" end="2718" title="Eric Jay" label="Eric G. Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q620035" start="2808" end="2829" title="dogmatic constitution" label="dogmatic constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q750388" start="2836" end="2849" title="Lumen gentium" label="Lumen gentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q336569" start="2996" end="3010" title="Michael Ramsey" label="Michael Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="3047" end="3071" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="3850" end="3868" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine of Hippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q390610" start="3985" end="4016" title="Baptism, Eucharist and Ministry" label="Baptism, Eucharist and Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q442693" start="4022" end="4048" title="Faith and Order Commission" label="Faith and Order Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q283639" start="4056" end="4081" title="World Council of Churches" label="World Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="5559" end="5568" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="5904" end="5926" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205652" start="6021" end="6057" title="International Theological Commission" label="International Theological Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="6160" end="6164" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q44170" start="6746" end="6765" title="Ignatius of Antioch" label="Ignatius of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6955" end="6980" title="#Various meanings" label="three senses given by him"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="7010" end="7017" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="7392" end="7401" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887" start="7596" end="7611" title="Clement of Rome" label="Clement of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q21933630" start="8227" end="8238" title="Eric Jay" label="Eric G. Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q503230" start="8441" end="8451" title="Hegesippus (chronicler)" label="Hegesippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="8463" end="8471" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="9041" end="9058" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q31966" start="9117" end="9136" title="Mark the Evangelist" label="Mark the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q58451" start="9172" end="9190" title="Pope of Alexandria" label="Pope of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q382012" start="9210" end="9218" title="Pope Anianus of Alexandria" label="Annianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="9265" end="9273" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062865" start="9306" end="9323" title="Centro Pro Unione" label="Centro Pro Unione"/>
<link wikidata="Q190240" start="10756" end="10763" title="Cyprian" label="Cyprian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045755" start="10765" end="10783" title="Bishop of Carthage" label="Bishop of Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10886" end="10904" title="Decius#Persecution of Christians" label="Decian Persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q222890" start="10993" end="11001" title="Novatian" label="Novatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="11611" end="11634" title="Consecration (Catholic Church)" label="episcopal consecrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519600" start="11640" end="11650" title="ordination" label="ordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076136" start="11670" end="11688" title="laying on of hands" label="laying on of hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="11815" end="11830" title="Twelve Apostles" label="Twelve Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302871" start="11885" end="11914" title="Apostolic Age" label="Apostolic Christian community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275182" start="11938" end="11951" title="Four Marks of the Church" label="four elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="12133" end="12153" title="Priesthood" label="presbyters (priests)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233636" start="12270" end="12280" title="Sacraments of the Catholic Church" label="sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="12296" end="12305" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q183959" start="12307" end="12334" title="Confession (religion)" label="reconciliation of penitents"/>
<link wikidata="Q188613" start="12336" end="12348" title="confirmation" label="confirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193770" start="12353" end="12374" title="anointing of the sick" label="anointing of the sick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417007" start="12376" end="12392" title="Everett Ferguson" label="Everett Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q207113" start="12405" end="12415" title="Hippolytus of Rome" label="Hippolytus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190240" start="12614" end="12621" title="Cyprian" label="Cyprian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44490" start="12741" end="12758" title="John Henry Newman" label="John Henry Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831654" start="12830" end="12850" title="Tracts for the Times" label="Tracts for the Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q26925" start="13448" end="13453" title="James the Just" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285436" start="13707" end="13723" title="Raymond E. Brown" label="Raymond E. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q44170" start="14487" end="14506" title="Ignatius of Antioch" label="Ignatius of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q51633" start="14719" end="14730" title="Last Supper" label="Last Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="14786" end="14801" title="Twelve Apostles" label="Twelve Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012011" start="15452" end="15475" title="William Griffith Thomas" label="William Griffith Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q336569" start="15677" end="15691" title="Michael Ramsey" label="Michael Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="15761" end="15770" title="Augustine of Hippo" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989826" start="15879" end="15892" title="C. K. Barrett" label="C. K. Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q42887" start="16200" end="16215" title="Clement of Rome" label="Clement of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q44170" start="16668" end="16687" title="Ignatius of Antioch" label="Ignatius of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q681375" start="17232" end="17244" title="house church" label="house church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="18091" end="18101" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q118205" start="19071" end="19082" title="Max Thurian" label="Max Thurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="19158" end="19166" title="Reformed tradition" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="19167" end="19179" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44100" start="20495" end="20508" title="Walter Kasper" label="Walter Kasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269267" start="21252" end="21359" title="Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church" label="Joint International Commission for Theological Dialogue Between the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123050" start="22004" end="22034" title="historical episcopate" label="episcopal apostolic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="22117" end="22138" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="22145" end="22168" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="22175" end="22201" title="Oriental Orthodoxy" label="Oriental Orthodox Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="22208" end="22226" title="Church of the East" label="Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="22233" end="22248" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="22255" end="22273" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="22281" end="22289" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="22302" end="22315" title="Old Catholic Church" label="Old Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159108" start="22326" end="22347" title="Independent Catholicism" label="Independent Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q29568419" start="22384" end="22392" title="Catholic (term)" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166375" start="22423" end="22443" title="Convergence Movement" label="Convergence Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="22485" end="22503" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="23115" end="23132" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q49830" start="23178" end="23207" title="Continental Reformed church" label="Continental Reformed Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q901769" start="23230" end="23243" title="Synod of Dort" label="Synod of Dort"/>
<link wikidata="Q32731" start="23498" end="23529" title="Polish National Catholic Church" label="Polish National Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055765" start="23966" end="23980" title="Holy Tradition" label="holy tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="24332" end="24354" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="24357" end="24404" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="24489" end="24501" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q982343" start="24506" end="24520" title="Oliver Cowdery" label="Oliver Cowdery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492096" start="24534" end="24544" title="priesthood (Latter Day Saints)" label="priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="24573" end="24589" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357673" start="24606" end="24624" title="Aaronic priesthood (Latter Day Saints)" label="Aaronic priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6812038" start="24699" end="24721" title="Melchizedek priesthood" label="Melchizedek priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076136" start="24844" end="24862" title="laying on of hands" label="laying on of hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="25061" end="25074" title="episcopal see" label="episcopal see"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154253" start="25340" end="25356" title="apostolic throne" label="apostolic throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="25435" end="25446" title="Holy See" label="See of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="25515" end="25526" title="Saint Peter" label="Simon Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="25627" end="25643" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211004" start="25949" end="25990" title="Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="26024" end="26047" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="26061" end="26075" title="Andrew the Apostle" label="Apostle Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q622216" start="26131" end="26157" title="Patriarchate of Alexandria" label="Patriarchate of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q251268" start="26163" end="26198" title="Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria" label="Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q49378" start="26204" end="26226" title="Coptic Catholic Church" label="Coptic Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="26236" end="26258" title="Coptic Orthodox Church" label="Coptic Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q31966" start="26290" end="26309" title="Mark the Evangelist" label="Mark the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q865026" start="26318" end="26341" title="Patriarchate of Antioch" label="Patriarchate of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q323301" start="26347" end="26379" title="Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch" label="Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q210540" start="26385" end="26407" title="Syriac Orthodox Church" label="Syriac Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q64900" start="26413" end="26428" title="Maronite Church" label="Maronite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q64885" start="26434" end="26463" title="Melkite Greek Catholic Church" label="Melkite Greek Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q755970" start="26473" end="26495" title="Syriac Catholic Church" label="Syriac Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="26527" end="26538" title="Saint Peter" label="Simon Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q632602" start="26546" end="26588" title="Eastern Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem" label="Eastern Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q26925" start="26619" end="26633" title="James the Just" label="James the Just"/>
<link wikidata="Q683724" start="26663" end="26688" title="Armenian Apostolic Church" label="Armenian Apostolic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q548391" start="26699" end="26710" title="Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin" label="Etchmiadzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q64842" start="26720" end="26744" title="Armenian Catholic Church" label="Armenian Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q388986" start="26771" end="26778" title="Patriarchate of Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="26795" end="26801" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q43982" start="26846" end="26857" title="Bartholomew the Apostle" label="Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q43945" start="26862" end="26875" title="Jude the Apostle" label="Jude Thaddeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="26931" end="26945" title="Thomas the Apostle" label="Apostle Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q203179" start="26951" end="26978" title="Assyrian Church of the East" label="Assyrian Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q435787" start="26984" end="27010" title="Ancient Church of the East" label="Ancient Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q64868" start="27019" end="27043" title="Chaldean Catholic Church" label="Chaldean Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="27070" end="27081" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q648601" start="27168" end="27191" title="Saint Thomas Christians" label="Saint Thomas Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q64871" start="27197" end="27225" title="Syro-Malabar Catholic Church" label="Syro-Malabar Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q256178" start="27231" end="27261" title="Syro-Malankara Catholic Church" label="Syro-Malankara Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077454" start="27267" end="27299" title="Jacobite Syrian Christian Church" label="Jacobite Syrian Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q532662" start="27305" end="27337" title="Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church" label="Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827463" start="27347" end="27370" title="Mar Thoma Syrian Church" label="Mar Thoma Syrian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7104499" start="27378" end="27404" title="Orthodox Tewahedo" label="Orthodox Tewahedo churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q179829" start="27410" end="27444" title="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church" label="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q844083" start="27453" end="27486" title="Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church" label="Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q508571" start="27520" end="27541" title="Philip the Evangelist" label="Philip the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q31966" start="27546" end="27565" title="Mark the Evangelist" label="Mark the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q192173" start="27573" end="27599" title="Georgian Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Church of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12871" start="27636" end="27652" title="Simon the Zealot" label="Simon the Zealot"/>
<link wikidata="Q59776" start="27687" end="27703" title="Church of Cyprus" label="Church of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q177298" start="27731" end="27736" title="Erdek" label="Erdek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="27782" end="27786" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q185856" start="27791" end="27799" title="Barnabas" label="Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q242758" start="27806" end="27831" title="Bulgarian Orthodox Church" label="Bulgarian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="27869" end="27887" title="Andrew the Apostle" label="Andrew the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="27895" end="27918" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="27960" end="27974" title="Andrew the Apostle" label="Apostle Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="28031" end="28035" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="28223" end="28238" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="28240" end="28258" title="Church of the East" label="Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="28260" end="28277" title="Oriental Orthodoxy" label="Oriental Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="28287" end="28310" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="28433" end="28445" title="Old Catholic" label="Old Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="28447" end="28455" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="28457" end="28465" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="28470" end="28478" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="28518" end="28526" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q611644" start="28727" end="28734" title="Bishop (Catholic Church)" label="bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q649263" start="29123" end="29136" title="Papal primacy" label="Papal primacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="29295" end="29300" title="Saint Peter" label="Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q665037" start="29425" end="29429" title="diocese of Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233636" start="31143" end="31153" title="Sacraments of the Catholic Church" label="sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="31165" end="31172" title="baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="31177" end="31186" title="matrimony" label="matrimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="31355" end="31366" title="Holy Orders" label="Holy Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="31714" end="31727" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="Pope Leo XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="31747" end="31751" title="Papal bull" label="bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q619982" start="31758" end="31775" title="Apostolicae curae" label="Apostolicae curae"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="31978" end="31987" title="Edward VI of England" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q114001190" start="32302" end="32319" title="Edwardine Ordinal" label="Edwardine Ordinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q619982" start="32953" end="32968" title="Saepius officio" label="Saepius officio"/>
<link wikidata="Q527450" start="33950" end="33960" title="Basil Hume" label="Basil Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q336805" start="34018" end="34032" title="Graham Leonard" label="Graham Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522948" start="35225" end="35235" title="The Tablet" label="The Tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="35571" end="35583" title="Old Catholic" label="Old Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q336805" start="35815" end="35829" title="Graham Leonard" label="Graham Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="36114" end="36156" title="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith" label="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="37118" end="37129" title="Ontology" label="ontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="37183" end="37187" title="Pope" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q865026" start="37192" end="37199" title="Bishop of Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="37434" end="37450" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4199063" start="37578" end="37586" title="Economy (Eastern Orthodoxy)" label="economia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092756" start="37888" end="37903" title="Moscow Sobor of 1666–1667" label="Synod of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860128" start="38017" end="38075" title="Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America" label="Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="38585" end="38623" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q919288" start="38897" end="38926" title="Meletius IV of Constantinople" label="Meletius IV of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q632602" start="39219" end="39261" title="Eastern Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem" label="Eastern Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q59776" start="39278" end="39311" title="Church of Cyprus" label="Eastern Orthodox Church of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="39443" end="39467" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q683724" start="39910" end="39935" title="Armenian Apostolic Church" label="Armenian Apostolic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595548" start="40385" end="40421" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in Kenya" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q163202" start="40959" end="40991" title="Prussian Union of churches" label="the Prussian state-ordered union"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="41124" end="41132" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q368606" start="41163" end="41179" title="Porvoo Communion" label="Porvoo Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q106935989" start="41376" end="41413" title="Communion of Nordic Lutheran Dioceses" label="Communion of Nordic Lutheran Dioceses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379849" start="41784" end="41801" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland" label="Church of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208293" start="43251" end="43260" title="Järvenpää" label="Järvenpää"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236616" start="43326" end="43342" title="Porvoo Cathedral" label="Porvoo Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q368606" start="43356" end="43372" title="Porvoo Communion" label="Porvoo Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413245" start="43515" end="43553" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Iceland" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q666860" start="43555" end="43571" title="Church of Norway" label="Church of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q749243" start="43573" end="43589" title="Church of Sweden" label="Church of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379849" start="43591" end="43629" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q595269" start="43631" end="43667" title="Estonian Evangelical Lutheran Church" label="Estonian Evangelical Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379883" start="43669" end="43709" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Lithuania" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q855585" start="43711" end="43728" title="Church of Denmark" label="Church of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q739910" start="43777" end="43814" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Latvia" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="43838" end="43855" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205829" start="43857" end="43882" title="Scottish Episcopal Church" label="Scottish Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="43884" end="43901" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089788" start="43907" end="43922" title="Church in Wales" label="Church in Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877715" start="43928" end="43976" title="Lusitanian Catholic Apostolic Evangelical Church" label="Lusitanian Catholic Apostolic Evangelical Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q937313" start="43986" end="44019" title="Spanish Reformed Episcopal Church" label="Spanish Reformed Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q855585" start="44114" end="44131" title="Church of Denmark" label="Church of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q77260" start="44318" end="44337" title="Johannes Bugenhagen" label="Johannes Bugenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705675" start="44560" end="44592" title="Lutheran Church in Great Britain" label="Lutheran Church in Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q544323" start="44659" end="44682" title="High Church Lutheranism" label="High Church Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="44687" end="44706" title="Pietist Lutheranism" label="Pietist Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895068" start="44740" end="44787" title="Evangelical Lutheran Mission Diocese of Finland" label="Evangelical Lutheran Mission Diocese of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385715" start="44789" end="44829" title="Missionsprovinsen" label="Mission Province of the Church of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q20035898" start="44839" end="44877" title="Evangelical Lutheran Diocese of Norway" label="Evangelical Lutheran Diocese of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649443" start="44909" end="44924" title="national church" label="national church"/>
<link wikidata="Q52636562" start="45094" end="45121" title="altar and pulpit fellowship" label="altar and pulpit fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q106935989" start="45134" end="45171" title="Communion of Nordic Lutheran Dioceses" label="Communion of Nordic Lutheran Dioceses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350994" start="45208" end="45238" title="International Lutheran Council" label="International Lutheran Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595548" start="45349" end="45385" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in Kenya" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515053" start="45478" end="45518" title="Hochkirchliche St. Johannes-Bruderschaft" label="Hochkirchliche St. Johannes-Bruderschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621913" start="45523" end="45559" title="Hochkirchlicher Apostolat St. Ansgar" label="Hochkirchlicher Apostolat St. Ansgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="45723" end="45761" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q649499" start="45905" end="45919" title="full communion" label="full communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="45929" end="45945" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021877" start="45981" end="46005" title="Called to Common Mission" label="Called to Common Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415645" start="46454" end="46481" title="Evangelical Catholic Church (Lutheran)" label="Evangelical Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415640" start="46615" end="46635" title="Evangelical Catholic" label="Evangelical Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159108" start="46781" end="46810" title="Independent Catholic Churches" label="Independent Catholic churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749204" start="46833" end="46878" title="The Lutheran Evangelical Protestant Church" label="Lutheran Evangelical Protestant Church (LEPC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987095" start="47150" end="47181" title="Lutheran Church - International" label="Lutheran Church - International"/>
<link wikidata="Q541225" start="47295" end="47325" title="Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church" label="Anglo-Lutheran Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169816" start="47366" end="47378" title="Old Catholic" label="Old Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159108" start="47383" end="47403" title="Independent Catholic" label="Independent Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="47435" end="47451" title="episcopal polity" label="episcopal polity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47633" end="47657" title="Lutheran Orthodox Church" label="Lutheran Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620644" start="47895" end="47918" title="Church Order (Lutheran)" label="church governance views"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="47922" end="47935" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="48019" end="48025" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q163202" start="48207" end="48221" title="Prussian Union (Evangelical Christian Church)" label="Prussian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="48329" end="48344" title="Reformed Church" label="Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q966577" start="48636" end="48656" title="United and uniting churches" label="united church bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q151624" start="48695" end="48715" title="German Confederation" label="German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q693844" start="49107" end="49137" title="Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod" label="Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q216106" start="49301" end="49317" title="C. F. W. Walther" label="C. F. W. Walther"/>
<link wikidata="Q193312" start="49512" end="49530" title="Anglican Communion" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="49854" end="49871" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="50242" end="50252" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="50339" end="50355" title="episcopal polity" label="episcopal polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="50412" end="50420" title="Reformed tradition" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="50482" end="50491" title="Edward VI of England" label="Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q199894" start="50695" end="50709" title="Thomas Cranmer" label="Thomas Cranmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q711332" start="50828" end="50842" title="Matthew Parker" label="Matthew Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q443783" start="51176" end="51190" title="Richard Hooker" label="Richard Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="51596" end="51604" title="James II of England" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="51609" end="51631" title="William III of England" label="William III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137662" start="52274" end="52284" title="Tractarian" label="Tractarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44490" start="52335" end="52341" title="John Henry Newman" label="Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q336569" start="52488" end="52502" title="Michael Ramsey" label="Michael Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706574" start="53109" end="53124" title="J. B. Lightfoot" label="J. B. Lightfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799003" start="53275" end="53287" title="Arthur Headlam" label="A.C. Headlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="53488" end="53506" title="Methodism" label="Methodist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q49703" start="53549" end="53559" title="sacraments" label="sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="53571" end="53586" title="Anglican Church" label="Anglican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823854" start="53761" end="53776" title="Methodist local preacher" label="local preachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q906066" start="53791" end="53806" title="Church service" label="worship service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907505" start="53812" end="53820" title="Revival meeting" label="revivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587771" start="53826" end="53842" title="Bishop of London" label="Bishop of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q918254" start="53898" end="53923" title="British colonization of the Americas" label="British American colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="53925" end="53936" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="54075" end="54089" title="Greek Orthodox" label="Greek Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384983" start="54097" end="54130" title="Erasmus of Arcadia" label="Erasmus of the Diocese of Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353927" start="54251" end="54258" title="Elder (Methodism)" label="priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q10638321" start="54409" end="54422" title="Praemunire" label="Præmunire Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641470" start="54486" end="54502" title="World Methodist Council" label="Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070069" start="55035" end="55046" title="high church" label="high church"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="55143" end="55148" title="holy orders" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139984" start="55185" end="55205" title="Church of Alexandria" label="Church of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="55207" end="55213" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q31966" start="55849" end="55868" title="Mark the Evangelist" label="Mark the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q56315811" start="56018" end="56027" title="Anglican ministry" label="ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q918254" start="56035" end="56060" title="British colonization of the Americas" label="British American colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q718439" start="56264" end="56275" title="Thomas Coke (bishop)" label="Thomas Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="56347" end="56370" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943021" start="56469" end="56503" title="Book of Discipline (United Methodist)" label="Discipline of the Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="56705" end="56716" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="56737" end="56753" title="Bible" label="sacred scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055765" start="56889" end="56905" title="sacred tradition" label="sacred tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984067" start="56913" end="56935" title="Wesleyan Quadrilateral" label="Wesleyan Quadrilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="56950" end="56964" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q769691" start="57115" end="57139" title="British Methodist Church" label="British Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089797" start="57801" end="57822" title="Church of North India" label="Church of North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089802" start="57824" end="57842" title="Church of Pakistan" label="Church of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089816" start="57847" end="57868" title="Church of South India" label="Church of South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641470" start="57888" end="57911" title="World Methodist Council" label="World Methodist Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q966577" start="57942" end="57968" title="United and uniting churches" label="united Protestant churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q48723869" start="58078" end="58111" title="Church of India, Burma and Ceylon" label="Church of India, Burma and Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="58193" end="58210" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586039" start="58302" end="58329" title="Methodist Church in Ireland" label="Methodist Church in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785670" start="58344" end="58364" title="Archbishop of Dublin (Church of Ireland)" label="Archbishop of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917831" start="58369" end="58395" title="Bishop of Down and Dromore" label="Bishop of Down and Dromore"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="58837" end="58852" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060869" start="58866" end="58880" title="Hussite Church" label="Hussite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738262" start="58999" end="59020" title="Unity of the Brethren (Czech Republic)" label="Unity of the Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="59140" end="59150" title="Waldensian" label="Waldensian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490065" start="59254" end="59260" title="Litice nad Orlicí" label="Litice"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="59523" end="59535" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492902" start="59719" end="59737" title="Christian laying on of hands" label="laying on of hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886961" start="59776" end="59796" title="Westminster Assembly" label="Westminster Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089797" start="60030" end="60051" title="Church of North India" label="Church of North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089802" start="60053" end="60071" title="Church of Pakistan" label="Church of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089816" start="60076" end="60097" title="Church of South India" label="Church of South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q613594" start="60117" end="60152" title="World Alliance of Reformed Churches" label="World Alliance of Reformed Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q966577" start="60183" end="60209" title="United and uniting churches" label="united Protestant churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q48723869" start="60319" end="60352" title="Church of India, Burma and Ceylon" label="Church of India, Burma and Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089816" start="60505" end="60526" title="Church of South India" label="Church of South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q966577" start="60530" end="60547" title="United Protestant" label="United Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917926" start="60696" end="60712" title="Diocese of Nagpur (Church of North India)" label="bishop of Nagpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089797" start="60720" end="60741" title="Church of North India" label="Church of North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="60828" end="60839" title="Pentecostal" label="Pentecostal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323770" start="60849" end="60863" title="K. P. Yohannan" label="K. P. Yohannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882833" start="60981" end="61005" title="Believers Eastern Church" label="Believers Eastern Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="61052" end="61068" title="episcopal polity" label="episcopal polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q700743" start="61265" end="61278" title="Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee)" label="Church of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741802" start="61297" end="61321" title="Ambrose Jessup Tomlinson" label="Ambrose Jessup Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="61524" end="61549" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316200" start="61631" end="61642" title="Restoration (Latter Day Saints)" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="61695" end="61703" title="apostasy" label="apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492096" start="61814" end="61834" title="Priesthood (Latter Day Saints)" label="Priesthood Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="61950" end="61962" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62113" end="62147" title="Restoration (Latter Day Saints)#Partial list of restoration events" label="partial list of restoration events"/>
<link wikidata="Q982343" start="62212" end="62226" title="Oliver Cowdery" label="Oliver Cowdery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357681" start="62326" end="62348" title="Melchizedek priesthood (Latter Day Saints)" label="Melchizedek Priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="62453" end="62500" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779357" start="62663" end="62692" title="Quorum of the Twelve Apostles (LDS Church)" label="Quorum of the Twelve Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000892" start="62708" end="62731" title="President of the Church (LDS Church)" label="President of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620760" start="62754" end="62761" title="Apostle (LDS Church)" label="apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867591" start="62788" end="62834" title="President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles" label="President of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456890" start="62839" end="62848" title="Setting apart" label="set apart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057571" start="62856" end="62876" title="List of presidents of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="new church president"/>
<link wikidata="Q310430" start="63484" end="63498" title="Sola Scriptura" label="Sola Scriptura"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="63571" end="63582" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="63962" end="63980" title="Church of the East" label="Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="63989" end="64006" title="Oriental Orthodox" label="Oriental Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q184332" start="64095" end="64102" title="First Council of Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170531" start="64113" end="64122" title="Council of Chalcedon" label="Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159999" start="64865" end="64889" title="Confessional Lutheranism" label="Confessional Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385715" start="64938" end="64954" title="Missionsprovinsen" label="Mission Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379853" start="64976" end="65013" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Ingria" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Ingria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19595548" start="65018" end="65054" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in Kenya" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65073" end="65090" title="#Lutheran churches" label="Lutheran churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350994" start="65118" end="65148" title="International Lutheran Council" label="International Lutheran Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379931" start="65206" end="65242" title="Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod" label="Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q693844" start="65254" end="65286" title="Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod" label="Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q12491745" start="66362" end="66368" title="Acts 1" label="Acts 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857708" start="66946" end="66967" title="Baptist successionism" label="Baptist successionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419441" start="66976" end="66993" title="Episcopi vagantes" label="Episcopi vagantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q382356" start="67002" end="67020" title="Lineage (Buddhism)" label="Lineage (Buddhism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647146" start="67065" end="67080" title="List of bishops" label="List of bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q512232" start="67083" end="67103" title="New Apostolic Church" label="New Apostolic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q47144" start="67106" end="67116" title="Pope Linus" label="Pope Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911660" start="67119" end="67136" title="Valid but illicit" label="Valid but illicit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281900" start="67248" end="67264" title="On the Detection and Overthrow of the So-Called Gnosis" label="Against Heresies"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="67299" end="67320" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q959180" start="67357" end="67367" title="Scott Hahn" label="Scott Hahn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2268" wikidata="Q193598" url="?curid=2268" title="Chemistry of ascorbic acid">
<text>Ascorbic acid is an organic compound with formula , originally called hexuronic acid. It is a white solid, but impure samples can appear yellowish. It dissolves freely in water to give mildly acidic solutions. It is a mild reducing agent.

Ascorbic acid exists as two enantiomers (mirror-image isomers), commonly denoted &quot;&quot; (for &quot;levo&quot;) and &quot;&quot; (for &quot;dextro&quot;). The isomer is the one most often encountered: it occurs naturally in many foods, and is one form (&quot;vitamer&quot;) of vitamin C, an essential nutrient for humans and many animals. Deficiency of vitamin C causes scurvy, formerly a major disease of sailors in long sea voyages. It is used as a food additive and a dietary supplement for its antioxidant properties. The &quot;&quot; form (erythorbic acid) can be made by chemical synthesis, but has no significant biological role.

==History==

The antiscorbutic properties of certain foods were demonstrated in the 18th century by James Lind. In 1907, Axel Holst and Theodor Frølich discovered that the antiscorbutic factor was a water-soluble chemical substance, distinct from the one that prevented beriberi. Between 1928 and 1932, Albert Szent-Györgyi isolated a candidate for this substance, which he called &quot;hexuronic acid&quot;, first from plants and later from animal adrenal glands. In 1932 Charles Glen King confirmed that it was indeed the antiscorbutic factor.

In 1933, sugar chemist Walter Norman Haworth, working with samples of &quot;hexuronic acid&quot; that Szent-Györgyi had isolated from paprika and sent him in the previous year, deduced the correct structure and optical-isomeric nature of the compound, and in 1934 reported its first synthesis. In reference to the compound&#x27;s antiscorbutic properties, Haworth and Szent-Györgyi proposed to rename it &quot;a-scorbic acid&quot; for the compound, and later specifically -ascorbic acid. Because of their work, in 1937 two Nobel Prizes: in Chemistry and in Physiology or Medicine were awarded to Haworth and Szent-Györgyi, respectively.

==Chemical properties==

===Acidity===
Ascorbic acid is a furan-based lactone of 2-ketogluconic acid. It contains an adjacent enediol adjacent to the carbonyl. This −C(OH)=C(OH)−C(=O)− structural pattern is characteristic of reductones, and increases the acidity of one of the enol hydroxyl groups. The deprotonated conjugate base is the ascorbate anion, which is stabilized by electron delocalization that results from resonance between two forms:

For this reason, ascorbic acid is much more acidic than would be expected if the compound contained only isolated hydroxyl groups.

===Salts===
The ascorbate anion forms salts, such as sodium ascorbate, calcium ascorbate, and potassium ascorbate.

===Esters===
Ascorbic acid can also react with organic acids as an alcohol forming esters such as ascorbyl palmitate and ascorbyl stearate.

===Nucleophilic attack===
Nucleophilic attack of ascorbic acid on a proton results in a 1,3-diketone: 

===Oxidation===


The ascorbate ion is the predominant species at typical biological pH values. It is a mild reducing agent and antioxidant, typically reacting with oxidants of the reactive oxygen species, such as the hydroxyl radical.

Reactive oxygen species are damaging to animals and plants at the molecular level due to their possible interaction with nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids. Sometimes these radicals initiate chain reactions. Ascorbate can terminate these chain radical reactions by electron transfer. The oxidized forms of ascorbate are relatively unreactive and do not cause cellular damage.

Ascorbic acid and its sodium, potassium, and calcium salts are commonly used as antioxidant food additives. These compounds are water-soluble and, thus, cannot protect fats from oxidation: For this purpose, the fat-soluble esters of ascorbic acid with long-chain fatty acids (ascorbyl palmitate or ascorbyl stearate) can be used as antioxidant food additives. Sodium-dependent active transport process enables absorption of Ascorbic acid from the intestine.

Ascorbate readily donates a hydrogen atom to free radicals, forming the radical anion semidehydroascorbate (also known as monodehydroascorbate), a resonance-stabilized semitrione:

Loss of an electron from semidehydroascorbate to produce the 1,2,3-tricarbonyl pseudodehydroascorbate is thermodynamically disfavored, which helps prevent propagation of free radical chain reactions such as autoxidation:
: formula_1 

However, being a good electron donor, excess ascorbate in the presence of free metal ions can not only promote but also initiate free radical reactions, thus making it a potentially dangerous pro-oxidative compound in certain metabolic contexts.

Semidehydroascorbate oxidation instead occurs in conjunction with hydration, yielding the bicyclic hemiketal dehydroascorbate. In particular, semidehydroascorbate undergoes disproportionation to ascorbate and dehydroascorbate:
:

Aqueous solutions of dehydroascorbate are unstable, undergoing hydrolysis with a half-life of 5–15 minutes at . Decomposition products include diketogulonic acid, xylonic acid, threonic acid and oxalic acid.

===Other reactions===
It creates volatile compounds when mixed with glucose and amino acids at 90 °C.

It is a cofactor in tyrosine oxidation, though because a crude extract of animal liver is used, it is unclear which reaction catalyzed by which enzyme is being helped here. For known roles in enzymatic reactions, see .

Because it reduces iron(III) and chelates iron ions, it enhances the oral absorption of non-heme iron. This property also applies to its enantiomer.

====Conversion to oxalate====
In 1958, it was discovered that ascorbic acid can be converted to oxalate, a key component of calcium oxalate kidney stones. The process begins with the formation of dehydroascorbic acid (DHA) from the ascorbyl radical. While DHA can be recycled back to ascorbic acid, a portion irreversibly degrades to 2,3-diketogulonic acid (DKG), which then breaks down to both oxalate and the sugars L-erythrulose and threosone. Research conducted in the 1960s suggested ascorbic acid could substantially contribute to urinary oxalate content (possibly over 40%), but these estimates have been questioned due to methodological limitations. Subsequent large cohort studies have yielded conflicting results regarding the link between vitamin C intake and kidney stone formation. The overall clinical significance of ascorbic acid consumption to kidney stone risk, however, remains inconclusive, although several studies have suggested a potential association, especially with high-dose supplementation in men.

==Uses==
===Food additive===
The main use of -ascorbic acid and its salts is as food additives, mostly to combat oxidation and prevent discoloration of the product during storage. It is approved for this purpose in the EU with E number E300, the US, Australia, and New Zealand.

The &quot;&quot; enantiomer (erythorbic acid) shares all of the non-biological chemical properties with the more common enantiomer. As a result, it is an equally effective food antioxidant, and is also approved in processed foods.

===Dietary supplement===
Another major use of -ascorbic acid is as a dietary supplement. It is on the World Health Organization&#x27;s List of Essential Medicines. Its deficiency over a prolonged period of time could cause scurvy, which is characterized by fatigue, widespread weakness in connective tissues and capillary fragility. It affects multiple organ systems due to its role in the biochemical reactions of connective tissue synthesis.

===Niche, non-food uses===

* Ascorbic acid is easily oxidized and so is used as a reductant in photographic developer solutions (among others) and as a preservative.
* In fluorescence microscopy and related fluorescence-based techniques, ascorbic acid can be used as an antioxidant to increase fluorescent signal and chemically retard dye photobleaching.
* It is also commonly used to remove dissolved metal stains, such as iron, from fiberglass swimming pool surfaces.
* In plastic manufacturing, ascorbic acid can be used to assemble molecular chains more quickly and with less waste than traditional synthesis methods.
* Heroin users are known to use ascorbic acid as a means to convert heroin base to a water-soluble salt so that it can be injected.
* As justified by its reaction with iodine, it is used to negate the effects of iodine tablets in water purification. It reacts with the sterilized water, removing the taste, color, and smell of the iodine. This is why it is often sold as a second set of tablets in most sporting goods stores as Potable Aqua-Neutralizing Tablets, along with the potassium iodide tablets.
*Intravenous high-dose ascorbate is being used as a chemotherapeutic and biological response modifying agent. It is undergoing clinical trials.
* It is sometimes used as a urinary acidifier to enhance the antiseptic effect of methenamine.

==Synthesis==
Natural biosynthesis of vitamin C occurs through various processes in many plants and animals.

===Industrial preparation===

Seventy percent of the world&#x27;s supply of ascorbic acid is produced in China. Ascorbic acid is prepared in industry from glucose in a method based on the historical Reichstein process. In the first of a five-step process, glucose is catalytically hydrogenated to sorbitol, which is then oxidized by the microorganism &quot;Acetobacter suboxydans&quot; to sorbose. Only one of the six hydroxy groups is oxidized by this enzymatic reaction. From this point, two routes are available. Treatment of the product with acetone in the presence of an acid catalyst converts four of the remaining hydroxyl groups to acetals. The unprotected hydroxyl group is oxidized to the carboxylic acid by reaction with the catalytic oxidant TEMPO (regenerated by sodium hypochlorite bleaching solution). Historically, industrial preparation via the Reichstein process used potassium permanganate as the bleaching solution. Acid-catalyzed hydrolysis of this product performs the dual function of removing the two acetal groups and ring-closing lactonization. This step yields ascorbic acid. Each of the five steps has a yield larger than 90%.

A biotechnological process, first developed in China in the 1960s but further developed in the 1990s, bypassing acetone-protecting groups. A second genetically modified microbe species, such as mutant &quot;Erwinia&quot;, among others, oxidises sorbose into 2-ketogluconic acid (2-KGA), which can then undergo ring-closing lactonization via dehydration. This method is used in the predominant process used by the ascorbic acid industry in China, which supplies 70% of the world&#x27;s ascorbic acid. Researchers are exploring means for one-step fermentation.

===Determination===
The traditional way to analyze the ascorbic acid content is by titration with an oxidizing agent, and several procedures have been developed.

The popular iodometry approach uses iodine in the presence of a starch indicator. Iodine is reduced by ascorbic acid, and when all the ascorbic acid has reacted, the iodine is in excess, forming a blue-black complex with the starch indicator. This indicates the end-point of the titration.

As an alternative, ascorbic acid can be treated with iodine in excess, followed by back titration with sodium thiosulfate using starch as an indicator.

This iodometric method has been revised to exploit the reaction of ascorbic acid with iodate and iodide in acid solution. Electrolyzing the potassium iodide solution produces iodine, which reacts with ascorbic acid. The end of the process is determined by potentiometric titration like Karl Fischer titration. The amount of ascorbic acid can be calculated by Faraday&#x27;s law.

Another alternative uses &quot;N&quot;-bromosuccinimide (NBS) as the oxidizing agent in the presence of potassium iodide and starch. The NBS first oxidizes the ascorbic acid; when the latter is exhausted, the NBS liberates the iodine from the potassium iodide, which then forms the blue-black complex with starch.

== See also ==
* Colour retention agent
* Erythorbic acid: a diastereomer of ascorbic acid.
* Mineral ascorbates: salts of ascorbic acid
* Acids in wine

==References==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 


== External links ==
*
*IPCS Poisons Information Monograph (PIM) 046
*Interactive 3D-structure of vitamin C with details on the x-ray structure</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193598" start="0" end="13" title="Chemistry of ascorbic acid" label="Ascorbic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="20" end="36" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q193598" start="70" end="84" title="Chemistry of ascorbic acid" label="hexuronic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="223" end="237" title="redox" label="reducing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q494483" start="268" end="278" title="enantiomer" label="enantiomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127950" start="294" end="300" title="isomer" label="isomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710532" start="504" end="511" title="vitamer" label="vitamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="522" end="531" title="vitamin C" label="vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q163865" start="615" end="621" title="scurvy" label="scurvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189567" start="696" end="709" title="food additive" label="food additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="716" end="734" title="dietary supplement" label="dietary supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q133948" start="743" end="754" title="antioxidant" label="antioxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q424531" start="790" end="805" title="erythorbic acid" label="erythorbic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q163865" start="900" end="913" title="scurvy" label="antiscorbutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q709525" start="983" end="993" title="James Lind" label="James Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q518399" start="1004" end="1014" title="Axel Holst" label="Axel Holst"/>
<link wikidata="Q14861532" start="1019" end="1034" title="Theodor Frølich" label="Theodor Frølich"/>
<link wikidata="Q184084" start="1153" end="1161" title="beriberi" label="beriberi"/>
<link wikidata="Q180468" start="1186" end="1206" title="Albert Szent-Györgyi" label="Albert Szent-Györgyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959232" start="1356" end="1373" title="Charles Glen King" label="Charles Glen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q204600" start="1453" end="1474" title="Norman Haworth" label="Walter Norman Haworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127593" start="1564" end="1571" title="paprika" label="paprika"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="1953" end="1964" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q243992" start="2126" end="2131" title="furan" label="furan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59078" start="2138" end="2145" title="lactone" label="lactone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2149" end="2168" title="2-ketogluconic acid" label="2-ketogluconic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q408053" start="2194" end="2201" title="enediol" label="enediol"/>
<link wikidata="Q201479" start="2218" end="2226" title="carbonyl" label="carbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347057" start="2293" end="2302" title="reductone" label="reductone"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="2350" end="2364" title="hydroxyl group" label="hydroxyl group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014867" start="2384" end="2398" title="conjugate base" label="conjugate base"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="2406" end="2415" title="ascorbate" label="ascorbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q911365" start="2488" end="2497" title="resonance (chemistry)" label="resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="2688" end="2693" title="salt (chemistry)" label="salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q424551" start="2703" end="2719" title="sodium ascorbate" label="sodium ascorbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q283033" start="2721" end="2738" title="calcium ascorbate" label="calcium ascorbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q56410901" start="2744" end="2763" title="potassium ascorbate" label="potassium ascorbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="2833" end="2840" title="alcohol (chemistry)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="2849" end="2854" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q424521" start="2864" end="2882" title="ascorbyl palmitate" label="ascorbyl palmitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q286793" start="2887" end="2904" title="ascorbyl stearate" label="ascorbyl stearate"/>
<link wikidata="Q745930" start="2933" end="2952" title="Nucleophile" label="Nucleophilic attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q216830" start="3120" end="3134" title="reducing agent" label="reducing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q133948" start="3139" end="3150" title="antioxidant" label="antioxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="3192" end="3215" title="reactive oxygen species" label="reactive oxygen species"/>
<link wikidata="Q427071" start="3229" end="3245" title="hydroxyl radical" label="hydroxyl radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q123619" start="3369" end="3381" title="nucleic acid" label="nucleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q902898" start="3514" end="3531" title="electron transfer" label="electron transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="3679" end="3683" title="Salt (chemistry)" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q133948" start="3706" end="3717" title="antioxidant" label="antioxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q189567" start="3718" end="3731" title="food additive" label="food additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q127980" start="3794" end="3797" title="fat" label="fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="3841" end="3848" title="Solubility" label="soluble"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="3849" end="3854" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="3889" end="3899" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="4130" end="4143" title="radical (chemistry)" label="free radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993452" start="4157" end="4170" title="radical anion" label="radical anion"/>
<link wikidata="Q123499544" start="4253" end="4263" title="semitrione" label="semitrione"/>
<link wikidata="Q789331" start="4473" end="4485" title="autoxidation" label="autoxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q414939" start="4847" end="4856" title="hemiketal" label="hemiketal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116723" start="4857" end="4873" title="dehydroascorbic acid" label="dehydroascorbate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5121" end="5139" title="diketogulonic acid" label="diketogulonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325795" start="5141" end="5153" title="xylonic acid" label="xylonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270244" start="5155" end="5168" title="threonic acid" label="threonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184832" start="5173" end="5184" title="oxalic acid" label="oxalic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="5255" end="5262" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="5267" end="5277" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188017" start="5310" end="5318" title="tyrosine" label="tyrosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="5319" end="5328" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q417351" start="5756" end="5763" title="oxalate" label="oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q178623" start="5800" end="5812" title="kidney stone" label="kidney stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116723" start="5856" end="5876" title="dehydroascorbic acid" label="dehydroascorbic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q27109825" start="6078" end="6091" title="erythrulose" label="L-erythrulose"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6096" end="6105" title="threosone" label="threosone"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="6914" end="6922" title="E number" label="E number"/>
<link wikidata="Q424531" start="6995" end="7010" title="erythorbic acid" label="erythorbic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="7267" end="7285" title="dietary supplement" label="dietary supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q37155" start="7300" end="7360" title="WHO Model List of Essential Medicines" label="World Health Organization&amp;#x27;s List of Essential Medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q274579" start="7796" end="7808" title="preservative" label="preservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q840211" start="7815" end="7838" title="fluorescence microscope" label="fluorescence microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133948" start="7914" end="7925" title="antioxidant" label="antioxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q899750" start="7983" end="7997" title="photobleaching" label="photobleaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="8771" end="8782" title="Intravenous therapy" label="Intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="8822" end="8838" title="Chemotherapy" label="chemotherapeutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915018" start="8843" end="8878" title="Biological response modifiers" label="biological response modifying agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q131340417" start="8996" end="9007" title="methenamine" label="methenamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="9032" end="9057" title="vitamin C" label="biosynthesis of vitamin C"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="9275" end="9282" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q908210" start="9319" end="9337" title="Reichstein process" label="Reichstein process"/>
<link wikidata="Q214166" start="9401" end="9413" title="hydrogenation" label="hydrogenated"/>
<link wikidata="Q245280" start="9417" end="9425" title="sorbitol" label="sorbitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="9441" end="9449" title="redox" label="oxidized"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="9457" end="9470" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9477" end="9488" title="Acetic acid bacteria#Acetobacter" label="Acetobacter"/>
<link wikidata="Q75082910" start="9509" end="9516" title="sorbose" label="sorbose"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="9666" end="9673" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="9701" end="9709" title="Catalysis" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="9741" end="9749" title="hydroxyl" label="hydroxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q421103" start="9760" end="9766" title="acetal" label="acetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q209120" start="9874" end="9879" title="TEMPO" label="TEMPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q407204" start="9896" end="9915" title="sodium hypochlorite" label="sodium hypochlorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11587" start="9916" end="9922" title="bleach" label="bleach"/>
<link wikidata="Q190865" start="10006" end="10028" title="potassium permanganate" label="potassium permanganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q59078" start="10163" end="10189" title="lactone" label="ring-closing lactonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="10424" end="10444" title="genetically modified" label="genetically modified"/>
<link wikidata="Q134827" start="10483" end="10490" title="Erwinia" label="Erwinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191010" start="10919" end="10928" title="titration" label="titration"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="10937" end="10952" title="oxidizing agent" label="oxidizing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q899190" start="11011" end="11020" title="iodometry" label="iodometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="11035" end="11041" title="iodine" label="iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q899258" start="11063" end="11079" title="starch indicator" label="starch indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q415631" start="11529" end="11535" title="iodate" label="iodate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801340" start="11540" end="11546" title="iodide" label="iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="11550" end="11554" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813495" start="11699" end="11723" title="potentiometric titration" label="potentiometric titration"/>
<link wikidata="Q899728" start="11729" end="11751" title="Karl Fischer titration" label="Karl Fischer titration"/>
<link wikidata="Q220609" start="11802" end="11820" title="Faraday&amp;#x27;s laws of electrolysis" label="Faraday&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q286939" start="11848" end="11878" title="N-Bromosuccinimide" label="&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;-bromosuccinimide"/>
<link wikidata="Q121874" start="11927" end="11943" title="potassium iodide" label="potassium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396438" start="12155" end="12177" title="Colour retention agent" label="Colour retention agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q424531" start="12180" end="12195" title="Erythorbic acid" label="Erythorbic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q268477" start="12199" end="12211" title="diastereomer" label="diastereomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q779467" start="12232" end="12250" title="Mineral ascorbates" label="Mineral ascorbates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564911" start="12277" end="12290" title="Acids in wine" label="Acids in wine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2273" wikidata="Q81888" url="?curid=2273" title="AFC Ajax">
<text>Amsterdamsche Football Club Ajax (), also known as AFC Ajax, Ajax Amsterdam, or commonly Ajax, is a Dutch professional football club based in Amsterdam, that plays in the , the top tier in Dutch football. Historically, Ajax (named after the legendary Greek hero) is the most successful club in the Netherlands, with 36 and 20 KNVB Cups. It has continuously played in the since the league&#x27;s inception in 1956, and along with and , it is one of the country&#x27;s &quot;big three&quot; clubs.

Ajax was one of the most successful clubs in the world in the 20th century. According to the International Federation of Football History &amp; Statistics, Ajax was the seventh-most successful European club of the 20th century and &quot;The World&#x27;s Club Team of the Year&quot; in 1992. According to German magazine &quot;Kicker&quot;, Ajax was the second-most successful European club of the 20th century. The club is one of five teams that have earned the right to keep the European Cup and to wear a multiple-winner badge. In 1972, they completed the continental treble by winning the , KNVB Cup, and the European Cup. They also won the first (albeit unofficial) European Super Cup against Rangers in January 1973. Ajax&#x27;s most recent international trophies are the 1995 Intercontinental Cup, 1995 UEFA Super Cup and the 1995 Champions League, where they defeated Milan in the final; they lost the 1996 Champions League final on penalties to Juventus. In 1995, Ajax was crowned as &quot;World Team of the Year&quot; by &quot;World Soccer&quot; magazine.

Ajax is also one of four teams to win the continental treble and the Intercontinental Cup or Club World Cup in the same season/calendar year; this was achieved in the 1971–72 season. Ajax is one of five clubs to have won all three major UEFA club competitions. They have also won the Intercontinental Cup twice, the 1991–92 UEFA Cup, as well as the Karl Rappan Cup, a predecessor of the UEFA Intertoto Cup in 1962. Ajax plays at the Johan Cruyff Arena, which opened as the Amsterdam ArenA in 1996 and was renamed in 2018. They previously played at and the Amsterdam Olympic Stadium (for international matches). Throughout their history, Ajax have cultivated a reputation for scouting, spotting and developing young talent, and have remained focused on developing a youth system.

==History==

Ajax was founded in Amsterdam on 18 March 1900. The club achieved promotion to the highest level of Dutch football in 1911 and had its first major success in 1917, winning the KNVB Beker, the Netherlands&#x27; national cup. The following season, Ajax became national champion for the first time. The club defended its title in 1918–19, becoming the only team to achieve an unbeaten season in the Netherlands Football League Championship.

Throughout the 1920s, Ajax was a strong regional power, winning the Eerste Klasse West division in 1921, 1927 and 1928, but could not maintain its success at the national level. This changed in the 1930s, with the club winning five national championships (1931, 1932, 1934, 1937, 1939), making it the most successful Dutch team of the decade. Ajax won its second KNVB Cup in 1942–43, and an eighth Dutch title in 1946–47, the last season the club was managed by Englishman Jack Reynolds, who, up to this point, had overseen all of its national championship successes as well as its 1917 KNVB Cup win.

In 1956, the first season of the Netherlands&#x27; new professional league, the , was played with Ajax participating as a founding member. The Amsterdam club became the first national champions under the new format and made its debut in the European Champion Clubs&#x27; Cup the following year, losing to Hungarian champions 6–2 on aggregate at the quarter-final stage. The team was again champions in 1960 and won a third KNVB Cup in 1961.


In 1965, Rinus Michels, who had played for the club between 1946 and 1958, was appointed manager of Ajax, implementing his philosophy of Total Football which was to become synonymous with both Ajax and the Netherlands national team. A year earlier, Johan Cruyff, who would go on to become widely regarded as the greatest Dutch footballer of all time, made his debut. Between them, Michels and Cruyff led Ajax through the most successful period in its history, winning seven titles, four KNVB Cups and three European Cups.

Ajax won the Dutch championship in 1966, 1967 and 1968, and reached the 1969 European Cup final, losing to Milan. During the 1966–67 season, Ajax scored a record 122 goals in an season and also won the KNVB Cup to achieve its first league and cup double. In 1969–70, Ajax won a fourth Dutch league championship and second league and cup double in five seasons, winning 27 out of 34 league matches and scoring 100 goals.

The 1970–71 season saw Ajax retain the KNVB Cup and reach the 1971 European Cup final, where they defeated 2–0 with goals from Dick van Dijk and Arie Haan to become continental champions for the first time, with Cruyff being named European Footballer of the Year. After this success, Michels departed to become manager of Barcelona and was replaced by the Romanian Ștefan Kovács. In Kovács&#x27; first season, Ajax completed a treble of the European Cup, the and a third consecutive KNVB Cup. The following season, the team beat Argentine to win the 1972 Intercontinental Cup and retained their and European Cup titles, becoming the first club to win three consecutive European Cups since Real Madrid in the 1950s.

In 1973, Michels&#x27; Barcelona broke the world transfer record to bring Cruyff to Catalonia. Kovács also departed to become manager of the France national team, signalling the end of this period of international success.

In 1976–77, Ajax won its first domestic championship in four seasons and recorded a double of the and KNVB Cup two years later.

The early 1980s saw the return of Cruyff to the club, as well as the emergence of young players Marco van Basten and Frank Rijkaard. The team won back-to-back titles in 1982 and 1983, with all three playing a significant role in the latter. After Cruyff&#x27;s sale to rivals in 1983, van Basten became Ajax&#x27;s key player, top scoring in the for four seasons between 1983–84 and 1986–87.

In 1985, Cruyff returned to Ajax as manager and the team ended his first season in charge with 120 goals from 34 matches. However, Ajax still finished as runner-up to PSV by eight points. The following season, Ajax again lost out on the title to PSV, but won the European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup, its first continental trophy in 14 years. After this, Cruyff left the club to become manager of Barcelona and Rijkaard and van Basten were sold to Sporting CP and Milan respectively. Despite these losses, Ajax reached a second consecutive Cup Winners&#x27; Cup final in 1988, where they lost to Belgian club .

The 1988–89 season saw Dennis Bergkamp, a young forward who had first appeared under Cruyff in 1986, establish himself as a regular goalscorer for Ajax. Bergkamp helped Ajax to the title and was the top scorer in the division in 1990–91, 1991–92 and 1992–93. Under the management of Louis van Gaal, Ajax won the UEFA Cup in 1992 to become the second club, after , to have won all three major European club competitions.

After the sale of Bergkamp to in 1993, van Gaal re-signed the experienced Rijkaard to complement his young Ajax team featuring academy graduates Frank and Ronald de Boer, Edwin van der Sar, Clarence Seedorf, Edgar Davids, Michael Reiziger and Winston Bogarde, as well as mercurial foreign talents Finidi George, Nwankwo Kanu and Jari Litmanen, and veteran captain Danny Blind. The team regained the Dutch championship in 1993–94, and won it again in 1994–95 and 1995–96 to become the first Ajax side to win three back-to-back championships since 1968. The height of van Gaal&#x27;s success came in 1994–95, where Ajax became the first, and to date only, team to complete an entire season unbeaten. The team also won its first European Cup since its 1970s era, defeating Milan in the 1995 UEFA Champions League final 1–0, with the winning goal scored by 18-year-old Patrick Kluivert. Ajax again reached the final one year later, and was defeated on penalties by .

Ajax&#x27;s return as a European force was short-lived, as van Gaal and several members of the squad soon departed to some of the continent&#x27;s biggest clubs. The 2000s was a lean decade for the club, with only two championships won. However, Ajax&#x27;s academy continued to produce star players such as Wesley Sneijder and Rafael van der Vaart.

In 2010, Frank de Boer was appointed manager of Ajax and led the club to its first league title in seven years, and record 30th title overall, in the 2010–11 season. This was followed by back-to-back wins in 2011–12 and 2012–13 to match his three consecutive titles as a player in the 1990s. In 2013–14, Ajax was again champions, winning four consecutive league titles for the first time in club history. After finishing as runner-up to PSV in both 2014–15 and 2015–16, de Boer resigned as Ajax head coach in May 2016.

Peter Bosz took over the club and led them to the 2017 UEFA Europa League final, their first European final in 21 years. They lost to Manchester United with a lineup that was the youngest ever in a European final, averaging an age of 22 years and 282 days. For the third consecutive season, they finished runner-up in the , this time to .

The 2018–19 season for Ajax involved a remarkable run in the UEFA Champions League. Due to their runner-up finish in the 2017–18 Eredivisie, Ajax entered the tournament in the second qualifying round. After successive victories against Sturm Graz, and , they qualified for the group stage. Ajax was drawn in a group with German champions Bayern Munich, Portuguese side Benfica and Greek champions AEK Athens. Ajax finished runner-up in this group, qualifying for the knockout stages, where it was drawn against three-time defending champions Real Madrid. After losing 1–2 in the first leg, they defeated Real Madrid 4–1 in the away match, stunning the defending champions in their own stadium, the Santiago Bernabéu, with an aggregate score of 5–3. Dušan Tadić was awarded a perfect score of 10 by following the match.
Thus, Ajax progressed to the quarter-finals and was drawn with Italian champions . In the first leg in the Johan Cruyff Arena, they drew 1–1. In the second leg at the Juventus Stadium, Ajax came from behind to win 2–1 and 3–2 on aggregate. Matthijs de Ligt scored the winning goal for Ajax to help the team advance to its first Champions League semi-final since 1997. There, they would face English side Tottenham Hotspur.

In the first leg of the semi-final, Ajax beat Tottenham 1–0 away from home. In the second leg, Ajax scored twice in the first half to generate a 3–0 lead on aggregate. However, in the second half, Lucas Moura scored three times, including in the 6th minute of added time, resulting in Ajax losing via the away goals rule.

Ajax was in first place on goal difference when the was declared void, preventing them being Dutch champions for the 35th time, but still qualified for the 2020–21 UEFA Champions League.

In this, it was eliminated again, but in 2021 it reached the quarter-finals of the Europa League. It was eliminated against AS Roma. That season, it again won both the national title and the KNVB Cup.
In the 2021–22 AFC Ajax season Ajax again became champion of the Netherlands. It had to give up the KNVB Cup and the Johan Cruijff Shield to competitor PSV because it came out on the losing end in both finals. In European terms, Ajax achieved first place in the Champions League group, all six matches were won, mostly by a wide margin. After the winter break, Ajax was narrowly eliminated in the eighth finals by the Portuguese Benfica Lisboa (Lisbon) (2-2 away, 0-1 at home).

As of July 1, 2022, Alfred Schreuder succeeded Erik ten Hag, who left for Manchester United, as Ajax&#x27;s coach. Most of the key players from previous seasons left during the summer transfer period, but there was also a lot of reinvestment. Ajax started the 2022/23 season relatively well with six consecutive victories in the Eredivisie. But Ajax was eliminated from the Champions League quite quickly in a group with Liverpool FC, SSC Napoli and Rangers FC. At home against Napoli on October 4, 2022, they even lost by 5 goals (1-6), Ajax&#x27;s biggest defeat ever in European competition. After seven consecutive matches without a win head coach Alfred Schreuder was dismissed. John Heitinga succeeded Schreuder as interim. Under Heitinga, Ajax failed to turn things around despite a good start with seven wins in a row. Ajax finished third in the Eredivisie, behind champions Feyenoord and runners-up PSV. This was the club&#x27;s lowest final ranking since the 2008/09 season, in which it also finished third. After the winter break, Ajax was eliminated in the first knockout phase of the Europa League by Union Berlin (3-1). Ajax did reach the final of the KNVB Cup, but lost to PSV on penalties (3-2).

On May 19, 2023, Sven Mislintat took over as Ajax&#x27;s sports director. He succeeded Marc Overmars, who left in early 2022. Mislintat appointed Maurice Steijn as head coach. Mislintat spent approximately 111 million euros on transfers. Ajax had its worst start to the season in fifty-nine years. On October 29, 2023, Ajax reached a historic low. Ajax lost 5-2 to PSV in Eindhoven. This put Ajax in last place, 18th place in the Eredivisie, for the first time since the club was founded. 
The position of director Mislintat became an embarrassment after it emerged that he had arranged a transfer through a player agent who was an investor in his company. In the evening of 24 September Mislintat was fired with immediate effect, among other things a lack of broad support within the club was one of the reasons. A day after the loss against PSV it was announced that John van &#x27;t Schip would become the head coach until the end of the season. Under the leadership of Van &#x27;t Schip Ajax managed to climb to 5th place in the Eredivisie. In the Europa League Ajax finished third, which meant a sequel in the Conference League, were it eventually lost to Aston Villa in the round of 16. In the cup Ajax was eliminated 3-2 by the third division amateurs of USV Hercules. 

In the summer of 2024 a rebuild began, with a new board of directors and Alex Kroes and Marijn Beuker as Technical Director and Director of Football. They hired Francesco Farioli as new head coach, the first foreign coach since 1998. Under his leadership Ajax reached the league phase of the Europa League where it finished 11th. On the 9th of February 2025 Ajax finished the weekend on the first place for the first time since November 2022.

===UEFA ranking===

==Academies==

The club is also particularly famous for its renowned youth programme that has produced many Dutch talents over the years – Johan Cruyff, Edwin van der Sar, Gerald Vanenburg, Frank Rijkaard, Dennis Bergkamp, Rafael van der Vaart, Patrick Kluivert, Marco van Basten, Wesley Sneijder, Maarten Stekelenburg, Nigel de Jong, Frenkie de Jong, and Matthijs de Ligt have come through the ranks and are just some of the talents who have played for Ajax. Ajax also regularly supplies the Dutch national youth teams with local talent.

Due to mutual agreements with foreign clubs, the youth academy has also signed foreign players as teenagers before making first team debuts, such as Belgian defensive trio Jan Vertonghen, Toby Alderweireld and Thomas Vermaelen along with winger Tom De Mul, all of whom are full internationals, as well as Dutch international Vurnon Anita and Javier Martina, representing Curaçao.

Ajax has also expanded its talent searching programme to South Africa with Ajax Cape Town. Ajax Cape Town was set up with the help of Rob Moore. Ajax has also had a satellite club in the United States under the name Ajax America, until it filed for bankruptcy. There are some youth players from Ajax Cape Town that have been drafted into the squad, such as South African internationals Steven Pienaar and Thulani Serero and Cameroonian international Eyong Enoh.

In 1995, the year Ajax won the UEFA Champions League, the Netherlands national team was almost entirely composed of Ajax players, with van der Sar in goal; players such as Michael Reiziger, Frank de Boer and Danny Blind in defence; Ronald de Boer, Edgar Davids and Clarence Seedorf in midfield; and Patrick Kluivert and Marc Overmars in attack.

In 2011, Ajax opened its first youth academies outside the Netherlands when the club partnered up with George Kazianis and All Star Consultancy in Greece to open the Ajax Hellas Youth Academy. The offices are based in Nea Smyrni, Attica, with the main training facility located on the island of Corfu, hosting a total of 15 football youth academies throughout Greece and Cyprus. Eddie van Schaik heads the organization as coach and consultant, introducing the Ajax football philosophy at the various Greek football training camps.

In 2016, Ajax launched the ACA (Ajax Coaching Academy) with the intention of sharing knowledge, and setting up a variety of camps and clinics for both players and coaches.

==Stadiums==
Ajax&#x27;s first stadium was built in 1911 out of wood and was called Het Houten Stadion (English: The Wooden Stadium). Ajax later also played in the Olympic Stadium built for the 1928 Summer Olympics hosted in Amsterdam. This stadium, designed by Jan Wils, is known in Dutch as . In 1934, Ajax moved to De Meer Stadion in east Amsterdam, close to the location of Het Houten Stadion. It was designed by architect and Ajax-member Daan Roodenburgh, who had also designed the club&#x27;s first stadium. It could accommodate 29,500 spectators and Ajax continued to play there until 1996. For big European and national fixtures, the club would often play at the Olympic Stadium, which could accommodate about twice the number of spectators.

In 1996, Ajax moved to a new home ground in the southeast of the city known as the Amsterdam Arena, since 2018 known as the Johan Cruyff Arena. This stadium was built by the Amsterdam city authority at a cost of $134 million. The stadium is capable of holding 55,865 spectators. The Arena has a retractable roof and set a trend for other modern stadiums built in Europe in the following years. In the Netherlands, the Arena earned a reputation for a terrible grass pitch caused by the removable roof that, even when open, takes away too much sunlight and fresh air. During the 2008–09 season, ground staff introduced an artificial lighting system that finally reduced this problem considerably.

The much-loved De Meer Stadion was torn down and the land was sold to the city council. A residential neighbourhood now occupies the area. The only thing left of the old stadium are the letters &quot;AJAX&quot;, which nowadays is in place on the façade of the entrance at the Johan Cruyff Arena and a replica of the letters are at De Toekomst, near the Johan Cruyff Arena.

==Crest and colours==

===Crest===
In 1900, when the club was founded, the emblem of Ajax was just a picture of an Ajax player. The crest was slightly altered following the club&#x27;s promotion to the top division in 1911 to match the club&#x27;s new outfits. In 1928, the club logo was introduced with the head of the Greek hero Ajax. The logo was once again changed in 1990 into an abstract version of the previous one. The new logo still sports the portrait of Ajax, but drawn with just 11 lines, symbolizing the 11 players of a football team. On 17 November 2024, Ajax announced on its official website that the classic logo of 1928 will return for the 2025-26 season, making a comeback after 34 years.

===Colours===

Ajax originally played in an all-black strip with a red sash tied around the players&#x27; waists, but that strip was soon replaced by a red/white striped shirt and black shorts. Red, black and white are the three colours of the flag of Amsterdam. Under manager Jack Kirwan, however, the club earned promotion to the top flight of Dutch football for the first time in 1911 (then the &quot;Eerste Klasse&quot; or &#x27;First Class&#x27;, later named the ), Ajax was forced to change its colours because Sparta Rotterdam already had exactly the same outfit. Special kits for away fixtures did not exist at the time and according to football association regulations the newcomers had to change their colours if two teams in the same league had identical uniforms. Ajax opted for white shorts and white shirt with a broad, vertical red stripe over chest and back, which still is Ajax&#x27;s outfit.

==Financial==
===AFC Ajax N.V.===

AFC Ajax is the only Dutch club with an initial public offering (IPO). The club is registered as a Naamloze vennootschap (N.V.) listed on the stock exchange Euronext Amsterdam, since 17 May 1998. With a launch price of ƒ25,- (Guilders) the club managed to a bring its total revenue up to €54 million (converted) in its first year on the market. After short-lived success, however, the rate dropped, at one point as low as €3.50. Criticism was brought forth that the legal grid for a naamloze vennootschap would not be suitable for a Football club, and that the sports related ambitions would suffer from the new commercial interests of the now listed Ajax. Shares of the company in the year 2008 were valued at approximately €5.90 per share.

In 2008, a Commission under guidance of honorary member Uri Coronel concluded that the IPO was of no value to the club, and that measures should be taken to exit the stock exchange by purchasing back all public shares. Ajax remain on the stock exchange.

===Sponsorship===

Ajax&#x27;s shirts have been sponsored by TDK from 1982 to 1991, and by ABN AMRO from 1991 to 2008. AEGON then replaced ABN AMRO as the new head sponsor for a period of seven years. On 1 April 2007, Ajax wore a different sponsor for the match against Heracles Almelo, &quot;Florius&quot;. Florius is a banking programme launched by ABN AMRO who wanted it to be the shirt sponsor for one match.

The shirts have been manufactured by Le Coq Sportif (1973–1977), Puma (1977–1979), Cor du Buy (1979–1980), Le Coq Sportif (1980–1984), Kappa (1985–1989) and Umbro (1989–2000) in the past, and by Adidas since 2000 (until at least 2025).

At the conclusion of the 2013–14 season, Ajax won the Football shirt of the Year award for its black and rose colored away shirt by Adidas. The annual award was presented by Subside Sports, which had previously given the award to Internazionale, Juventus and the Belgium national team. It was Ajax&#x27;s first time winning the award.

On 7 November 2014, it was announced that Ajax had agreed to a four-and-a-half-year contract worth €8 million annually with Dutch cable operating company Ziggo as the new shirt sponsor for the club. Having extended its contract with AEGON for half a season until December, the club featured &quot;Fonds Gehandicaptensport&quot;, a charitable fund for handicapped sports on its away shirts for a six-month period before transitioning to Ziggo in 2015.

=== Kit suppliers and shirt sponsors ===
=== Kit deals ===

==Other teams==

===Reserves team===

Jong Ajax (&quot;formerly more commonly known as Ajax 2&quot;) is the reserve team of AFC Ajax. The team is composed mostly of professional footballers, who are often recent graduates from the highest youth level (Ajax A1) serving their first professional contract as a reserve, or players who are otherwise unable to play in the first team.

Since 1992, Jong Ajax competed in the Beloften Eredivisie, competing against other reserve teams such as Jong PSV, Jong FC Groningen or Jong AZ. They have won the Beloften title a record eight times, as well as the KNVB Reserve Cup three times, making them the most successful reserve squad in the Netherlands. By winning the Beloften Eredivisie title, Jong Ajax was able to qualify for the actual KNVB Cup, even advancing to the semi-finals on three occasions. Its best result in the Dutch Cup was under manager Jan Olde Riekerink in 2001–02, when a semi-final loss to Utrecht in a Penalty shoot-out after extra time, which saw Utrecht advance, and thus preventing an Ajax–Jong Ajax Dutch Cup final.

The 2013–14 season marked the Jupiler League debut of the Ajax reserves&#x27; squad, Jong Ajax. Previously playing in the Beloften Eredivisie (a separate league for reserve teams, not included in the Dutch professional or amateur league structure), players were allowed to move around freely between the reserve team and the first team during the season. This is no longer the case as Jong Ajax now registers and fields a separate squad from that of Ajax first team for the Eerste Divisie, the second tier of professional football in the Netherlands. Its home matches are played at Sportpark De Toekomst, except for the occasional match in the Johan Cruyff Arena. Now regarded a semi-professional team in its own respect, the only period in which players are able to move between squads are during the transfer windows, unless the player has made less than 15 appearances for the first team, then he is still eligible to appear in both first team and second team matches during the season. Furthermore, the team is not eligible for promotion to the or to participate in the KNVB Cup. Jong Ajax was joined in the Eerste Divisie by Jong Twente and Jong PSV, reserve teams who have also moved from the Beloften to the Eerste Divisie, in place of VV Katwijk, SC Veendam and AGOVV Apeldoorn, increasing the total number of teams in the Jupiler League from 18 to 20.

Ajax reserve squad Jong Ajax left the Beloften Eredivisie in 2013, having held a 21-year tenure in the reserves league, having also won the league title a record eight times (1994, 1996, 1998, 2001, 2002, 2004, 2005, 2009).

===Women&#x27;s team===

AFC Ajax Vrouwen (&quot;English: AFC Ajax Women&quot;) is the women&#x27;s team of AFC Ajax, competing in the women&#x27;s eredivisie, the highest level of women&#x27;s football in the Netherlands. Founded on 18 May 2012, the women&#x27;s team saw Ajax attracting many of the Netherlands top talents, with International players such as Anouk Hoogendijk, Daphne Koster and Petra Hogewoning joining the Amsterdam club in its maiden season in women&#x27;s professional football. The team won its first piece of silverware when they defeated PSV/FC Eindhoven 2–1 in the final of the KNVB Women&#x27;s Cup.

===Amateur team===

AFC Ajax Amateurs, better known as Ajax Zaterdag, is a Dutch amateur football club founded 18 March 1900. It is the amateur team of the professional club AFC Ajax, playing its home matches at the Sportpark De Toekomst training grounds to a capacity of 5,000. The team was promoted from the Eerste Klasse to the Hoofdklasse ahead of the 2011–12 season, the league in which it is currently competing. The team has won the Eerste Klasse title twice, as well as the *KNVB District Cup West I on two occasions as well.

Furthermore, Ajax Zaterdag has also managed to qualify for the KNVB Cup on its own accord on three occasions, namely in 2004, 2005, 2008 and 2021. Even advancing to the second round before bowing out to Vitesse on 24 September 2008.

==Other sports==

===Baseball===

Ajax HVA (1922–1972) was the baseball team of AFC Ajax founded in 1922, and competed as founding members of the Honkbal Hoofdklasse, the top flight of professional baseball in the Netherlands. Ajax won the national baseball title a total of four times (1924, 1928, 1942, 1948) before the club opted to no longer field a baseball team, and to focus solely on football in 1972. Ajax spent a total of 50 years at the top flight of Baseball in the Netherlands from 1922 to 1972. The dissolution of Ajax baseball club resulted in the players finding a new sponsor in a mustard manufacturing company called Luycks, while merging with the Diemen Giants to become the Luycks Giants, thus replacing both former clubs.

===Esports===

In 2016, Ajax launched an esports team, with Koen Weijland as the club&#x27;s first signing, making its debut on the Global stage of professional gaming. They have since signed the likes of Dani Hagebeuk, Lev Vinken, Joey Calabro and Bob van Uden, the latter spent his first season on loan to the esports team of Japanese club Sagan Tosu.

==Affiliated clubs==

The following clubs are currently affiliated with AFC Ajax:
* Almere City (2005–present)
* Barcelona (2007–present)
* Cruzeiro (2007–present)
* Beijing Guoan (2007–present)
* Palmeiras (2010–present)
* AS Trenčín (2012–present)
* Guangzhou R&amp;F (2017–present)
* Sagan Tosu (2018–present)
* Sharjah FC (2020–present)
* Sydney FC (2018–present)
* Sparta Rotterdam (2019–present)
* &quot;Various HETT-clubs (See main article)&quot;
The following clubs were affiliated with AFC Ajax in the past:
* Germinal Beerschot (1999–2003)
* Ashanti Goldfields (1999–2003)
* Ajax Orlando Prospects (2003–2007)
* HFC Haarlem (2006–2010)
* Volendam (2007–2010)
* Ajax Cape Town (1999–2020)

==Rivalries==
&quot;As one of the traditional big three clubs in the Netherlands, Ajax have amassed a number of intense rivalries over the years. Listed below are the most significant of the rivalries involving Ajax.&quot;

===Rivalry with Feyenoord===

Feyenoord from Rotterdam is Ajax&#x27;s archrival. Every year both clubs play the &quot;De Klassieker&quot; (&quot;The Classic&quot;), a match between the teams from the two largest cities of the Netherlands. Till the 1973/74-season, Ajax and Feyenoord were the only two clubs in the Netherlands who were able to clinch national titles, as well as achieve continental and even global success. From the 1974/75-season on, PSV (Eindhoven) and AZ (Alkmaar) too, competed with Ajax and Feyenoord. A meeting between the two clubs became the measure for who was truly the best club in the Netherlands. The &quot;Klassieker&quot; is the most famous of all the rivalries in the Netherlands and the matches are always sold out. The fixture is seen in the public eye as &quot;the graceful and elegant football of Ajax, against the indomitable fighting spirit of Feyenoord&quot;; the confidence of the capital city versus the blue collar mentality of Rotterdam. Matches are known for their tension and violence, both on and off the pitch. Over the years, several violent incidents have taken place involving rival supporters, leading to the current prohibition of away supporters in both stadiums. The lowest point was reached on 23 March 1997, when supporters of both clubs met on a field near Beverwijk, where Ajax-supporter Carlo Picornie was fatally injured, the incident is commonly referred to as the &quot;Battle of Beverwijk&quot;.

===Rivalry with PSV===

PSV is also a rival of Ajax, but in terms of tension and rivalry, these matches are not as loaded as the duels with Feyenoord. The rivalry has existed for some time with PSV and stems from various causes, such as the different interpretations of whether current national and international successes of both clubs correlates and the supposed opposition between the Randstad and the province. The matches between these two teams is commonly referred to as &quot;De Topper&quot; (&quot;The Topper&quot;), and involves the two most trophy-laden sides in Dutch football and is essentially a clash of two competing schools of thought in Dutch football. Historically, PSV compete with a workmanlike ethic, preferring a more robust 4–3–1–2 or 4–2–3–1, typically shunning the frivolous 4–3–3 approach favoured in Amsterdam. While Rinus Michels and Johan Cruyff helped to innovate Total Football in the sixties and seventies, a different philosophy was honed in Eindhoven by Kees Rijvers and Guus Hiddink in the late 1970s and &#x27;80s. This in turn has created one of the more philosophical rivalries in football, an ideological battleground, which is gradually becoming as heated and intense as the matches Ajax and Feyenoord partake in.

===Rivalries with other clubs===

Aside from Feyenoord and PSV, Ajax have several other rivalries, although in most cases the sentiment is mostly felt by the opposition and is more directed towards Ajax, with one of them being Utrecht. Although the rivalry is more felt on the Utrecht side then with Ajax, matchups between the two sides are often quite intense. Both teams have fanatic supporters, and clashes off the pitch are more often the rule than the exception. The same goes for ADO Den Haag, with both supporter groups often getting in conflicts, when ADO-Hooligans set fire to the supporters home of Ajax, and Ajax hooligans subsequently broke into the Supporters home of ADO tensions between the two clubs rose. In 2006, supporters from both clubs were banned from attending away matches for five years due to frequent violent outbreaks and clashes.

Further teams who share a rivalry with Ajax include Twente, Vitesse Arnhem, Groningen and AZ, although the latter is often regarded by Ajax supporters as the club&#x27;s &quot;little brother&quot;. With AZ being from nearby Alkmaar and therefore situated in the same province as Ajax, match-ups between the two sides are commonly known as the &quot;De Noord-Hollandse Derby&quot; (&quot;North Holland Derby&quot;) and are often very competitive, intense and loaded fixtures.

Past rivalries include local Amsterdam derbies between Ajax and clubs such as Blauw-Wit, DWS and De Volewijckers (which later merged to become FC Amsterdam in 1972). However, the tension between the local sides lessened as the division of the clubs through playing in different leagues over time became greater. Years of not competing in the same league resulted in less frequent match-ups, until tensions finally settled between the Amsterdam clubs. The last Amsterdam derby to take place in an official league match was when Ajax defeated FC Amsterdam 5–1 on 19 March 1978.

==Supporters==
Ajax is known for having fanatic core supporter-groups, of which F-Side and VAK410 are the most famous. The F-Side was founded on 3 October 1976, and is situated right behind the goal in the Johan Cruyff Arena, on the southern end of the stadium in rows 125–129. Its name is derived from the group&#x27;s former location on the F-side of the old De Meer Stadion. The F-side supporters are responsible for a big part of the atmosphere in the stadium, and are also known for rioting during and after matches. If in any match Ajax should win the coin toss, the second half of the match Ajax always play towards the south-end of the stadium. VAK410 (English: Row 410) was founded in 2001 and is situated in the Zuidhoek (&quot;South corner&quot;) of the stadium on the upper ring in rows 424–425. The group was originally situated on the North-West side of the stadium in row 410, from where it derives its name, until relocating to their current place in the stands in 2008. Members of VAK410 are known to perform various stunts, which include massive banners, to enhance the atmosphere in the stadium. Neither F-Side or VAK410 have seats in their sections of the stadium, and both groups stand for the duration of the match.

Through the official &quot;Football Top 20&quot; of Dutch sports research group &quot;SPORT+MARKT&quot;, it was revealed in 2010 that Ajax had approximately 7.1 million supporters throughout Europe. This is significantly more than rivals Feyenoord and PSV (each 1.6 and 1.3 million, respectively), which puts Ajax as the club with the 15th-most supporters across Europe. The study also revealed that approximately 39% of the Netherlands were Ajax supporters. Not only does Ajax have many supporters, but several fans attend their matches in European competition, with an average attendance of 48,677 spectators for every international match Ajax played, putting the team at 12th place in Europe for highest attendance, ahead of high-profile clubs such as Milan and Chelsea. It is noteworthy that not all stadiums share the capacity of the Johan Cruyff Arena.

===Supporters clubs===
The Supporters Club Ajax () is officially the largest supporters club in the Netherlands with 94,000 members. Founded on 7 May 1992, the supporters club organize big monthly events throughout the Netherlands, and particularly around the official Ajax Open Training Day, which attracts thousands of supporters each year. Furthermore, the supporters group is responsible for the Ajax Life website, as well as the fanzine which is issued 20 times a year.

In 2006, the AFCA Supportersclub was introduced as the club&#x27;s second official supporters&#x27; association, through the merger of the Onafhankelijke Fanclub Ajax (OFA) and the Ajax Supporters Delegatie (ASD). The AFCA Supportersclub has a reported 42,000 members, as well as a former member on the Board of Administration of Ajax, in Ronald Pieloor.

The third official supporters club is the Ajax Business Associates (ABA). Founded in 1991 the ABA is the Business club of Ajax. Members occupy the skyboxes in the Stadium and can make use of the clubs&#x27; amenities and luxury suites including the ABA club and lounge. The ABA is also responsible for hosting the annual Ajax Business Golf Trophy, an amateur golf tournament where several active and former Ajax players, as well as prominent people and members of the ABA, participate.

===Average attendance===
This graph displays the average attendance for home matches of Ajax from 1988 to 2018, whereby the difference in capacity of the De Meer Stadion and the Johan Cruyff Arena (est. 1996) is clearly visible.


===Mascot===
* Lucky Lynx, is the official team mascot. (2000–present)

==Jewish connection==
Historically, Ajax was popularly seen as having &quot;Jewish roots&quot;. While it had fewer Jewish players than WV-HEDW, Ajax has had a Jewish image since the 1930s when the home stadium was located next to a Jewish neighbourhood of Amsterdam-Oost and opponents saw many supporters walking through the Nieuwmarkt/Waterloopleinbuurt (de Jodenhoek—the &quot;Jews&#x27; corner&quot;) to get to the stadium. The city of Amsterdam was historically referred to as a Mokum city, Mokum (מקום) being the Yiddish word for &quot;place&quot; or &quot;safe haven&quot;, and as anti-Semitic chants and name calling developed and intensified at the old De Meer Stadion from frustrated supporters of opposing clubs, Ajax fans (few of whom are Jewish) responded by embracing Ajax&#x27;s &quot;Jewish&quot; identity: calling themselves &quot;super Jews&quot;, chanting &quot;Jews, Jews&quot; (&quot;Joden, Joden&quot;) at games, and adopting Jewish symbols such as the Star of David and the Israeli flag.

This Jewish imagery eventually became a central part of Ajax fans&#x27; culture. At one point, ringtones of &quot;Hava Nagila&quot;, a Hebrew folk song, could be downloaded from the club&#x27;s official website. Beginning in the 1980s, fans of Ajax&#x27;s rivals escalated their anti-Semitic rhetoric, chanting slogans like &quot;Hamas, Hamas/Jews to the gas&quot; (&quot;Hamas, hamas, joden aan het gas&quot;), hissing to imitate the flow of gas, giving Nazi salutes, and other things. The eventual result was that many genuinely Jewish Ajax fans stopped going to games.

In the 2000s, the club began trying to persuade fans to drop its Jewish image. In 2013, a documentary titled &quot;Superjews&quot; was released by NTR and Viewpoint Productions which premiered at the International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam (IDFA). The film was directed by Nirit Peled, an Israeli living in Amsterdam, and an independent film maker who offers a very personal view into the game, the lore of Ajax and its relation to Judaism from both the supporters as well as from a Jewish perspective.
Before and after a UEFA Europa League game between the Israeli team Maccabi Tel Aviv and Ajax on Thursday 7 November 2024 in the Johan Cruyff Arena, tensions surrounding the Israel–Hamas war erupted into violence.

==Players==
===Current squad===











===Players out on loan===





==== Retired numbers ====
*14 – Johan Cruyff (Forward, 1964–73, 1981–83). &quot;Number retired on 25 April 2007 at Cruyff&#x27;s 60th birthday celebration match.&quot;
&quot;Notes&quot;:
===Youth/reserves squad===
&quot;For the reserve squad of Ajax see: Jong Ajax.&quot;

==Notable former players==

==Board and staff==

===Current board===
;Executive Board
*Chairman: Ernst Boekhorst
**Board members: 7 – ( John Busink, Marjon Eijlers, Giovanni Fränkel, Pim van Dord, René Zegerius, Edo Ophof, Christian Visser.

;Board of Directors
*Chief executive officer: Menno Geelen &quot;(ad interim)&quot;
*Chief financial officer: Baboeram Panday
*Chief commercial officer: Cas Biesta &quot;(ad interim)&quot;
*Technical Director: Alex Kroes
*Director of Football: Marijn Beuker

;Supervisory Board
*Chairman: Carolien Gehrels
**Board members: 4 – ( Danny Blind, Sirik Goeman, Dirk Anbeek, Hermine Voûte.

===Current staff===
;Coaching staff
*Head coach: Francesco Farioli
*Assistant coaches: Daniele Cavalletto Dave Vos Felipe Sanchez Mateos
*Goalkeeping coach: Jarkko Tuomisto
*Goalkeeping coach: Erik Heijblok
*Performance coach: Sam Feringa
*Video analyst: Osman Kul
*Video analyst: Kevin Keij

;Medical staff
*Team doctor: Bas Peijs
*Head physio: Maarten Gozeling
*Club doctor: Niels Wijne
*Fitness coach: Callum Walsh
*Fitness coach: Maikel van Wijk
*Physiotherapist: Frank van Deursen

;Accompanying staff
*Team manager: Jan Siemerink
*Players supervisor: Herman Pinkster
*Loan coach: Michel Kreek
*Press officer: Miel Brinkhuis

===List of Ajax chairmen===

* Floris Stempel (1900–08)
* Chris Holst (1908–10)
* Han Dade (1910–12)
* Chris Holst (1912–13)
* Willem Egeman (1913–25)
* Frans Schoevaart (1925–32)
* Marius Koolhaas (1932–56)
* Wim Volkers (1956–58)
* Jan Melchers (1958–64)
* Jaap van Praag (1964–78)
* Ton Harmsen (1978–88)
* Michael van Praag (1989–2003)
* John Jaakke (2003–08)
* Uri Coronel (2008–11)
* Hennie Henrichs (2011–20)
* Frank Eijken (2020–2023)
* Ernst Boekhorst (2023–present)
===List of Ajax coaches===

* Jack Kirwan (1910–15)
* Jack Reynolds (1915–25)
* Harold Rose (1925–26)
* Stanley Castle (1926–28)
* Jack Reynolds (1928–40)
* Vilmos Halpern (1940–41)
* Wim Volkers (1941–42)
* Dolf van Kol (1942–45)
* Jack Reynolds (1945–47)
* Robert Smith (1947–48)
* Walter Crook (1948–50)
* Robert Thomson (1950–52)
* Karel Kaufman (1952–53)
* Walter Crook (1953–54)
* Karl Humenberger (1954–59)
* Vic Buckingham (1959–61)
* Keith Spurgeon (1961–62)
* Joseph Gruber (1962–63)
* Jack Rowley (1963–64)
* Vic Buckingham (1964–65)
* Rinus Michels (1965–71)
* Ștefan Kovács (1971–73)
* George Knobel (1973–74)
* Bobby Haarms (1974, interim)
* Hans Kraay (1974–75)
* Jan van Daal (1975, interim)
* Rinus Michels (1975–76)
* Tomislav Ivić (1976–78)
* Cor Brom (1978–79)
* Leo Beenhakker (1979–81)
* Aad de Mos (1981, interim)
* Kurt Linder (1981–82)
* Aad de Mos (1982–85)
* Antoine Kohn, Tonny Bruins Slot and Cor van der Hart (1985, interim)
* Johan Cruyff (1985–88)
* Kurt Linder (1988)
* Antoine Kohn, Bobby Haarms and Barry Hulshoff (1988–89, interim)
* Leo Beenhakker (1989–91)
* Louis van Gaal (1991–97)
* Morten Olsen (1997–99)
* Jan Wouters (1999–2000)
* Hans Westerhof (2000, interim)
* Co Adriaanse (2000–01)
* Ronald Koeman (2001–05)
* Ruud Krol (2005, interim)
* Danny Blind (2005–06)
* Henk ten Cate (2006–07)
* Adrie Koster (2007–08, interim)
* Marco van Basten (2008–09)
* John van &#x27;t Schip (2009, interim)
* Martin Jol (2009–10)
* Frank de Boer (2010–16)
* Peter Bosz (2016–17)
* Marcel Keizer (2017)
* Erik ten Hag (2017–2022)
* Alfred Schreuder (2022–2023)
* John Heitinga (2023)
* Maurice Steijn (2023)
* Hedwiges Maduro (2023, interim)
* John van &#x27;t Schip (2023–2024, interim)
* Francesco Farioli (2024–present)
== Honours ==

* shared record

Ajax also won in 1972, however UEFA only sanctioned the UEFA Super Cup for the first time in 1973 so the 1972 edition was an unofficial one. Played against Rangers, winners of the 1971–72 European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup, it went ahead as &#x27;a celebration of the Centenary of Rangers F.C.&#x27; (see below) because Rangers was serving a one-year ban at the time, imposed by UEFA for the misbehaviour of its fans. That victory meant Ajax had won every tournament (5 in total) they entered that year, a feat Celtic achieved in 1967 (with 6 trophies), Barcelona in 2009 (6 trophies), and Bayern in 2020 (also 6 trophies).

===Other trophies===
Ajax have won numerous friendly tournaments, unsanctioned by UEFA or FIFA, including the Amsterdam Tournament, Bruges Matins Trophy, Trofeo Santiago Bernabéu, Eusébio Cup, Ted Bates Trophy, Jalkapalloturnaus and Chippie Polar Cup (&quot;for a complete list, see: list of AFC Ajax honours&quot;).

===Club Awards===
*&quot;World Soccer&quot; World Team of the Year : 1
:: 1995
*&quot;France Football&quot; European Team of the Year : 4
:: 1969, 1971, 1972, 1973
*Dutch Sports Team of the Year : 5
:: 1968, 1969, 1972, 1987, 1995
*Sports Team of the Year : 1
:: 1990
*IFFHS The World&#x27;s Club Team of the Year : 1
:: 1992
*Dick van Rijn Trophy : 1
:: 1995
*Amsterdam Sportsteam of the year: 3
:: 2011, 2013, 2014
*ING Fair Play Award : 2
:: 2013, 2014
*Fair Play Cup : 1
:: 1995
*FIFA Club of the Century : shared 5th place
:: 20th Century
*&quot;kicker Sportmagazin&quot; Club of the Century: 2nd place
:: 20th Century
*Best Dutch club after 50 years of professional football : 1
:: 2004
*Football shirt of the Year : Ajax away shirt by adidas
:: 2013–14
*The Four-Four-Two Greatest Club Side Ever : Ajax (1965–1973)
:: 2013
*VVCS Best Pitch of the Year : 1
:: 2012

==Honorary club members==
Ajax have a total of 50 honorary club members, from people who have been invested within the club&#x27;s administrative engagements, to committed players who have excelled in the athletic department. Of those 50 members 41 have since died. Nine members still remain, including Louis van Gaal. He was made honorary member in 2024.

* Hennie Henrichs
* Arie van Os
* Michael van Praag
* Rob Been sr. 
* Sjaak Swart
* Hans Bijvank
* Leo van Wijk
* Jan Buskermolen
* Louis van Gaal

The remaining 41 honorary members who have since died:

* Floris Stempel
* Han Dade
* Chris Holst
* L.W. van Fliet
* K.W.F. van der Lee
* Henk Alofs
* Frans Schoevaart
* Jan Grootmeijer
* J. Oudheusden
* Willem Egeman
* Jan Schoevaart
* Marius Koolhaas
* Jordanus Roodenburgh
* Theo Brokmann
* F.H.W. de Bruijn
* Jan de Boer
* Frans Couton
* A.L. Desmit
* Wim Anderiesen
* Wim Volkers
* Jan Elzenga
* Roef Vunderink
* Kick Geudeker
* G. de Jongh
* Jack Reynolds
* Ferry Dukker
* Arie de Wit
* W.F.C. Bruijnesteijn
* Jan Westrik
* Jaap van Praag
* Henk Hordijk
* M.J.W. Middendorp
* Rinus Michels
* Henk Timman
* Jan Potharst
* Bobby Haarms
* André Kraan
* Willem Schoevaart
* Johan Cruyff
* Uri Coronel
* Tijn Middendorp
==Results==
===Domestic results===
Below is a table with Ajax&#x27;s domestic results since the introduction of the in 1956.

===Continental results===
==Team records==

* Most match appearances: 463 – Sjaak Swart
* Most goals scored: 273 – Piet van Reenen
* Most goals scored in a season: 41 – Henk Groot
* First Ajax player to receive an International cap: Gerard Fortgens for the Netherlands in 1911
* First Ajax player to score a goal for the national team: Theo Brokmann for the Netherlands in 1919

==Club van 100==

The Club van 100 is the official list of Football players who have appeared in one hundred or more official matches for AFC Ajax. The club currently has a total of over 150 members. The record for league appearances is held by Mr. Ajax himself Sjaak Swart, who appeared in 463 league matches for Ajax. There is a beneficiary team called Lucky Ajax, which was initiated by Sjaak Swart. Lucky Ajax participate in at least one match a year, usually in the name of charity, and commonly at football ceremonies to bid farewell to retiring players. One of the prerequisites for playing on Lucky Ajax, which is invitational only, is that you are a member of the Club van 100, having made at least 100 official match appearances for Ajax in the first team of the club.

==Lucky Ajax==
Lucky Ajax is a beneficiary team that was initiated by Sjaak Swart in the seventies, competing in at least one match a year, usually in the name of charity and/or to bid farewell to retiring former Ajax players. The team is made up of various members of the Club van 100 of Ajax who will come out of retirement for this match to face the Ajax squad that is current of that year. Past participants have included Barry Hulshoff, Sonny Silooy, Simon Tahamata, Ronald Koeman, Tscheu La Ling, Gerrie Mühren, John van &#x27;t Schip, Brian Roy, Stanley Menzo, Peter van Vossen and Fred Grim. The name Lucky Ajax is derived from the famous &quot;Lucky Ajax&quot; nickname from how people used to refer to the club when Ajax would either win a match by chance, by a decision of a referee, or by coincidence such as was said to be the case during the infamous &quot;Mistwedstrijd&quot; (&quot;Fog Match&quot;).

==Number 14 shirt==

As of the 2007–08 season, no player could wear the number 14 shirt at Ajax after the club decided to retire the shirt out of respect for Johan Cruyff, &quot;the legendary number fourteen&quot;. Cruyff himself laughed off the tribute, saying the club had to let its best player play with number 14. Spanish midfielder Roger was the last player to wear the number. Marvin Zeegelaar wore the shirt number in preparation for the 2011–12 season in one preseason match, while Aras Özbiliz wore the number 14 shirt in one pre-season match ahead of the 2011–12 season as well. The club stated that this was, in fact, not done in error.

Below is a list of all players to wear the number 14 shirt since Johan Cruyff&#x27;s departure.

==Former captains==
==Team tournaments==

===Amsterdam Tournament===

Established in 1975 as the Amsterdam 700 Tournament to celebrate 700 years of history in the city. The tournament was hosted annually each summer by Ajax until 1992, when the last edition of the original tournament was played. It returned in 1999 with the backing of the International Event Partnership (IEP). Four teams participated in the competition, played in a league format since 1986. Since its return, the tournament used an unusual point scoring system. As with most league competitions, three points were awarded for a win, one for a draw, and none for a loss. An additional point, however, was awarded for each goal scored. The system was designed to reward teams that adopted a more attacking style of play. Each entrant played two matches, with the winner being the club that finished at the top of the table. The original competition was held at Het Olympisch Stadion where Ajax played the bigget games until 1996. The Amsterdam Arena (now Johan Cruyff Arena) played host to the event since its return until the last edition was played in 2009. Ajax is the most successful team of the tournament, having won it a record ten times, while Benfica from Portugal was the last team to win the tournament, in 2009.

===Copa Amsterdam===

Established in 2005, the Copa Amsterdam is an international friendly football tournament for Under-19 youth teams, that is organized by Ajax and the Amsterdam city council, which takes place at the Olympic Stadium as part of the annual Amsterdam Sports Weekend, a citywide sponsored initiative to promote &#x27;sports and recreation&#x27; within the city of Amsterdam. Each Summer the city of Amsterdam and Ajax invite U-19 teams from various top clubs from around the World to participate in the tournament. Seven teams are invited and play in the competition every year. Over the years, clubs such as Barcelona, Juventus, Chelsea and Real Madrid have had their senior youth teams participate in the tournament. Cruzeiro from Brazil is the most successful club in the history of the tournament, having won it three times in total.

===Future Cup===

Established in 2010, the AEGON Future Cup is an international friendly tournament for Under-17 youth teams, which is organized by AFC Ajax and their main sponsor, the insurance company AEGON. The tournament is held each year at the Johan Cruyff Arena and at the Sportpark De Toekomst, the team&#x27;s training ground, which also inspired the name of the competition, since &quot;De Toekomst&quot; in Dutch means The Future. Every year during the Easter weekend, six U-17 teams are invited to participate in the competition, while the seventh place for the contesters is reserved for the winners of the &quot;Craques Mongeral AEGON Future Cup&quot; in Brazil, the sister competition of the tournament in South America. Youth teams from top clubs such as Manchester United, Bayern Munich, Milan and many more have participated in the competition over the years. Ajax is the most successful club of the tournament, having won the trophy a total of five times.

==See also==
* List of football clubs in the Netherlands
* List of world champion football clubs

==Bibliography==
* David Endt, &quot;De godenzonen van Ajax&quot;, Rap, Amsterdam, 1993, 
* Jan Baltus Kok, &quot;Naar Ajax. Mobiliteitspatronen van bezoekers bij vier thuiswedstrijden van Ajax&quot;, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 1992, 
*Simon Kuper, &quot;Ajax, The Dutch, The War. Football in Europe during the Second World War&quot;, Orion Books, London (Translation of: Ajax, de Joden en Nederland (&quot;Ajax, the Jews, The Netherlands)&quot;, 2003, 
* Evert Vermeer, &quot;95 jaar Ajax. 1900–1995&quot;, Luitingh-Sijthoff, Amsterdam, 1996, 

==External links==
*AFC Ajax at weltfussballarchiv
*AFC Ajax at soccerway

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="0" end="32" title="AFC Ajax" label="Amsterdamsche Football Club Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="51" end="59" title="AFC Ajax" label="AFC Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="61" end="75" title="AFC Ajax" label="Ajax Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="89" end="93" title="AFC Ajax" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="119" end="127" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q28083137" start="128" end="132" title="Football team" label="club"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="142" end="151" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="241" end="261" title="Ajax the Great" label="legendary Greek hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q131481002" start="266" end="290" title="List of football clubs by competitive honours won" label="the most successful club"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="298" end="309" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q216858" start="326" end="334" title="KNVB Cup" label="KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836816" start="473" end="482" title="Big Three (Netherlands)" label="big three"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383" start="590" end="651" title="International Federation of Football History &amp;amp; Statistics" label="International Federation of Football History &amp;amp; Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131481002" start="679" end="723" title="List of football clubs by competitive honours won" label="successful European club of the 20th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q481190" start="823" end="829" title="Kicker (sports magazine)" label="Kicker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="948" end="964" title="European Champion Clubs&amp;#x27; Cup#Clubs awarded the trophy permanently" label="earned the right"/>
<link wikidata="Q728383" start="977" end="989" title="European Champion Clubs&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1055" end="1073" title="Treble (association football)#Continental trebles" label="continental treble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143937" start="1091" end="1099" title="1971–72 KNVB Cup" label="KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q269640" start="1109" end="1121" title="1971–72 European Cup" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q977481" start="1167" end="1185" title="1972 European Super Cup" label="European Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="1194" end="1201" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086446" start="1274" end="1299" title="1995 Intercontinental Cup" label="1995 Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192930" start="1301" end="1320" title="1995 UEFA Super Cup" label="1995 UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q455985" start="1329" end="1350" title="1994–95 UEFA Champions League" label="1995 Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="1372" end="1377" title="A.C. Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080061" start="1385" end="1390" title="1995 UEFA Champions League Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q26170" start="1406" end="1427" title="1995–96 UEFA Champions League" label="1996 Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068932" start="1428" end="1433" title="1996 UEFA Champions League Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="1437" end="1446" title="Penalty shoot-out (association football)" label="penalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="1450" end="1458" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q729035" start="1533" end="1545" title="World Soccer (magazine)" label="World Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q182473" start="1632" end="1652" title="Intercontinental Cup (1960–2004)" label="Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q223366" start="1656" end="1670" title="FIFA Club World Cup" label="Club World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q751828" start="1879" end="1895" title="1991–92 UEFA Cup" label="1991–92 UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666576" start="1912" end="1927" title="1961–62 Intertoto Cup" label="Karl Rappan Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q182068" start="1950" end="1968" title="UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q207109" start="1996" end="2014" title="Johan Cruyff Arena" label="Johan Cruyff Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q503319" start="2119" end="2144" title="Olympic Stadium (Amsterdam)" label="Amsterdam Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119268" start="2328" end="2340" title="youth system" label="youth system"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="2376" end="2385" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q216858" start="2532" end="2542" title="KNVB Beker" label="KNVB Beker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2244768" start="2584" end="2600" title="1917–18 Netherlands Football League Championship" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6569520" start="2614" end="2631" title="List of Dutch football champions" label="national champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941754" start="2683" end="2690" title="1918–19 Netherlands Football League Championship" label="1918–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982952" start="3051" end="3055" title="1930–31 Netherlands Football League Championship" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100265" start="3057" end="3061" title="1931–32 Netherlands Football League Championship" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106541" start="3063" end="3067" title="1933–34 Netherlands Football League Championship" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694230" start="3069" end="3073" title="1936–37 Netherlands Football League Championship" label="1937"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505436" start="3075" end="3079" title="1938–39 Netherlands Football League Championship" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q511620" start="3208" end="3215" title="1946–47 Netherlands Football League Championship" label="1946–47"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313404" start="3268" end="3281" title="Jack Reynolds (footballer, born 1881)" label="Jack Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061868" start="3410" end="3422" title="1956–57 Eredivisie" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q728383" start="3638" end="3671" title="European Champion Clubs&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Champion Clubs&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q309318" start="3676" end="3690" title="1957–58 European Cup" label="following year"/>
<link wikidata="Q507439" start="3799" end="3803" title="1959–60 Eredivisie" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154479" start="3849" end="3862" title="Rinus Michels" label="Rinus Michels"/>
<link wikidata="Q738761" start="3977" end="3991" title="Total Football" label="Total Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="4046" end="4071" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163" start="4089" end="4101" title="Johan Cruyff" label="Johan Cruyff"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="4347" end="4360" title="UEFA Champions League" label="European Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q633337" start="4398" end="4402" title="1965–66 Eredivisie" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349713" start="4404" end="4408" title="1966–67 Eredivisie" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349711" start="4413" end="4417" title="1967–68 Eredivisie" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068845" start="4435" end="4458" title="1969 European Cup Final" label="1969 European Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="4470" end="4475" title="A.C. Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q876065" start="4610" end="4616" title="Double (association football)" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q958130" start="4621" end="4628" title="1969–70 Eredivisie" label="1969–70"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349721" start="4788" end="4802" title="1970–71 Eredivisie" label="1970–71 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382061" start="4823" end="4831" title="1970–71 KNVB Cup" label="KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q947543" start="4846" end="4869" title="1971 European Cup Final" label="1971 European Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209884" start="4911" end="4924" title="Dick van Dijk" label="Dick van Dijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q317885" start="4929" end="4938" title="Arie Haan" label="Arie Haan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="5015" end="5046" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="European Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="5106" end="5115" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q397125" start="5149" end="5162" title="Ștefan Kovács" label="Ștefan Kovács"/>
<link wikidata="Q845101" start="5211" end="5217" title="Treble (association football)" label="treble"/>
<link wikidata="Q269640" start="5225" end="5237" title="1971–72 European Cup" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143937" start="5267" end="5275" title="1971–72 KNVB Cup" label="KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101063" start="5334" end="5359" title="1972 Intercontinental Cup" label="1972 Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q642893" start="5383" end="5395" title="1972–73 European Cup" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="5473" end="5484" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913307" start="5543" end="5564" title="World football transfer record" label="world transfer record"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="5584" end="5593" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="5641" end="5661" title="France national football team" label="France national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349758" start="5727" end="5734" title="1976–77 Eredivisie" label="1976–77"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331335" start="5826" end="5834" title="1977–78 KNVB Cup" label="KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q483629" start="5949" end="5965" title="Marco van Basten" label="Marco van Basten"/>
<link wikidata="Q169098" start="5970" end="5984" title="Frank Rijkaard" label="Frank Rijkaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q266253" start="6022" end="6026" title="1981–82 Eredivisie" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349801" start="6031" end="6035" title="1982–83 Eredivisie" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349805" start="6224" end="6231" title="1983–84 Eredivisie" label="1983–84"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123795" start="6236" end="6243" title="1986–87 Eredivisie" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349808" start="6309" end="6335" title="1985–86 Eredivisie" label="his first season in charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11938" start="6413" end="6416" title="PSV Eindhoven" label="PSV"/>
<link wikidata="Q843540" start="6509" end="6539" title="1986–87 European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q75729" start="6688" end="6699" title="Sporting CP" label="Sporting CP"/>
<link wikidata="Q426178" start="6811" end="6815" title="1988 European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup Final" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q594110" start="6856" end="6863" title="1988–89 Eredivisie" label="1988–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q185389" start="6875" end="6890" title="Dennis Bergkamp" label="Dennis Bergkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q736308" start="7081" end="7088" title="1990–91 Eredivisie" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349842" start="7090" end="7097" title="1991–92 Eredivisie" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267396" start="7102" end="7109" title="1992–93 Eredivisie" label="1992–93"/>
<link wikidata="Q207431" start="7135" end="7149" title="Louis van Gaal" label="Louis van Gaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="7164" end="7172" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q751828" start="7176" end="7180" title="1991–92 UEFA Cup" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604779" start="7238" end="7270" title="List of UEFA club competition winners" label="major European club competitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q219657" start="7418" end="7423" title="Frank de Boer" label="Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q270075" start="7428" end="7442" title="Ronald de Boer" label="Ronald de Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q482955" start="7444" end="7461" title="Edwin van der Sar" label="Edwin van der Sar"/>
<link wikidata="Q484909" start="7463" end="7479" title="Clarence Seedorf" label="Clarence Seedorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q185115" start="7481" end="7493" title="Edgar Davids" label="Edgar Davids"/>
<link wikidata="Q34658" start="7495" end="7511" title="Michael Reiziger" label="Michael Reiziger"/>
<link wikidata="Q125796" start="7516" end="7531" title="Winston Bogarde" label="Winston Bogarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q379349" start="7570" end="7583" title="Finidi George" label="Finidi George"/>
<link wikidata="Q599675" start="7585" end="7597" title="Nwankwo Kanu" label="Nwankwo Kanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q209650" start="7602" end="7615" title="Jari Litmanen" label="Jari Litmanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q434702" start="7637" end="7648" title="Danny Blind" label="Danny Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349853" start="7694" end="7701" title="1993–94 Eredivisie" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349857" start="7723" end="7730" title="1994–95 Eredivisie" label="1994–95"/>
<link wikidata="Q741595" start="7735" end="7742" title="1995–96 Eredivisie" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080061" start="8056" end="8088" title="1995 UEFA Champions League Final" label="1995 UEFA Champions League final"/>
<link wikidata="Q189686" start="8138" end="8154" title="Patrick Kluivert" label="Patrick Kluivert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068932" start="8175" end="8184" title="1996 UEFA Champions League Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q124086" start="8545" end="8560" title="Wesley Sneijder" label="Wesley Sneijder"/>
<link wikidata="Q163974" start="8565" end="8585" title="Rafael van der Vaart" label="Rafael van der Vaart"/>
<link wikidata="Q266928" start="8738" end="8752" title="2010–11 Eredivisie" label="2010–11 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q670444" start="8796" end="8803" title="2011–12 Eredivisie" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q976911" start="8808" end="8815" title="2012–13 Eredivisie" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q10937006" start="8883" end="8890" title="2013–14 Eredivisie" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068831" start="9037" end="9044" title="2014–15 Eredivisie" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q19797368" start="9049" end="9056" title="2015–16 Eredivisie" label="2015–16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029982" start="9108" end="9118" title="Peter Bosz" label="Peter Bosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q20650323" start="9158" end="9187" title="2017 UEFA Europa League Final" label="2017 UEFA Europa League final"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="9242" end="9259" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q53945928" start="9452" end="9466" title="2018–19 AFC Ajax season" label="2018–19 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q30032467" start="9509" end="9530" title="2018–19 UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q29965938" start="9569" end="9587" title="2017–18 Eredivisie" label="2017–18 Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q124007617" start="9684" end="9694" title="SK Sturm Graz" label="Sturm Graz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="9786" end="9799" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q131499" start="9817" end="9824" title="S.L. Benfica" label="Benfica"/>
<link wikidata="Q201584" start="9845" end="9855" title="AEK Athens F.C." label="AEK Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="9990" end="10001" title="Real Madrid CF" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q164027" start="10146" end="10163" title="Santiago Bernabéu Stadium" label="Santiago Bernabéu"/>
<link wikidata="Q713895" start="10197" end="10208" title="Dušan Tadić" label="Dušan Tadić"/>
<link wikidata="Q62149" start="10434" end="10450" title="Juventus Stadium" label="Juventus Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q26259982" start="10507" end="10523" title="Matthijs de Ligt" label="Matthijs de Ligt"/>
<link wikidata="Q196515" start="10629" end="10633" title="1996–97 UEFA Champions League" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="10671" end="10688" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q312886" start="10888" end="10899" title="Lucas Moura" label="Lucas Moura"/>
<link wikidata="Q208679" start="10996" end="11011" title="away goals rule" label="away goals rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q63088790" start="11170" end="11199" title="2020–21 UEFA Champions League" label="2020–21 UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q107652654" start="11410" end="11433" title="2021–22 AFC Ajax season" label="2021–22 AFC Ajax season"/>
<link wikidata="Q348301" start="11902" end="11918" title="Alfred Schreuder" label="Alfred Schreuder"/>
<link wikidata="Q946457" start="12566" end="12579" title="John Heitinga" label="John Heitinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q43379655" start="13112" end="13126" title="Sven Mislintat" label="Sven Mislintat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619700" start="13241" end="13255" title="Maurice Steijn" label="Maurice Steijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q529563" start="13964" end="13986" title="John van &amp;#x27;t Schip" label="John van &amp;#x27;t Schip"/>
<link wikidata="Q111817121" start="14446" end="14456" title="Alex Kroes" label="Alex Kroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q125121553" start="14461" end="14474" title="Marijn Beuker" label="Marijn Beuker"/>
<link wikidata="Q106247695" start="14534" end="14551" title="Francesco Farioli" label="Francesco Farioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163" start="14976" end="14988" title="Johan Cruyff" label="Johan Cruyff"/>
<link wikidata="Q482955" start="14990" end="15007" title="Edwin van der Sar" label="Edwin van der Sar"/>
<link wikidata="Q448291" start="15009" end="15025" title="Gerald Vanenburg" label="Gerald Vanenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q169098" start="15027" end="15041" title="Frank Rijkaard" label="Frank Rijkaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q185389" start="15043" end="15058" title="Dennis Bergkamp" label="Dennis Bergkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q163974" start="15060" end="15080" title="Rafael van der Vaart" label="Rafael van der Vaart"/>
<link wikidata="Q189686" start="15082" end="15098" title="Patrick Kluivert" label="Patrick Kluivert"/>
<link wikidata="Q483629" start="15100" end="15116" title="Marco van Basten" label="Marco van Basten"/>
<link wikidata="Q124086" start="15118" end="15133" title="Wesley Sneijder" label="Wesley Sneijder"/>
<link wikidata="Q182685" start="15135" end="15155" title="Maarten Stekelenburg" label="Maarten Stekelenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q185650" start="15157" end="15170" title="Nigel de Jong" label="Nigel de Jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19898898" start="15172" end="15187" title="Frenkie de Jong" label="Frenkie de Jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q26259982" start="15193" end="15209" title="Matthijs de Ligt" label="Matthijs de Ligt"/>
<link wikidata="Q313170" start="15549" end="15563" title="Jan Vertonghen" label="Jan Vertonghen"/>
<link wikidata="Q128840" start="15565" end="15582" title="Toby Alderweireld" label="Toby Alderweireld"/>
<link wikidata="Q184177" start="15587" end="15603" title="Thomas Vermaelen" label="Thomas Vermaelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q350431" start="15622" end="15632" title="Tom De Mul" label="Tom De Mul"/>
<link wikidata="Q316923" start="15702" end="15714" title="Vurnon Anita" label="Vurnon Anita"/>
<link wikidata="Q971669" start="15719" end="15733" title="Javier Martina" label="Javier Martina"/>
<link wikidata="Q729640" start="15748" end="15755" title="Curaçao national football team" label="Curaçao"/>
<link wikidata="Q412502" start="15833" end="15847" title="Ajax Cape Town FC" label="Ajax Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699613" start="15974" end="15986" title="Ajax Orlando Prospects" label="Ajax America"/>
<link wikidata="Q193488" start="16144" end="16158" title="Steven Pienaar" label="Steven Pienaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128890" start="16163" end="16177" title="Thulani Serero" label="Thulani Serero"/>
<link wikidata="Q349181" start="16208" end="16218" title="Eyong Enoh" label="Eyong Enoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q219248" start="16541" end="16554" title="Marc Overmars" label="Marc Overmars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002266" start="16733" end="16758" title="Ajax Hellas Youth Academy" label="Ajax Hellas Youth Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q546634" start="16785" end="16795" title="Nea Smyrni" label="Nea Smyrni"/>
<link wikidata="Q758056" start="16797" end="16803" title="Attica (region)" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q121378" start="16862" end="16867" title="Corfu" label="Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552609" start="17356" end="17374" title="Het Houten Stadion" label="Het Houten Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q503319" start="17436" end="17451" title="Olympic Stadium (Amsterdam)" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8138" start="17466" end="17486" title="1928 Summer Olympics" label="1928 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="17497" end="17506" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394697" start="17534" end="17542" title="Jan Wils" label="Jan Wils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112724" start="17590" end="17605" title="De Meer Stadion" label="De Meer Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228384" start="17715" end="17731" title="Jordanus Roodenburgh" label="Daan Roodenburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q207109" start="18147" end="18165" title="Johan Cruyff Arena" label="Johan Cruyff Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200744" start="19050" end="19061" title="Sportpark De Toekomst" label="De Toekomst"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="19413" end="19418" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="19424" end="19428" title="Ajax the Great" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426379" start="20046" end="20063" title="flag of Amsterdam" label="flag of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q724087" start="20079" end="20090" title="Jack Kirwan" label="Jack Kirwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q209895" start="20319" end="20335" title="Sparta Rotterdam" label="Sparta Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="20788" end="20811" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436139" start="20847" end="20868" title="Naamloze vennootschap" label="Naamloze vennootschap"/>
<link wikidata="Q478720" start="20905" end="20923" title="Euronext Amsterdam" label="Euronext Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="21578" end="21581" title="Initial public offering" label="IPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q152478" start="21794" end="21803" title="sponsor (commercial)" label="sponsored"/>
<link wikidata="Q855479" start="21807" end="21810" title="TDK" label="TDK"/>
<link wikidata="Q287471" start="21837" end="21845" title="ABN AMRO" label="ABN AMRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q291171" start="21865" end="21870" title="Aegon N.V." label="AEGON"/>
<link wikidata="Q11961" start="22016" end="22031" title="Heracles Almelo" label="Heracles Almelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066156" start="22197" end="22211" title="Le Coq Sportif" label="Le Coq Sportif"/>
<link wikidata="Q157064" start="22225" end="22229" title="Puma SE" label="Puma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22243" end="22253" title="Cor du Buy" label="Cor du Buy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066156" start="22267" end="22281" title="Le Coq Sportif" label="Le Coq Sportif"/>
<link wikidata="Q735873" start="22295" end="22300" title="Kappa (company)" label="Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q652047" start="22317" end="22322" title="Umbro" label="Umbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3895" start="22355" end="22361" title="Adidas" label="Adidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427601" start="22422" end="22436" title="2013–14 AFC Ajax season" label="2013–14 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q631" start="22627" end="22641" title="Inter Milan" label="Internazionale"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="22660" end="22681" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382166" start="22887" end="22892" title="Ziggo" label="Ziggo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770361" start="23283" end="23292" title="Jong Ajax" label="Jong Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079392" start="23664" end="23683" title="Beloften Eredivisie" label="Beloften Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534332" start="23731" end="23739" title="Jong PSV" label="Jong PSV"/>
<link wikidata="Q24711" start="23741" end="23758" title="FC Groningen" label="Jong FC Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q191264" start="23762" end="23769" title="AZ Alkmaar" label="Jong AZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q935501" start="23841" end="23857" title="KNVB Reserve Cup" label="KNVB Reserve Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079392" start="23952" end="23971" title="Beloften Eredivisie" label="Beloften Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485203" start="24139" end="24157" title="Jan Olde Riekerink" label="Jan Olde Riekerink"/>
<link wikidata="Q24680" start="24196" end="24203" title="FC Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="24209" end="24226" title="Penalty shoot-out (association football)" label="Penalty shoot-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q610823" start="24358" end="24372" title="Eerste Divisie" label="Jupiler League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079392" start="24450" end="24469" title="Beloften Eredivisie" label="Beloften Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q14229572" start="25458" end="25469" title="Jong FC Twente" label="Jong Twente"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534332" start="25474" end="25482" title="Jong PSV" label="Jong PSV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267313" start="25571" end="25581" title="VV Katwijk" label="VV Katwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q648382" start="25583" end="25593" title="SC Veendam" label="SC Veendam"/>
<link wikidata="Q292618" start="25598" end="25613" title="AGOVV Apeldoorn" label="AGOVV Apeldoorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079392" start="25728" end="25747" title="Beloften Eredivisie" label="Beloften Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q412433" start="25940" end="25956" title="AFC Ajax (women)" label="AFC Ajax Vrouwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785497" start="26050" end="26073" title="Eredivisie (women)" label="women&amp;#x27;s eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q292486" start="26276" end="26292" title="Anouk Hoogendijk" label="Anouk Hoogendijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q526614" start="26294" end="26307" title="Daphne Koster" label="Daphne Koster"/>
<link wikidata="Q524035" start="26312" end="26328" title="Petra Hogewoning" label="Petra Hogewoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874991" start="26478" end="26494" title="PSV/FC Eindhoven" label="PSV/FC Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2242926" start="26519" end="26540" title="KNVB Women&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="KNVB Women&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q108749732" start="26563" end="26580" title="AFC Ajax (amateurs)" label="AFC Ajax Amateurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200744" start="26759" end="26780" title="Sportpark De Toekomst" label="Sportpark De Toekomst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2675688" start="26853" end="26866" title="Eerste Klasse" label="Eerste Klasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877646" start="26874" end="26885" title="Hoofdklasse" label="Hoofdklasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2675688" start="26983" end="26996" title="Eerste Klasse" label="Eerste Klasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087851" start="27026" end="27050" title="KNVB District Cup" label="KNVB District Cup West I"/>
<link wikidata="Q219233" start="27281" end="27288" title="SBV Vitesse" label="Vitesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139379" start="27346" end="27354" title="Ajax HVA" label="Ajax HVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="27375" end="27383" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q166279" start="27458" end="27477" title="Honkbal Hoofdklasse" label="Honkbal Hoofdklasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q131748" start="27910" end="27917" title="Mustard (condiment)" label="mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="28204" end="28223" title="Video game" label="professional gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051238" start="28398" end="28408" title="Sagan Tosu" label="Sagan Tosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q653119" start="28495" end="28506" title="Almere City FC" label="Almere City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="28524" end="28533" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q188277" start="28551" end="28559" title="Cruzeiro Esporte Clube" label="Cruzeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q814738" start="28577" end="28590" title="Beijing Sinobo Guoan F.C." label="Beijing Guoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80964" start="28608" end="28617" title="Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras" label="Palmeiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q223264" start="28635" end="28645" title="AS Trenčín" label="AS Trenčín"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192340" start="28663" end="28680" title="Guangzhou R&amp;amp;F F.C." label="Guangzhou R&amp;amp;F"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051238" start="28698" end="28708" title="Sagan Tosu" label="Sagan Tosu"/>
<link wikidata="Q286801" start="28726" end="28736" title="Sharjah FC" label="Sharjah FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q330143" start="28754" end="28763" title="Sydney FC" label="Sydney FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q209895" start="28781" end="28797" title="Sparta Rotterdam" label="Sparta Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28845" end="28857" title="List of AFC Ajax affiliated clubs#Various HETT-clubs" label="main article"/>
<link wikidata="Q646079" start="28930" end="28948" title="Beerschot A.C." label="Germinal Beerschot"/>
<link wikidata="Q511902" start="28963" end="28981" title="Ashanti Gold SC" label="Ashanti Goldfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699613" start="28996" end="29018" title="Ajax Orlando Prospects" label="Ajax Orlando Prospects"/>
<link wikidata="Q854141" start="29033" end="29044" title="HFC Haarlem" label="HFC Haarlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q738060" start="29059" end="29067" title="FC Volendam" label="Volendam"/>
<link wikidata="Q412502" start="29082" end="29096" title="Cape Town Spurs F.C." label="Ajax Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836816" start="29156" end="29171" title="Big Three (Netherlands)" label="big three clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q134241" start="29364" end="29373" title="Feyenoord" label="Feyenoord"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="29379" end="29388" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180663" start="29452" end="29465" title="De Klassieker" label="De Klassieker"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="30304" end="30313" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9905" start="30648" end="30657" title="Beverwijk" label="Beverwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538388" start="30766" end="30785" title="Battle of Beverwijk" label="Battle of Beverwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11938" start="30818" end="30821" title="PSV Eindhoven" label="PSV"/>
<link wikidata="Q806" start="31182" end="31190" title="Randstad" label="Randstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154479" start="31639" end="31652" title="Rinus Michels" label="Rinus Michels"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163" start="31657" end="31669" title="Johan Cruyff" label="Johan Cruyff"/>
<link wikidata="Q738761" start="31689" end="31703" title="Total Football" label="Total Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q9832" start="31770" end="31779" title="Eindhoven" label="Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q955365" start="31783" end="31795" title="Kees Rijvers" label="Kees Rijvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q484534" start="31800" end="31812" title="Guus Hiddink" label="Guus Hiddink"/>
<link wikidata="Q24680" start="32277" end="32284" title="FC Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q24904" start="32536" end="32548" title="ADO Den Haag" label="ADO Den Haag"/>
<link wikidata="Q19603" start="32963" end="32969" title="FC Twente" label="Twente"/>
<link wikidata="Q219233" start="32971" end="32985" title="Vitesse Arnhem" label="Vitesse Arnhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q24711" start="32987" end="32996" title="FC Groningen" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q972" start="33135" end="33142" title="Alkmaar" label="Alkmaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q701" start="33298" end="33311" title="North Holland" label="North Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980237" start="33416" end="33433" title="Amsterdam derby" label="Amsterdam derbies"/>
<link wikidata="Q629344" start="33465" end="33474" title="Blauw-Wit Amsterdam" label="Blauw-Wit"/>
<link wikidata="Q478766" start="33476" end="33479" title="AFC DWS" label="DWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15874169" start="33484" end="33499" title="De Volewijckers" label="De Volewijckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q386241" start="33530" end="33542" title="FC Amsterdam" label="FC Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496228" start="34044" end="34050" title="F-side" label="F-Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959838" start="34055" end="34061" title="VAK410" label="VAK410"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112724" start="34325" end="34340" title="De Meer Stadion" label="De Meer Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="35968" end="35975" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951885" start="36090" end="36110" title="Supportersvereniging Ajax" label="Supporters Club Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835657" start="36463" end="36472" title="Ajax Life" label="Ajax Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q181298" start="36497" end="36504" title="fanzine" label="fanzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242580" start="36552" end="36571" title="AFCA Supportersclub" label="AFCA Supportersclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835653" start="36937" end="36961" title="Ajax Business Associates" label="Ajax Business Associates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37216" end="37241" title="Ajax Business Golf Trophy" label="Ajax Business Golf Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844096" start="37628" end="37638" title="Lucky Lynx" label="Lucky Lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035937" start="37820" end="37827" title="WV-HEDW" label="WV-HEDW"/>
<link wikidata="Q478608" start="37941" end="37955" title="Amsterdam-Oost" label="Amsterdam-Oost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396997" start="38168" end="38173" title="Mokum" label="Mokum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="38203" end="38210" title="Yiddish language" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="38272" end="38284" title="anti-Semitic" label="anti-Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112724" start="38346" end="38361" title="De Meer Stadion" label="De Meer Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q161396" start="38659" end="38672" title="Star of David" label="Star of David"/>
<link wikidata="Q128480" start="38681" end="38693" title="Israeli flag" label="Israeli flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q131718" start="38810" end="38821" title="Hava Nagila" label="Hava Nagila"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="38831" end="38837" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="38838" end="38847" title="folk song" label="folk song"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="39026" end="39031" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q205348" start="39051" end="39054" title="Gas chamber" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q153271" start="39151" end="39162" title="Nazi salute" label="Nazi salute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851144" start="39384" end="39393" title="Superjews" label="Superjews"/>
<link wikidata="Q969731" start="39416" end="39419" title="Omroep NTR" label="NTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666506" start="39469" end="39518" title="International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam" label="International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="39711" end="39718" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="39837" end="39843" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q223728" start="39850" end="39866" title="Maccabi Tel Aviv F.C." label="Maccabi Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="39956" end="39972" title="Israel–Hamas war" label="Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163" start="40103" end="40115" title="Johan Cruyff" label="Johan Cruyff"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="40117" end="40124" title="Forward (association football)" label="Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770361" start="40326" end="40335" title="Jong Ajax" label="Jong Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q111817121" start="40796" end="40806" title="Alex Kroes" label="Alex Kroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q125121553" start="40830" end="40843" title="Marijn Beuker" label="Marijn Beuker"/>
<link wikidata="Q434702" start="40915" end="40926" title="Danny Blind" label="Danny Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q106247695" start="41020" end="41037" title="Francesco Farioli" label="Francesco Farioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q120059455" start="41077" end="41085" title="Dave Vos" label="Dave Vos"/>
<link wikidata="Q123274552" start="41128" end="41143" title="Jarkko Tuomisto" label="Jarkko Tuomisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364928" start="41493" end="41506" title="Jan Siemerink" label="Jan Siemerink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439009" start="41557" end="41569" title="Michel Kreek" label="Michel Kreek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560053" start="41633" end="41647" title="Floris Stempel" label="Floris Stempel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900916" start="41684" end="41692" title="Han Dade" label="Han Dade"/>
<link wikidata="Q729357" start="41812" end="41823" title="Wim Volkers" label="Wim Volkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128641" start="41861" end="41875" title="Jaap van Praag (sports director)" label="Jaap van Praag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783962" start="41912" end="41929" title="Michael van Praag" label="Michael van Praag"/>
<link wikidata="Q538361" start="41968" end="41979" title="Uri Coronel" label="Uri Coronel"/>
<link wikidata="Q724087" start="42108" end="42119" title="Jack Kirwan" label="Jack Kirwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313404" start="42132" end="42145" title="Jack Reynolds (footballer, born 1881)" label="Jack Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2769508" start="42158" end="42169" title="Harold Rose" label="Harold Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q536973" start="42182" end="42196" title="Stanley Castle" label="Stanley Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313404" start="42209" end="42222" title="Jack Reynolds (footballer, born 1881)" label="Jack Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931154" start="42235" end="42249" title="Vilmos Halpern" label="Vilmos Halpern"/>
<link wikidata="Q729357" start="42262" end="42273" title="Wim Volkers" label="Wim Volkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462601" start="42286" end="42298" title="Dolf van Kol" label="Dolf van Kol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313404" start="42311" end="42324" title="Jack Reynolds (footballer, born 1881)" label="Jack Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349886" start="42337" end="42349" title="Robert Smith (manager)" label="Robert Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307001" start="42362" end="42374" title="Walter Crook" label="Walter Crook"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937433" start="42387" end="42401" title="Robert Thomson (footballer, born 1905)" label="Robert Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750850" start="42414" end="42427" title="Karel Kaufman" label="Karel Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307001" start="42440" end="42452" title="Walter Crook" label="Walter Crook"/>
<link wikidata="Q686619" start="42465" end="42481" title="Karl Humenberger" label="Karl Humenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q920038" start="42494" end="42508" title="Vic Buckingham" label="Vic Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q744817" start="42521" end="42535" title="Keith Spurgeon" label="Keith Spurgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216446" start="42548" end="42561" title="Joseph Gruber" label="Joseph Gruber"/>
<link wikidata="Q544255" start="42574" end="42585" title="Jack Rowley" label="Jack Rowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q920038" start="42598" end="42612" title="Vic Buckingham" label="Vic Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154479" start="42625" end="42638" title="Rinus Michels" label="Rinus Michels"/>
<link wikidata="Q397125" start="42651" end="42664" title="Ștefan Kovács" label="Ștefan Kovács"/>
<link wikidata="Q591773" start="42677" end="42690" title="George Knobel" label="George Knobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528515" start="42703" end="42715" title="Bobby Haarms" label="Bobby Haarms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091537" start="42734" end="42744" title="Hans Kraay Sr." label="Hans Kraay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154479" start="42788" end="42801" title="Rinus Michels" label="Rinus Michels"/>
<link wikidata="Q360924" start="42814" end="42827" title="Tomislav Ivić" label="Tomislav Ivić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131716" start="42840" end="42848" title="Cor Brom" label="Cor Brom"/>
<link wikidata="Q158647" start="42861" end="42875" title="Leo Beenhakker" label="Leo Beenhakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q300778" start="42888" end="42898" title="Aad de Mos" label="Aad de Mos"/>
<link wikidata="Q71565" start="42917" end="42928" title="Kurt Linder" label="Kurt Linder"/>
<link wikidata="Q300778" start="42941" end="42951" title="Aad de Mos" label="Aad de Mos"/>
<link wikidata="Q586540" start="42964" end="42976" title="Antoine Kohn" label="Antoine Kohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606463" start="42978" end="42995" title="Tonny Bruins Slot" label="Tonny Bruins Slot"/>
<link wikidata="Q718029" start="43000" end="43016" title="Cor van der Hart" label="Cor van der Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163" start="43035" end="43047" title="Johan Cruyff" label="Johan Cruyff"/>
<link wikidata="Q71565" start="43060" end="43071" title="Kurt Linder" label="Kurt Linder"/>
<link wikidata="Q586540" start="43081" end="43093" title="Antoine Kohn" label="Antoine Kohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528515" start="43095" end="43107" title="Bobby Haarms" label="Bobby Haarms"/>
<link wikidata="Q528792" start="43112" end="43126" title="Barry Hulshoff" label="Barry Hulshoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q158647" start="43148" end="43162" title="Leo Beenhakker" label="Leo Beenhakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q207431" start="43175" end="43189" title="Louis van Gaal" label="Louis van Gaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q310103" start="43202" end="43214" title="Morten Olsen" label="Morten Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q275643" start="43227" end="43238" title="Jan Wouters" label="Jan Wouters"/>
<link wikidata="Q187687" start="43253" end="43267" title="Hans Westerhof" label="Hans Westerhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q469750" start="43286" end="43298" title="Co Adriaanse" label="Co Adriaanse"/>
<link wikidata="Q192635" start="43311" end="43324" title="Ronald Koeman" label="Ronald Koeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q313180" start="43337" end="43346" title="Ruud Krol" label="Ruud Krol"/>
<link wikidata="Q434702" start="43365" end="43376" title="Danny Blind" label="Danny Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q380732" start="43389" end="43402" title="Henk ten Cate" label="Henk ten Cate"/>
<link wikidata="Q376494" start="43415" end="43427" title="Adrie Koster" label="Adrie Koster"/>
<link wikidata="Q483629" start="43449" end="43465" title="Marco van Basten" label="Marco van Basten"/>
<link wikidata="Q529563" start="43478" end="43500" title="John van &amp;#x27;t Schip" label="John van &amp;#x27;t Schip"/>
<link wikidata="Q310181" start="43519" end="43529" title="Martin Jol" label="Martin Jol"/>
<link wikidata="Q219657" start="43542" end="43555" title="Frank de Boer" label="Frank de Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029982" start="43568" end="43578" title="Peter Bosz" label="Peter Bosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4218949" start="43591" end="43604" title="Marcel Keizer" label="Marcel Keizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844569" start="43614" end="43626" title="Erik ten Hag" label="Erik ten Hag"/>
<link wikidata="Q348301" start="43641" end="43657" title="Alfred Schreuder" label="Alfred Schreuder"/>
<link wikidata="Q946457" start="43672" end="43685" title="John Heitinga" label="John Heitinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619700" start="43695" end="43709" title="Maurice Steijn" label="Maurice Steijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q216260" start="43719" end="43734" title="Hedwiges Maduro" label="Hedwiges Maduro"/>
<link wikidata="Q529563" start="43753" end="43775" title="John van &amp;#x27;t Schip" label="John van &amp;#x27;t Schip"/>
<link wikidata="Q106247695" start="43799" end="43816" title="Francesco Farioli" label="Francesco Farioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="44020" end="44027" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="44180" end="44187" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="44371" end="44377" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="44414" end="44423" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="44450" end="44456" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern"/>
<link wikidata="Q493386" start="44529" end="44537" title="Exhibition game" label="friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q478643" start="44595" end="44615" title="Amsterdam Tournament" label="Amsterdam Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931444" start="44617" end="44637" title="Bruges Matins (football)" label="Bruges Matins Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q751394" start="44639" end="44663" title="Trofeo Santiago Bernabéu" label="Trofeo Santiago Bernabéu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361940" start="44665" end="44676" title="Eusébio Cup" label="Eusébio Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44678" end="44694" title="Ted Bates (footballer)#Ted Bates Trophy" label="Ted Bates Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809351" start="44718" end="44735" title="Chippie Polar Cup" label="Chippie Polar Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840840" start="44769" end="44793" title="list of AFC Ajax honours" label="list of AFC Ajax honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q729035" start="44822" end="44869" title="World Soccer (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;World Soccer&amp;quot; World Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478279" start="44883" end="44936" title="France Football European Team of the Year" label="&amp;quot;France Football&amp;quot; European Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45072" end="45116" title="International Federation of Football History &amp;amp; Statistics#The World&amp;#x27;s Best Club" label="IFFHS The World&amp;#x27;s Club Team of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748844" start="45164" end="45196" title="Amsterdam Sportsman of the year" label="Amsterdam Sportsteam of the year"/>
<link wikidata="Q389263" start="45287" end="45311" title="FIFA Club of the Century" label="FIFA Club of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45348" end="45399" title="kicker (sports magazine)#Kicker Sportmagazin Club of the Century" label="&amp;quot;kicker Sportmagazin&amp;quot; Club of the Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427601" start="45555" end="45562" title="2013–14 AFC Ajax season" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q207431" start="45978" end="45992" title="Louis van Gaal" label="Louis van Gaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990992" start="46052" end="46063" title="Arie van Os" label="Arie van Os"/>
<link wikidata="Q2783962" start="46066" end="46083" title="Michael van Praag" label="Michael van Praag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334013" start="46102" end="46113" title="Sjaak Swart" label="Sjaak Swart"/>
<link wikidata="Q207431" start="46164" end="46178" title="Louis van Gaal" label="Louis van Gaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560053" start="46238" end="46252" title="Floris Stempel" label="Floris Stempel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900916" start="46255" end="46263" title="Han Dade" label="Han Dade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228384" start="46435" end="46455" title="Jordanus Roodenburgh" label="Jordanus Roodenburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317260" start="46458" end="46471" title="Theo Brokmann" label="Theo Brokmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240355" start="46493" end="46504" title="Jan de Boer (footballer, born 1898)" label="Jan de Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384642" start="46536" end="46550" title="Wim Anderiesen" label="Wim Anderiesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q729357" start="46553" end="46564" title="Wim Volkers" label="Wim Volkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313404" start="46628" end="46641" title="Jack Reynolds (footballer, born 1881)" label="Jack Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128641" start="46710" end="46724" title="Jaap van Praag (sports director)" label="Jaap van Praag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777101" start="46727" end="46739" title="Henk Hordijk" label="Henk Hordijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154479" start="46762" end="46775" title="Rinus Michels" label="Rinus Michels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430821" start="46792" end="46804" title="Jan Potharst" label="Jan Potharst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528515" start="46807" end="46819" title="Bobby Haarms" label="Bobby Haarms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163" start="46856" end="46868" title="Johan Cruyff" label="Johan Cruyff"/>
<link wikidata="Q538361" start="46871" end="46882" title="Uri Coronel" label="Uri Coronel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334013" start="47103" end="47114" title="Sjaak Swart" label="Sjaak Swart"/>
<link wikidata="Q288805" start="47142" end="47157" title="Piet van Reenen" label="Piet van Reenen"/>
<link wikidata="Q923217" start="47196" end="47206" title="Henk Groot" label="Henk Groot"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="47241" end="47258" title="Cap (sport)" label="International cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317260" start="47363" end="47376" title="Theo Brokmann" label="Theo Brokmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="47465" end="47473" title="Association football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334013" start="47668" end="47679" title="Sjaak Swart" label="Sjaak Swart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777966" start="48459" end="48471" title="Club van 100 (AFC Ajax)" label="Club van 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q528792" start="48612" end="48626" title="Barry Hulshoff" label="Barry Hulshoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383680" start="48628" end="48640" title="Sonny Silooy" label="Sonny Silooy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391203" start="48642" end="48656" title="Simon Tahamata" label="Simon Tahamata"/>
<link wikidata="Q192635" start="48658" end="48671" title="Ronald Koeman" label="Ronald Koeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255421" start="48673" end="48687" title="Tscheu La Ling" label="Tscheu La Ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514737" start="48689" end="48702" title="Gerrie Mühren" label="Gerrie Mühren"/>
<link wikidata="Q529563" start="48704" end="48726" title="John van &amp;#x27;t Schip" label="John van &amp;#x27;t Schip"/>
<link wikidata="Q238857" start="48728" end="48737" title="Brian Roy" label="Brian Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q945295" start="48739" end="48752" title="Stanley Menzo" label="Stanley Menzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q705988" start="48754" end="48770" title="Peter van Vossen" label="Peter van Vossen"/>
<link wikidata="Q690923" start="48775" end="48784" title="Fred Grim" label="Fred Grim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490027" start="49057" end="49070" title="De Mistwedstrijd" label="Mistwedstrijd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070918" start="49134" end="49148" title="2007–08 Eredivisie" label="2007–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q943194" start="49441" end="49446" title="Roger García Junyent" label="Roger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906140" start="49487" end="49503" title="Marvin Zeegelaar" label="Marvin Zeegelaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q670444" start="49549" end="49563" title="2011–12 Eredivisie" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q541542" start="49594" end="49606" title="Aras Özbiliz" label="Aras Özbiliz"/>
<link wikidata="Q670444" start="49669" end="49683" title="2011–12 Eredivisie" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q478643" start="49947" end="49971" title="Amsterdam Tournament" label="Amsterdam 700 Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q131499" start="51071" end="51078" title="S.L. Benfica" label="Benfica"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="51084" end="51092" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114228" start="51191" end="51205" title="Copa Amsterdam" label="Copa Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9899" start="51315" end="51337" title="Amsterdam city council" label="Amsterdam city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q503319" start="51364" end="51379" title="Olympic Stadium (Amsterdam)" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="51769" end="51778" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="51780" end="51788" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="51790" end="51797" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="51802" end="51813" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188277" start="51879" end="51887" title="Cruzeiro Esporte Clube" label="Cruzeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="51893" end="51899" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427597" start="52042" end="52058" title="AEGON Future Cup" label="AEGON Future Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q291171" start="52202" end="52207" title="Aegon N.V." label="AEGON"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200744" start="52279" end="52300" title="Sportpark De Toekomst" label="Sportpark De Toekomst"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="52463" end="52469" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="52720" end="52733" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="52770" end="52787" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="52789" end="52802" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="52804" end="52809" title="A.C. Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250669" start="52990" end="53031" title="List of football clubs in the Netherlands" label="List of football clubs in the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42405316" start="53034" end="53071" title="List of world champion football clubs" label="List of world champion football clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727418" start="53092" end="53102" title="David Endt" label="David Endt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53165" end="53179" title="Jan Baltus Kok" label="Jan Baltus Kok"/>
<link wikidata="Q214341" start="53274" end="53297" title="University of Amsterdam" label="University of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118355" start="53318" end="53329" title="Simon Kuper" label="Simon Kuper"/>
<link wikidata="Q861799" start="53417" end="53428" title="Orion Books" label="Orion Books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53538" end="53551" title="Evert Vermeer" label="Evert Vermeer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2274" wikidata="Q215022" url="?curid=2274" title="Arthur Eddington">
<text>Sir Arthur Stanley Eddington, (28 December 1882 – 22 November 1944) was an English astronomer, physicist, and mathematician. He was also a philosopher of science and a populariser of science. The Eddington limit, the natural limit to the luminosity of stars, or the radiation generated by accretion onto a compact object, is named in his honour.

Around 1920, he foreshadowed the discovery and mechanism of nuclear fusion processes in stars, in his paper &quot;The Internal Constitution of the Stars&quot;. At that time, the source of stellar energy was a complete mystery; Eddington was the first to correctly speculate that the source was fusion of hydrogen into helium.

Eddington wrote a number of articles that announced and explained Einstein&#x27;s theory of general relativity to the English-speaking world. World War I had severed many lines of scientific communication, and new developments in German science were not well known in England. He also conducted an expedition to observe the solar eclipse of 29 May 1919 on the Island of Príncipe that provided one of the earliest confirmations of general relativity, and he became known for his popular expositions and interpretations of the theory.

==Early years==
Eddington was born 28 December 1882 in Kendal, Westmorland (now Cumbria), England, the son of Quaker parents, Arthur Henry Eddington, headmaster of the Quaker School, and Sarah Ann Shout.

His father taught at a Quaker training college in Lancashire before moving to Kendal to become headmaster of Stramongate School. He died in the typhoid epidemic which swept England in 1884. His mother was left to bring up her two children with relatively little income. The family moved to Weston-super-Mare where at first Stanley (as his mother and sister always called Eddington) was educated at home before spending three years at a preparatory school. The family lived in a house called Varzin, at 42 Walliscote Road, Weston-super-Mare. A commemorative plaque on the building explains Eddington&#x27;s contributions to science.

In 1893 Eddington entered Brynmelyn School. He proved to be a most capable scholar, particularly in mathematics and English literature. His performance earned him a scholarship to Owens College, Manchester (what was later to become the University of Manchester), in 1898, which he was able to attend, having turned 16 that year. He spent the first year in a general course, but he turned to physics for the next three years. Eddington was greatly influenced by his physics and mathematics teachers, Arthur Schuster and Horace Lamb. At Manchester, Eddington lived at Dalton Hall, where he came under the lasting influence of the Quaker mathematician J. W. Graham. His progress was rapid, winning him several scholarships, and he graduated with a BSc in physics with First Class Honours in 1902.

Based on his performance at Owens College, he was awarded a scholarship to Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1902. His tutor at Cambridge was Robert Alfred Herman and in 1904 Eddington became the first ever second-year student to be placed as Senior Wrangler. After receiving his M.A. in 1905, he began research on thermionic emission in the Cavendish Laboratory. This did not go well, and meanwhile he spent time teaching mathematics to first year engineering students. This hiatus was brief. Through a recommendation by E. T. Whittaker, his senior colleague at Trinity College, he secured a position at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, where he was to embark on his career in astronomy, a career whose seeds had been sown even as a young child when he would often &quot;try to count the stars&quot;.

==Astronomy==

In January 1906, Eddington was nominated to the post of chief assistant to the Astronomer Royal at the Royal Greenwich Observatory. He left Cambridge for Greenwich the following month. He was put to work on a detailed analysis of the parallax of 433 Eros on photographic plates that had started in 1900. He developed a new statistical method based on the apparent drift of two background stars, winning him the Smith&#x27;s Prize in 1907. The prize won him a fellowship of Trinity College, Cambridge. In December 1912, George Darwin, son of Charles Darwin, died suddenly, and Eddington was promoted to his chair as the Plumian Professor of Astronomy and Experimental Philosophy in early 1913. Later that year, Robert Ball, holder of the theoretical Lowndean chair, also died, and Eddington was named the director of the entire Cambridge Observatory the next year. In May 1914, he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society: he was awarded the Royal Medal in 1928 and delivered the Bakerian Lecture in 1926.

Eddington also investigated the interior of stars through theory, and developed the first true understanding of stellar processes. He began this in 1916 with investigations of possible physical explanations for Cepheid variable stars. He began by extending Karl Schwarzschild&#x27;s earlier work on radiation pressure in Emden polytropic models. These models treated a star as a sphere of gas held up against gravity by internal thermal pressure, and one of Eddington&#x27;s chief additions was to show that radiation pressure was necessary to prevent collapse of the sphere. He developed his model despite knowingly lacking firm foundations for understanding opacity and energy generation in the stellar interior. However, his results allowed for calculation of temperature, density and pressure at all points inside a star (thermodynamic anisotropy), and Eddington argued that his theory was so useful for further astrophysical investigation that it should be retained despite not being based on completely accepted physics. James Jeans contributed the important suggestion that stellar matter would certainly be ionized, but that was the end of any collaboration between the pair, who became famous for their lively debates.

Eddington defended his method by pointing to the utility of his results, particularly his important mass–luminosity relation. This had the unexpected result of showing that virtually all stars, including giants and dwarfs, behaved as ideal gases. In the process of developing his stellar models, he sought to overturn current thinking about the sources of stellar energy. Jeans and others defended the Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism, which was based on classical mechanics, while Eddington speculated broadly about the qualitative and quantitative consequences of possible proton–electron annihilation and nuclear fusion processes.

Around 1920, he anticipated the discovery and mechanism of nuclear fusion processes in stars, in his paper &quot;The Internal Constitution of the Stars&quot;. At that time, the source of stellar energy was a complete mystery; Eddington correctly speculated that the source was fusion of hydrogen into helium, liberating enormous energy according to Einstein&#x27;s equation . This was a particularly remarkable development since at that time fusion and thermonuclear energy, and even the fact that stars are largely composed of hydrogen (see metallicity), had not yet been discovered. Eddington&#x27;s paper, based on knowledge at the time, reasoned that:

# The leading theory of stellar energy, the contraction hypothesis (cf. the Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism), should cause stars&#x27; rotation to visibly speed up due to conservation of angular momentum. But observations of Cepheid variable stars showed this was not happening.
# The only other known plausible source of energy was conversion of matter to energy; Einstein had shown some years earlier that a small amount of matter was equivalent to a large amount of energy.
# Francis Aston had also recently shown that the mass of a helium atom was about 0.8% less than the mass of the four hydrogen atoms which would, combined, form a helium atom, suggesting that if such a combination could happen, it would release considerable energy as a byproduct.
# If a star contained just 5% of fusible hydrogen, it would suffice to explain how stars got their energy. (We now know that most &quot;ordinary&quot; stars contain far more than 5% hydrogen.)
# Further elements might also be fused, and other scientists had speculated that stars were the &quot;crucible&quot; in which light elements combined to create heavy elements, but without more-accurate measurements of their atomic masses nothing more could be said at the time.

All of these speculations were proven correct in the following decades.

With these assumptions, he demonstrated that the interior temperature of stars must be millions of degrees. In 1924, he discovered the mass–luminosity relation for stars (see Lecchini in &quot;&quot;). Despite some disagreement, Eddington&#x27;s models were eventually accepted as a powerful tool for further investigation, particularly in issues of stellar evolution. The confirmation of his estimated stellar diameters by Michelson in 1920 proved crucial in convincing astronomers unused to Eddington&#x27;s intuitive, exploratory style. Eddington&#x27;s theory appeared in mature form in 1926 as &quot;The Internal Constitution of the Stars&quot;, which became an important text for training an entire generation of astrophysicists.

Eddington&#x27;s work in astrophysics in the late 1920s and the 1930s continued his work in stellar structure, and precipitated further clashes with Jeans and Edward Arthur Milne. An important topic was the extension of his models to take advantage of developments in quantum physics, including the use of degeneracy physics in describing dwarf stars.

===Dispute with Chandrasekhar on the mass limit of stars===
The topic of extension of his models precipitated his dispute with Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, who was then a student at Cambridge. Chandrasekhar&#x27;s work presaged the discovery of black holes, which at the time seemed so absurdly non-physical that Eddington refused to believe that Chandrasekhar&#x27;s purely mathematical derivation had consequences for the real world. Eddington was wrong and his motivation is controversial. Chandrasekhar&#x27;s narrative of this incident, in which his work is harshly rejected, portrays Eddington as rather cruel and dogmatic. Chandra benefited from his friendship with Eddington. It was Eddington and Milne who put up Chandra&#x27;s name for the fellowship for the Royal Society which Chandra obtained. An FRS meant he was at the Cambridge high-table with all the luminaries and a very comfortable endowment for research. Eddington&#x27;s criticism seems to have been based partly on a suspicion that a purely mathematical derivation from relativity theory was not enough to explain the seemingly daunting physical paradoxes that were inherent to degenerate stars, but to have &quot;raised irrelevant objections&quot; in addition, as Thanu Padmanabhan puts it.

==Relativity==

During World War I, Eddington was secretary of the Royal Astronomical Society, which meant he was the first to receive a series of letters and papers from Willem de Sitter regarding Einstein&#x27;s theory of general relativity. Eddington was fortunate in being not only one of the few astronomers with the mathematical skills to understand general relativity, but owing to his internationalist and pacifist views inspired by his Quaker religious beliefs, one of the few at the time who was still interested in pursuing a theory developed by a German physicist. He quickly became the chief supporter and expositor of relativity in Britain. He and Astronomer Royal Frank Watson Dyson organized two expeditions to observe a solar eclipse in 1919 to make the first empirical test of Einstein&#x27;s theory: the measurement of the deflection of light by the Sun&#x27;s gravitational field. In fact, Dyson&#x27;s argument for the indispensability of Eddington&#x27;s expertise in this test was what prevented Eddington from eventually having to enter military service.

When conscription was introduced in Britain on 2 March 1916, Eddington intended to apply for an exemption as a conscientious objector. Cambridge University authorities instead requested and were granted an exemption on the ground of Eddington&#x27;s work being of national interest. In 1918, this was appealed against by the Ministry of National Service. Before the appeal tribunal in June, Eddington claimed conscientious objector status, which was not recognized and would have ended his exemption in August 1918. A further two hearings took place in June and July, respectively. Eddington&#x27;s personal statement at the June hearing about his objection to war based on religious grounds is on record. The Astronomer Royal, Sir Frank Dyson, supported Eddington at the July hearing with a written statement, emphasising Eddington&#x27;s essential role in the solar eclipse expedition to Príncipe in May 1919. Eddington made clear his willingness to serve in the Friends&#x27; Ambulance Unit, under the jurisdiction of the British Red Cross, or as a harvest labourer. However, the tribunal&#x27;s decision to grant a further twelve months&#x27; exemption from military service was on condition of Eddington continuing his astronomy work, in particular in preparation for the Príncipe expedition. The war ended before the end of his exemption.
After the war, Eddington travelled to the island of Príncipe off the west coast of Africa to watch the solar eclipse of 29 May 1919. During the eclipse, he took pictures of the stars (several stars in the Hyades cluster, including Kappa Tauri of the constellation Taurus) whose line of sight from the Earth happened to be near the Sun&#x27;s location in the sky at that time of year. This effect is noticeable only during a total solar eclipse when the sky is dark enough to see stars which are normally obscured by the Sun&#x27;s brightness. According to the theory of general relativity, stars with light rays that passed near the Sun would appear to have been slightly shifted because their light had been curved by its gravitational field. Eddington showed that Newtonian gravitation could be interpreted to predict half the shift predicted by Einstein.

Eddington&#x27;s observations published the next year allegedly confirmed Einstein&#x27;s theory, and were hailed at the time as evidence of general relativity over the Newtonian model. The news was reported in newspapers all over the world as a major story. Afterward, Eddington embarked on a campaign to popularize relativity and the expedition as landmarks both in scientific development and international scientific relations.

It has been claimed that Eddington&#x27;s observations were of poor quality, and he had unjustly discounted simultaneous observations at Sobral, Brazil, which appeared closer to the Newtonian model, but a 1979 re-analysis with modern measuring equipment and contemporary software validated Eddington&#x27;s results and conclusions. The quality of the 1919 results was indeed poor compared to later observations, but was sufficient to persuade contemporary astronomers. The rejection of the results from the expedition to Brazil was due to a defect in the telescopes used which, again, was completely accepted and well understood by contemporary astronomers.

Throughout this period, Eddington lectured on relativity, and was particularly well known for his ability to explain the concepts in lay terms as well as scientific. He collected many of these into the &quot;Mathematical Theory of Relativity&quot; in 1923, which Albert Einstein suggested was &quot;the finest presentation of the subject in any language.&quot; He was an early advocate of Einstein&#x27;s general relativity, and an interesting anecdote well illustrates his humour and personal intellectual investment: Ludwik Silberstein, a physicist who thought of himself as an expert on relativity, approached Eddington at the Royal Society&#x27;s (6 November) 1919 meeting where he had defended Einstein&#x27;s relativity with his Brazil-Príncipe solar eclipse calculations with some degree of scepticism, and ruefully charged Arthur as one who claimed to be one of three men who actually understood the theory (Silberstein, of course, was including himself and Einstein as the other). When Eddington refrained from replying, he insisted Arthur not be &quot;so shy&quot;, whereupon Eddington replied, &quot;Oh, no! I was wondering who the third one might be!&quot;

==Cosmology==
Eddington was also heavily involved with the development of the first generation of general relativistic cosmological models. He had been investigating the instability of the Einstein universe when he learned of both Lemaître&#x27;s 1927 paper postulating an expanding or contracting universe and Hubble&#x27;s work on the recession of the spiral nebulae. He felt the cosmological constant must have played the crucial role in the universe&#x27;s evolution from an Einsteinian steady state to its current expanding state, and most of his cosmological investigations focused on the constant&#x27;s significance and characteristics. In &quot;The Mathematical Theory of Relativity,&quot; Eddington interpreted the cosmological constant to mean that the universe is &quot;self-gauging&quot;.

== Fundamental theory and the Eddington number ==

During the 1920s until his death, Eddington increasingly concentrated on what he called &quot;fundamental theory&quot; which was intended to be a unification of quantum theory, relativity, cosmology, and gravitation. At first he progressed along &quot;traditional&quot; lines, but turned increasingly to an almost numerological analysis of the dimensionless ratios of fundamental constants.

His basic approach was to combine several fundamental constants in order to produce a dimensionless number. In many cases these would result in numbers close to 1040, its square, or its square root. He was convinced that the mass of the proton and the charge of the electron were a &quot;natural and complete specification for constructing a Universe&quot; and that their values were not accidental. One of the discoverers of quantum mechanics, Paul Dirac, also pursued this line of investigation, which has become known as the Dirac large numbers hypothesis.
A somewhat damaging statement in his defence of these concepts involved the fine-structure constant, &quot;α&quot;. At the time it was measured to be very close to 1/136, and he argued that the value should in fact be exactly 1/136 for epistemological reasons. Later measurements placed the value much closer to 1/137, at which point he switched his line of reasoning to argue that one more should be added to the degrees of freedom, so that the value should in fact be exactly 1/137, the Eddington number. at the time started calling him &quot;Arthur Adding-one&quot;. This change of stance detracted from Eddington&#x27;s credibility in the physics community. The current CODATA value is 1/

Eddington believed he had identified an algebraic basis for fundamental physics, which he termed &quot;E-numbers&quot; (representing a certain group – a Clifford algebra). These in effect incorporated spacetime into a higher-dimensional structure. While his theory has long been neglected by the general physics community, similar algebraic notions underlie many modern attempts at a grand unified theory. Moreover, Eddington&#x27;s emphasis on the values of the fundamental constants, and specifically upon dimensionless numbers derived from them, is nowadays a central concern of physics. In particular, he predicted a number of hydrogen atoms in the Universe ≈ , or equivalently the half of the total number of particles protons + electrons. He did not complete this line of research before his death in 1944; his book &quot;Fundamental Theory&quot; was published posthumously in 1948.

=== Eddington number for cycling ===
Eddington is credited with devising a measure of a cyclist&#x27;s long-distance riding achievements. The Eddington number in the context of cycling is defined as the maximum number E such that the cyclist has cycled at least E miles on at least E days.

For example, an Eddington number of 70 would imply that the cyclist has cycled at least 70 miles in a day on at least 70 occasions. Achieving a high Eddington number is difficult, since moving from, say, 70 to 75 will (probably) require more than five new long-distance rides, since any rides shorter than 75 miles will no longer be included in the reckoning. Eddington&#x27;s own life-time E-number was 84.

The Eddington number for cycling is analogous to the &quot;h&quot;-index that quantifies both the actual scientific productivity and the apparent scientific impact of a scientist.

==Philosophy==

===Idealism===

Eddington wrote in his book &quot;The Nature of the Physical World&quot; that &quot;The stuff of the world is mind-stuff.&quot;
The idealist conclusion was not integral to his epistemology but was based on two main arguments.

The first derives directly from current physical theory. Briefly, mechanical theories of the ether and of the behaviour of fundamental particles have been discarded in both relativity and quantum physics. From this, Eddington inferred that a materialistic metaphysics was outmoded and that, in consequence, since the disjunction of materialism or idealism are assumed to be exhaustive, an idealistic metaphysics is required. The second, and more interesting argument, was based on Eddington&#x27;s epistemology, and may be regarded as consisting of two parts. First, all we know of the objective world is its structure, and the structure of the objective world is precisely mirrored in our own consciousness. We therefore have no reason to doubt that the objective world too is &quot;mind-stuff&quot;. Dualistic metaphysics, then, cannot be evidentially supported.

But, second, not only can we not know that the objective world is nonmentalistic, we also cannot intelligibly suppose that it could be material. To conceive of a dualism entails attributing material properties to the objective world. However, this presupposes that we could observe that the objective world has material properties. But this is absurd, for whatever is observed must ultimately be the content of our own consciousness, and consequently, nonmaterial.

Eddington believed that physics cannot explain consciousness - &quot;light waves are propagated from the table to the eye; chemical changes occur in the retina; propagation of some kind occurs in the optic nerves; atomic changes follow in the brain. Just where the final leap into consciousness occurs is not clear. We do not know the last stage of the message in the physical world before it became a sensation in consciousness&quot;.

Ian Barbour, in his book &quot;Issues in Science and Religion&quot; (1966), p. 133, cites Eddington&#x27;s &quot;The Nature of the Physical World&quot; (1928) for a text that argues the Heisenberg uncertainty principle provides a scientific basis for &quot;the defense of the idea of human freedom&quot; and his &quot;Science and the Unseen World&quot; (1929) for support of philosophical idealism, &quot;the thesis that reality is basically mental&quot;.

Charles De Koninck points out that Eddington believed in objective reality existing apart from our minds, but was using the phrase &quot;mind-stuff&quot; to highlight the inherent intelligibility of the world: that our minds and the physical world are made of the same &quot;stuff&quot; and that our minds are the inescapable connection to the world. As De Koninck quotes Eddington,

===Science===

Against Albert Einstein and others who advocated determinism, indeterminism—championed by Eddington—says that a physical object has an ontologically undetermined component that is not due to the epistemological limitations of physicists&#x27; understanding. The uncertainty principle in quantum mechanics, then, would not necessarily be due to hidden variables but to an indeterminism in nature itself. Eddington proclaimed &quot;It is a consequence of the advent of the quantum theory that physics is no longer pledged to a scheme of deterministic law&quot;.

Eddington agreed with the tenet of logical positivism that &quot;the meaning of a scientific statement is to be ascertained by reference to the steps which would be taken to verify it&quot;.

==Popular and philosophical writings==
Eddington wrote a parody of &quot;The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam&quot;, recounting his 1919 solar eclipse experiment. It contained the following quatrain:

In addition to his textbook &quot;The Mathematical Theory of Relativity&quot;, during the 1920s and 30s, Eddington gave numerous lectures, interviews, and radio broadcasts on relativity, and later, quantum mechanics. Many of these were gathered into books, including &quot;The Nature of the Physical World&quot; and &quot;New Pathways in Science&quot;. His use of literary allusions and humour helped make these difficult subjects more accessible. One familiar image drawn by Eddington consisted of his &quot;two tables&quot;, which represent a paradox concerned with what really exists: one table is the familiar and commonplace one, with properties of extension, colour, and permanence, it is &quot;substantial&quot; in the sense that it is constituted of &quot;substance&quot;; the other is his &#x27;scientific&#x27; one, nothing but myriad minute particles in empty space: the table which &quot;modern physics has by delicate test and remorseless logic assured me . . . is the only one which is really there ... wherever &#x27;there&#x27; may be.&quot; He began the lectures where he discussed this paradox in 1927 with an allusion to these two tables: The second table is mostly emptiness, with numerous electric charges moving around at great speed, and this table is not &quot;substantial&quot; in any way. Eddington portrays the two tables as a recent innovation: physicists &quot;used to borrow the raw material of [their] world from the familiar world&quot;, but for the new concepts, such as the electron, quantum or potential, there is no &quot;familiar counterpart to these things&quot; in &quot;the world of commonplace experience&quot;.

Eddington&#x27;s books and lectures were immensely popular with the public, not only because of his clear exposition, but also for his willingness to discuss the philosophical and religious implications of the new physics. He argued for a deeply rooted philosophical harmony between scientific investigation and religious mysticism, and also that the positivist nature of relativity and quantum physics provided new room for personal religious experience and free will. Unlike many other spiritual scientists, he rejected the idea that science could provide proof of religious propositions.

His popular writings made him a household name in Great Britain between the world wars.

==Death==
Eddington died of cancer in the Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, on 22 November 1944. He was unmarried. His body was cremated at Cambridge Crematorium (Cambridgeshire) on 27 November 1944; the cremated remains were buried in the grave of his mother in the Ascension Parish Burial Ground in Cambridge.

Cambridge University&#x27;s North West Cambridge development has been named Eddington in his honour.

Eddington was played by David Tennant in the television film &quot;Einstein and Eddington&quot;, with Einstein played by Andy Serkis. The film was notable for its groundbreaking portrayal of Eddington as a somewhat repressed gay man. It was first broadcast in 2008.

The actor Paul Eddington was a relative, mentioning in his autobiography (in light of his own weakness in mathematics) &quot;what I then felt to be the misfortune&quot; of being related to &quot;one of the foremost physicists in the world&quot;. Paul&#x27;s father Albert and Sir Arthur were second cousins, both great-grandsons of William Eddington (1755–1806).

==Honours==
===Awards and honors===
* Smith&#x27;s Prize (1907)
* International Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1922)
* Bruce Medal of Astronomical Society of the Pacific (1924)
* Henry Draper Medal of the National Academy of Sciences (1924)
* Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society (1924)
* International Member of the United States National Academy of Sciences (1925)
* Foreign membership of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (1926)
* Prix Jules Janssen of the Société astronomique de France (French Astronomical Society) (1928)
* Royal Medal of the Royal Society (1928)
* Knighthood (1930)
* International Member of the American Philosophical Society (1931)
* Order of Merit (1938)
* Honorary member of the Norwegian Astronomical Society (1939)
* Hon. Freeman of Kendal, 1930

===Named after him===
* Lunar crater Eddington
* asteroid 2761 Eddington
* Royal Astronomical Society&#x27;s Eddington Medal
* Eddington mission, now cancelled
* Eddington Tower, halls of residence at the University of Essex
* Eddington Astronomical Society, an amateur society based in his hometown of Kendal
* Eddington, a house (group of students, used for in-school sports matches) of Kirkbie Kendal School
* Eddington, new suburb of North West Cambridge, opened in 2017
* Eddington Community Interest Company (CIC), 2003. A Community Centre focusing on Climate Information and projects, including a Waste Food Community Café and Larder, in partnership with SLACC (South Lakes Action on Climate Change), converting the former United Reform Church in Kendal

===Service===
* Gave the Swarthmore Lecture in 1929
* Chairman of the National Peace Council 1941–1943
* President of the International Astronomical Union; of the Physical Society, 1930–32; of the Royal Astronomical Society, 1921–23
* Romanes Lecturer, 1922
* Gifford Lecturer, 1927

==In popular culture==
* Eddington is a central figure in the short story &quot;The Mathematician&#x27;s Nightmare: The Vision of Professor Squarepunt&quot; by Bertrand Russell, a work featured in &quot;The Mathematical Magpie&quot; by Clifton Fadiman.
* He was portrayed by David Tennant in the television film &quot;Einstein and Eddington&quot;, a co-production of the BBC and HBO, broadcast in the United Kingdom on Saturday, 22 November 2008, on BBC2.
* His thoughts on humour and religious experience were quoted in the adventure game &quot;The Witness&quot;, a production of the Thelka, Inc., released on 26 January 2016.
* &quot;Time&quot; placed him on the cover on 16 April 1934.
* The song “In Transit”, from the 2023 album &quot;Signs Of Life&quot; by Neil Gaiman and Fourplay String Quartet was written in memory of him.

==Publications==
* 1914. &quot;Stellar Movements and the Structure of the Universe&quot;. London: Macmillan.
* 1918. &quot;Report on the relativity theory of gravitation&quot;. London, Fleetway Press, Ltd.
* 1920. &quot;&quot;. Cambridge University Press. 
* 1922. &quot;The theory of relativity and its influence on scientific thought&quot; 
* 1923. 1952. The Mathematical Theory of Relativity. Cambridge University Press.
* 1925. &quot;The Domain of Physical Science&quot;. 2005 reprint: 
* 1926. &quot;Stars and Atoms&quot;. Oxford: British Association.
* 1926. &quot;The Internal Constitution of Stars&quot;. Cambridge University Press. 
* 1928. &quot;The Nature of the Physical World&quot;. MacMillan. 1935 replica edition: , University of Michigan 1981 edition: (1926–27 Gifford lectures)
* 1929. &quot;Science and the Unseen World&quot;. US Macmillan, UK Allen &amp; Unwin. 1980 Reprint Arden Library . 2004 US reprint – Whitefish, Montana : Kessinger Publications: . 2007 UK reprint London, Allen &amp; Unwin (Swarthmore Lecture), with a new foreword by George Ellis. 
* 1930. &quot;Why I Believe in God: Science and Religion, as a Scientist Sees It&quot;. Arrow/scrollable preview.
* 1933. &quot;The Expanding Universe: Astronomy&#x27;s &#x27;Great Debate&#x27;, 1900–1931&quot;. Cambridge University Press. 
* 1935. &quot;New Pathways in Science&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* 1936. &quot;Relativity Theory of Protons and Electrons&quot;. Cambridge Univ. Press.
* 1939. &quot;Philosophy of Physical Science&quot;. Cambridge University Press. (1938 Tarner lectures at Cambridge)
* 1946. &quot;Fundamental Theory&quot;. Cambridge University Press.

==See also==

===Astronomy===
* Chandrasekhar limit
* Eddington luminosity (also called the Eddington limit)
* Gravitational lens
* Outline of astronomy
* Stellar nucleosynthesis
* Timeline of stellar astronomy
* List of astronomers

===Science===
* Arrow of time
* Classical unified field theories
* Degenerate matter
* Dimensionless physical constant
* Dirac large numbers hypothesis (also called the Eddington–Dirac number)
* Eddington number
* Introduction to quantum mechanics
* Luminiferous aether
* Parameterized post-Newtonian formalism
* Special relativity
* Theory of everything (also called &quot;final theory&quot; or &quot;ultimate theory&quot;)
* Timeline of gravitational physics and relativity
* List of experiments

===People===
* List of science and religion scholars

===Other===
* Infinite monkey theorem
* Numerology
* Ontic structural realism

==References==
==Further reading==
* Durham, Ian T., &quot;Eddington &amp; Uncertainty&quot;. Physics in Perspective (September – December). Arxiv, &quot;History of Physics&quot;
* Lecchini, Stefano, &quot;How Dwarfs Became Giants. The Discovery of the Mass–Luminosity Relation&quot; &quot;Bern Studies in the History and Philosophy of Science&quot;, pp. 224. (2007)
* Stanley, Matthew. &quot;An Expedition to Heal the Wounds of War: The 1919 Eclipse Expedition and Eddington as Quaker Adventurer.&quot; &quot;Isis&quot; 94 (2003): 57–89.
* Stanley, Matthew. &quot;So Simple a Thing as a Star: Jeans, Eddington, and the Growth of Astrophysical Phenomenology&quot; in &quot;British Journal for the History of Science&quot;, 2007, 40: 53–82.

==External links==
* 
* Trinity College Chapel
* Arthur Stanley Eddington (1882–1944) . University of St Andrews, Scotland.
* Quotations by Arthur Eddington
* Arthur Stanley Eddington The Bruce Medalists.
* Russell, Henry Norris, &quot;Review of The Internal Constitution of the Stars by A.S. Eddington&quot;. Ap.J. 67, 83 (1928).
* Experiments of Sobral and Príncipe repeated in the space project in proceeding in fórum astronomical.
* Biography and bibliography of Bruce medalists: Arthur Stanley Eddington
* Eddington books: &quot;The Nature of the Physical World&quot;, &quot;The Philosophy of Physical Science&quot;, &quot;Relativity Theory of Protons and Electrons&quot;, and &quot;Fundamental Theory&quot;
===Obituaries===
* Obituary 1 by Henry Norris Russell, &quot;Astrophysical Journal&quot; 101 (1943–46) 133
* Obituary 2 by A. Vibert Douglas, &quot;Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada,&quot; 39 (1943–46) 1
* Obituary 3 by Harold Spencer Jones and E. T. Whittaker, &quot;Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society&quot; 105 (1943–46) 68
* Obituary 4 by Herbert Dingle, &quot;The Observatory&quot; 66 (1943–46) 1
* &quot;The Times&quot;, Thursday, 23 November 1944; pg. 7; Issue 49998; col D: Obituary (unsigned) – Image of cutting available at </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q215022" start="0" end="28" title="Arthur Eddington" label="Sir Arthur Stanley Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q59115" start="139" end="161" title="Philosophy of science" label="philosopher of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q853005" start="196" end="211" title="Eddington limit" label="Eddington limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="238" end="248" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="407" end="421" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="651" end="659" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="665" end="671" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="740" end="755" title="Albert Einstein" label="Einstein&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="766" end="784" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="816" end="827" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q65041294" start="969" end="982" title="Eddington experiment" label="an expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035756" start="998" end="1026" title="solar eclipse of May 29, 1919" label="solar eclipse of 29 May 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q210636" start="1034" end="1052" title="Príncipe" label="Island of Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q994575" start="1263" end="1269" title="Kendal" label="Kendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23326" start="1271" end="1282" title="Westmorland" label="Westmorland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="1288" end="1295" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="1318" end="1324" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="1463" end="1473" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="1557" end="1564" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q845623" start="1703" end="1720" title="Weston-super-Mare" label="Weston-super-Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q867530" start="2282" end="2306" title="Victoria University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="2437" end="2444" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q711452" start="2545" end="2560" title="Arthur Schuster" label="Arthur Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627897" start="2565" end="2576" title="Horace Lamb" label="Horace Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="2916" end="2942" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990037" start="2980" end="3000" title="Robert Alfred Herman" label="Robert Alfred Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450721" start="3081" end="3096" title="Senior Wrangler (University of Cambridge)" label="Senior Wrangler"/>
<link wikidata="Q215259" start="3153" end="3172" title="thermionic emission" label="thermionic emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q181892" start="3180" end="3200" title="Cavendish Laboratory" label="Cavendish Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q909884" start="3360" end="3375" title="E. T. Whittaker" label="E. T. Whittaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q192988" start="3447" end="3475" title="Royal Observatory, Greenwich" label="Royal Observatory, Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="3517" end="3526" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q369877" start="3736" end="3752" title="Astronomer Royal" label="Astronomer Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192988" start="3760" end="3787" title="Royal Greenwich Observatory" label="Royal Greenwich Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="3891" end="3899" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16711" start="3903" end="3911" title="433 Eros" label="433 Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138868" start="3915" end="3933" title="photographic plate" label="photographic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690167" start="4068" end="4086" title="Smith&amp;#x27;s Prize" label="Smith&amp;#x27;s Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q325016" start="4176" end="4189" title="George Darwin" label="George Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="4198" end="4212" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131100" start="4276" end="4334" title="Plumian Professor of Astronomy and Experimental Philosophy" label="Plumian Professor of Astronomy and Experimental Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q379367" start="4367" end="4378" title="Robert Stawell Ball" label="Robert Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694113" start="4406" end="4420" title="Lowndean Professor of Astronomy and Geometry" label="Lowndean chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965699" start="4484" end="4505" title="Cambridge Observatory" label="Cambridge Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="4551" end="4578" title="fellow of the Royal Society" label="fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q746756" start="4599" end="4610" title="Royal Medal" label="Royal Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107771" start="4637" end="4653" title="Bakerian Lecture" label="Bakerian Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="4708" end="4712" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="4875" end="4897" title="Cepheid variables" label="Cepheid variable stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q57145" start="4921" end="4939" title="Karl Schwarzschild" label="Karl Schwarzschild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804812" start="4985" end="5008" title="Lane–Emden equation" label="Emden polytropic models"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="5440" end="5447" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="5452" end="5460" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q466686" start="5504" end="5514" title="anisotropy" label="anisotropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q315545" start="5691" end="5702" title="James Jeans" label="James Jeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q190382" start="5779" end="5786" title="Ionization" label="ionized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907452" start="5993" end="6017" title="mass–luminosity relation" label="mass–luminosity relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875" start="6097" end="6103" title="Giant star" label="giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q244393" start="6108" end="6114" title="Dwarf star" label="dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q172280" start="6127" end="6138" title="ideal gases" label="ideal gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q477816" start="6295" end="6321" title="Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism" label="Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="7050" end="7058" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="7064" end="7075" title="metallicity" label="metallicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="7345" end="7377" title="conservation of angular momentum" label="conservation of angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="7399" end="7406" title="Cepheid" label="Cepheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q102291" start="7653" end="7666" title="Francis William Aston" label="Francis Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="7710" end="7716" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840065" start="8348" end="8359" title="atomic mass" label="atomic mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450" start="8611" end="8635" title="Main sequence" label="mass–luminosity relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="9238" end="9250" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q441192" start="9372" end="9391" title="Edward Arthur Milne" label="Edward Arthur Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="9481" end="9496" title="quantum physics" label="quantum physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q51368" start="9519" end="9537" title="Degenerate matter" label="degeneracy physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q148109" start="9693" end="9719" title="Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar" label="Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="9810" end="9820" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409133" start="10803" end="10820" title="Thanu Padmanabhan" label="Thanu Padmanabhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10854" end="10865" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q753299" start="10898" end="10924" title="Royal Astronomical Society" label="Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q313059" start="11002" end="11018" title="Willem de Sitter" label="Willem de Sitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q369877" start="11493" end="11509" title="Astronomer Royal" label="Astronomer Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q945309" start="11510" end="11528" title="Frank Watson Dyson" label="Frank Watson Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q65041294" start="11539" end="11554" title="Eddington experiment" label="two expeditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035756" start="11568" end="11589" title="Solar eclipse of May 29, 1919" label="solar eclipse in 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="12022" end="12044" title="conscientious objector" label="conscientious objector"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867341" start="12236" end="12264" title="Ministry of National Service" label="Ministry of National Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q369877" start="12621" end="12637" title="Astronomer Royal" label="Astronomer Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q945309" start="12639" end="12654" title="Sir Frank Dyson" label="Sir Frank Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035756" start="12773" end="12786" title="Solar eclipse of May 29, 1919" label="solar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q210636" start="12801" end="12809" title="Príncipe" label="Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504100" start="12876" end="12904" title="Friends&amp;#x27; Ambulance Unit" label="Friends&amp;#x27; Ambulance Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="12944" end="12953" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035756" start="13359" end="13387" title="Solar eclipse of May 29, 1919" label="solar eclipse of 29 May 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q13511" start="13461" end="13475" title="Hyades (star cluster)" label="Hyades cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604077" start="13487" end="13498" title="Kappa Tauri" label="Kappa Tauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q10570" start="13520" end="13526" title="Taurus (constellation)" label="Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="13826" end="13844" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815899" start="14684" end="14698" title="Sobral, Brazil" label="Sobral, Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="15469" end="15484" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q451657" start="15725" end="15743" title="Ludwik Silberstein" label="Ludwik Silberstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="15836" end="15849" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q12998" start="16607" end="16622" title="Georges Lemaître" label="Lemaître&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q59151" start="16758" end="16779" title="cosmological constant" label="cosmological constant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17324" end="17342" title="Classical unified field theories#Eddington&amp;#x27;s affine geometry" label="fundamental theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="17391" end="17405" title="Quantum mechanics" label="quantum theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="17407" end="17417" title="theory of relativity" label="relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="17434" end="17445" title="gravitation" label="gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q140732" start="17544" end="17557" title="numerology" label="numerological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="17859" end="17865" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="17888" end="17896" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q47480" start="18067" end="18077" title="Paul Dirac" label="Paul Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370759" start="18150" end="18180" title="Dirac large numbers hypothesis" label="Dirac large numbers hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5997" start="18258" end="18281" title="fine-structure constant" label="fine-structure constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="18418" end="18433" title="epistemological" label="epistemological"/>
<link wikidata="Q274502" start="18596" end="18614" title="Degrees of freedom (physics and chemistry)" label="degrees of freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q24434" start="18671" end="18687" title="Eddington number" label="Eddington number"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="19019" end="19024" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q674689" start="19029" end="19045" title="Clifford algebra" label="Clifford algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="19077" end="19086" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q382037" start="19260" end="19280" title="grand unified theory" label="grand unified theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="19854" end="19868" title="Cycling" label="cyclist&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q310663" start="20519" end="20538" title="h-index" label="&amp;quot;h&amp;quot;-index"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="20811" end="20819" title="idealist" label="idealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="22285" end="22298" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q525883" start="22675" end="22686" title="Ian Barbour" label="Ian Barbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="22861" end="22871" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="22872" end="22893" title="uncertainty principle" label="uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="23050" end="23072" title="philosophical idealism" label="philosophical idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958855" start="23132" end="23150" title="Charles De Koninck" label="Charles De Koninck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044174" start="23312" end="23327" title="intelligibility (philosophy)" label="intelligibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="23539" end="23554" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="23580" end="23591" title="determinism" label="determinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="23666" end="23679" title="ontology" label="ontologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="23726" end="23741" title="epistemology" label="epistemological"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="23793" end="23814" title="uncertainty principle" label="uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="23818" end="23835" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q898521" start="23875" end="23891" title="Hidden variable theory" label="hidden variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q193627" start="24127" end="24145" title="logical positivism" label="logical positivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059358" start="24357" end="24385" title="The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam" label="The Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q570948" start="24466" end="24474" title="quatrain" label="quatrain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24511" end="24548" title="List of publications in physics#General" label="The Mathematical Theory of Relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q750883" start="25548" end="25556" title="Gifford Lectures" label="lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="25687" end="25702" title="electric charge" label="electric charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="25985" end="25993" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q46344" start="25995" end="26002" title="quantum" label="quantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42851410" start="26854" end="26873" title="Nuffield Health Cambridge Hospital" label="Evelyn Nursing Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803837" start="27077" end="27107" title="Ascension Parish Burial Ground" label="Ascension Parish Burial Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q42851389" start="27151" end="27183" title="North West Cambridge development" label="North West Cambridge development"/>
<link wikidata="Q214601" start="27249" end="27262" title="David Tennant" label="David Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627275" start="27292" end="27314" title="Einstein and Eddington" label="Einstein and Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q206922" start="27346" end="27357" title="Andy Serkis" label="Andy Serkis"/>
<link wikidata="Q955048" start="27502" end="27516" title="Paul Eddington" label="Paul Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690167" start="27894" end="27912" title="Smith&amp;#x27;s Prize" label="Smith&amp;#x27;s Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="27959" end="27996" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q330957" start="28006" end="28017" title="Bruce Medal" label="Bruce Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q746633" start="28066" end="28084" title="Henry Draper Medal" label="Henry Draper Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="28092" end="28120" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q753072" start="28130" end="28174" title="Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society" label="Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="28226" end="28254" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q253439" start="28290" end="28336" title="Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711648" start="28346" end="28364" title="Prix Jules Janssen" label="Prix Jules Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919053" start="28372" end="28402" title="Société astronomique de France" label="Société astronomique de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q746756" start="28442" end="28453" title="Royal Medal" label="Royal Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="28461" end="28474" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="28484" end="28494" title="Knight Bachelor" label="Knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="28532" end="28562" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q94056" start="28572" end="28586" title="Order of Merit (Commonwealth)" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11183197" start="28619" end="28649" title="Norwegian Astronomical Society" label="Norwegian Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q994575" start="28675" end="28681" title="Kendal" label="Kendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q278520" start="28726" end="28735" title="Eddington (crater)" label="Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="28738" end="28746" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110360" start="28747" end="28761" title="2761 Eddington" label="2761 Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q753299" start="28764" end="28790" title="Royal Astronomical Society" label="Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q936106" start="28798" end="28813" title="Eddington Medal" label="Eddington Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336605" start="28816" end="28833" title="Eddington mission" label="Eddington mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075104" start="28894" end="28913" title="University of Essex" label="University of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q994575" start="28916" end="28946" title="Kendal" label="Eddington Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q994575" start="28992" end="28998" title="Kendal" label="Kendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15238582" start="29078" end="29099" title="Kirkbie Kendal School" label="Kirkbie Kendal School"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="29138" end="29147" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q994575" start="29443" end="29449" title="Kendal" label="Kendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653934" start="29476" end="29494" title="Swarthmore Lecture" label="Swarthmore Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974842" start="29521" end="29543" title="National Peace Council" label="National Peace Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="29573" end="29605" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3390455" start="29614" end="29630" title="Physical Society of London" label="Physical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362459" start="29686" end="29701" title="Romanes Lecture" label="Romanes Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q750883" start="29711" end="29727" title="Gifford lectures" label="Gifford Lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="29797" end="29808" title="short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="29895" end="29911" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750658" start="29938" end="29961" title="The Mathematical Magpie" label="The Mathematical Magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101372" start="29971" end="29986" title="Clifton Fadiman" label="Clifton Fadiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q214601" start="30010" end="30023" title="David Tennant" label="David Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627275" start="30053" end="30075" title="Einstein and Eddington" label="Einstein and Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="30106" end="30109" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="30114" end="30117" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711359" start="30281" end="30292" title="The Witness (2016 video game)" label="The Witness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30320" end="30332" title="Thelka, Inc." label="Thelka, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="30371" end="30375" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="30498" end="30509" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474984" start="30514" end="30537" title="FourPlay String Quartet" label="Fourplay String Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30926" end="30963" title="List of publications in physics#General" label="The Mathematical Theory of Relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="31182" end="31208" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q750883" start="31346" end="31362" title="Gifford lectures" label="Gifford lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7653934" start="31587" end="31605" title="Swarthmore Lecture" label="Swarthmore Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387629" start="31631" end="31643" title="George Francis Rayner Ellis" label="George Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51366" start="32264" end="32283" title="Chandrasekhar limit" label="Chandrasekhar limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q853005" start="32286" end="32306" title="Eddington luminosity" label="Eddington luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q185243" start="32343" end="32361" title="Gravitational lens" label="Gravitational lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740993" start="32364" end="32384" title="Outline of astronomy" label="Outline of astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057093" start="32387" end="32410" title="Stellar nucleosynthesis" label="Stellar nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q986134" start="32413" end="32442" title="Timeline of stellar astronomy" label="Timeline of stellar astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11073" start="32445" end="32464" title="List of astronomers" label="List of astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q186559" start="32482" end="32495" title="Arrow of time" label="Arrow of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166515" start="32498" end="32530" title="Classical unified field theories" label="Classical unified field theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q51368" start="32533" end="32550" title="Degenerate matter" label="Degenerate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994934" start="32553" end="32584" title="Dimensionless physical constant" label="Dimensionless physical constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370759" start="32587" end="32617" title="Dirac large numbers hypothesis" label="Dirac large numbers hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24434" start="32661" end="32677" title="Eddington number" label="Eddington number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238797" start="32680" end="32713" title="Introduction to quantum mechanics" label="Introduction to quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q208702" start="32716" end="32735" title="Luminiferous aether" label="Luminiferous aether"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621284" start="32738" end="32776" title="Parameterized post-Newtonian formalism" label="Parameterized post-Newtonian formalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="32779" end="32797" title="Special relativity" label="Special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18359" start="32800" end="32820" title="Theory of everything" label="Theory of everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806081" start="32893" end="32941" title="Timeline of gravitational physics and relativity" label="Timeline of gravitational physics and relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086943" start="32944" end="32963" title="List of experiments" label="List of experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637951" start="32980" end="33017" title="List of science and religion scholars" label="List of science and religion scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q487132" start="33033" end="33056" title="Infinite monkey theorem" label="Infinite monkey theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33059" end="33069" title="Numerology#Numerology in science" label="Numerology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357279" start="33072" end="33096" title="Ontic structural realism" label="Ontic structural realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q273159" start="34585" end="34605" title="Henry Norris Russell" label="Henry Norris Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q598789" start="34613" end="34634" title="Astrophysical Journal" label="Astrophysical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838289" start="34675" end="34692" title="A. Vibert Douglas" label="A. Vibert Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296186" start="34700" end="34751" title="Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada" label="Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q520309" start="34790" end="34810" title="Harold Spencer Jones" label="Harold Spencer Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q909884" start="34815" end="34830" title="E. T. Whittaker" label="E. T. Whittaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536490" start="34838" end="34887" title="Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society" label="Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q628065" start="34927" end="34941" title="Herbert Dingle" label="Herbert Dingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754640" start="34949" end="34964" title="The Observatory (journal)" label="The Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="34994" end="35003" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2275" wikidata="Q3017175" url="?curid=2275" title="Apple II (original)">
<text>The Apple II (stylized as ) is a personal computer released by Apple Inc. in June 1977. It was one of the first successful mass-produced microcomputer products and is widely regarded as one of the most important personal computers of all time due to its role in popularizing home computing and influencing later software development.

The Apple II was designed primarily by Steve Wozniak. The system is based around the 8-bit MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor. Jerry Manock designed the foam-molded plastic case, Rod Holt developed the switching power supply, while Steve Jobs was not involved in the design of the computer. It was introduced by Jobs and Wozniak at the 1977 West Coast Computer Faire, and marks Apple&#x27;s first launch of a computer aimed at a consumer market—branded toward American households rather than businessmen or computer hobbyists.

&quot;Byte&quot; magazine referred to the Apple II, Commodore PET 2001, and TRS-80 as the &quot;1977 Trinity&quot;. As the Apple II had the defining feature of being able to display color graphics, the Apple logo was redesigned to have a spectrum of colors.

The Apple II was the first in a series of computers collectively referred to by the Apple II name. It was followed by the Apple II+, Apple IIe, Apple IIc, Apple IIc Plus, and the 16-bit Apple IIGS—all of which remained compatible. Production of the last available model, the Apple IIe, ceased in November 1993.

==History==
By 1976, Steve Jobs had convinced product designer Jerry Manock (who had formerly worked at Hewlett Packard designing calculators) to create the &quot;shell&quot; for the Apple II—a smooth case inspired by kitchen appliances that concealed the internal mechanics. The earliest Apple II computers were assembled in Silicon Valley and later in Texas; printed circuit boards were manufactured in Ireland and Singapore. The first computers went on sale on June 10, 1977 with an MOS Technology 6502 microprocessor running at 1.023 MHz ( of the NTSC color subcarrier), two game paddles (bundled until 1980, when they were found to violate FCC regulations), 4 KiB of RAM, an audio cassette interface for loading programs and storing data, and the Integer BASIC programming language built into ROMs. The video controller displayed 24 lines by 40 columns of monochrome, uppercase-only text on the screen (the original character set matches ASCII characters 20h to 5Fh), with NTSC composite video output suitable for display on a video monitor or on a regular TV set (by way of a separate RF modulator).

The original retail price of the computer with 4 KiB of RAM was and with the maximum 48 KiB of RAM, it was To reflect the computer&#x27;s color graphics capability, the Apple logo on the casing has rainbow stripes, which remained a part of Apple&#x27;s corporate logo until early 1998. Perhaps most significantly, the Apple II was a catalyst for personal computers across many industries; it opened the doors to software marketed at consumers.

Certain aspects of the system&#x27;s design were influenced by Atari, Inc.&#x27;s arcade video game &quot;Breakout&quot; (1976), which was designed by Wozniak, who said: &quot;A lot of features of the Apple II went in because I had designed &quot;Breakout&quot; for Atari. I had designed it in hardware. I wanted to write it in software now&quot;. This included his design of color graphics circuitry, the addition of game paddle support and sound, and graphics commands in Integer BASIC, with which he wrote &quot;Brick Out&quot;, a software clone of his own hardware game. Wozniak said in 1984: &quot;Basically, all the game features were put in just so I could show off the game I was familiar with—&quot;Breakout&quot;—at the Homebrew Computer Club. It was the most satisfying day of my life [when] I demonstrated &quot;Breakout&quot;—totally written in BASIC. It seemed like a huge step to me. After designing hardware arcade games, I knew that being able to program them in BASIC was going to change the world.&quot;

==Overview==
In the May 1977 issue of &quot;Byte&quot;, Steve Wozniak published a detailed description of his design; the article began, &quot;To me, a personal computer should be small, reliable, convenient to use, and inexpensive.&quot;

The Apple II used peculiar engineering shortcuts to save hardware and reduce costs, such as:
* Taking advantage of the way the 6502 processor accesses memory: it occurs only on alternate phases of the clock cycle; video generation circuitry memory access on the otherwise unused phase avoids memory contention issues and interruptions of the video stream;
* This arrangement simultaneously eliminated the need for a separate refresh circuit for DRAM chips, as video transfer accessed each row of dynamic memory within the timeout period. In addition, it did not require separate RAM chips for video RAM, while the PET and TRS-80 had SRAM chips for video;
* Apart from the 6502 CPU and a few support chips, the vast majority of the semiconductors used were 74LS low-power Schottky chips;
* Rather than use a complex analog-to-digital circuit to read the outputs of the game controller, Wozniak used a simple timer circuit, built around a quad 555 timer IC called a 558, whose period is proportional to the resistance of the game controller, and he used a software loop to measure the timers;
* A single 14.31818 MHz master oscillator (fM) was divided by various ratios to produce all other required frequencies, including microprocessor clock signals (fM/14), video transfer counters, and color-burst samples (fM/4). A solderable jumper on the main board allowed to switch between European 50 Hz and USA 60 Hz video.

The text and graphics screens have a complex arrangement. For instance, the scanlines were not stored in sequential areas of memory. This complexity was reportedly due to Wozniak&#x27;s realization that the method would allow for the refresh of dynamic RAM as a side effect (as described above). This method had no cost overhead to have software calculate or look up the address of the required scanline and avoided the need for significant extra hardware. Similarly, in high-resolution graphics mode, color is determined by pixel position and thus can be implemented in software, saving Wozniak the chips needed to convert bit patterns to colors. This also allowed the ability to draw text with subpixel rendering, since orange and blue pixels appear half a pixel-width farther to the right on the screen than green and purple pixels.

The Apple II at first used data cassette storage, like most other microcomputers of the time. In 1978, the company introduced an external -inch floppy disk drive, called Disk II (stylized as Disk ][), attached through a controller card that plugs into one of the computer&#x27;s expansion slots (usually slot 6). The Disk II interface, created by Wozniak, is regarded as an engineering masterpiece for its economy of electronic components.

The approach taken in the Disk II controller is typical of Wozniak&#x27;s designs. With a few small-scale logic chips and a cheap PROM (programmable read-only memory), he created a functional floppy disk interface at a fraction of the component cost of standard circuit configurations.

==Case design==

The first production Apple II computers had hand-molded cases; these had visible bubbles and other lumps in them from the imperfect plastic molding process, which was soon switched to machine molding. In addition, the initial case design had no vent openings, causing high heat buildup from the PCB and resulting in the plastic softening and sagging. Apple added vent holes to the case within three months of production; customers with the original case could have them replaced at no charge.

==PCB revisions==

The Apple II&#x27;s printed circuit board (PCB) underwent several revisions, as Steve Wozniak made modifications to it. The earliest version was known as Revision 0, and the first 6,000 units shipped used it. Later revisions added a color killer circuit to prevent color fringing when the computer was in text mode, as well as modifications to improve the reliability of cassette I/O. Revision 0 Apple IIs powered up in an undefined mode and had garbage on-screen, requiring the user to press Reset. This was eliminated in later board revisions. Revision 0 Apple IIs could display only four colors in hi-res mode, but Wozniak was able to increase this to six hi-res colors on later board revisions. (Technically it was eight, but only six were visible.)

The PCB had three RAM banks for a total of 24 RAM chips. Original Apple IIs had jumper switches to adjust RAM size, and RAM configurations could be 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 32, 36, or 48 KiB. The three smallest memory configurations used 4kx1 DRAMs, with larger ones using 16kx1 DRAMs, or mix of 4-kilobyte and 16-kilobyte banks (the chips in any one bank have to be the same size). The early Apple II+ models retained this feature, but after a drop in DRAM prices, Apple redesigned the circuit boards without the jumpers, so that only 16kx1 chips were supported. A few months later, they started shipping all machines with a full 48 KiB complement of DRAM.

Unlike most machines, all integrated circuits on the Apple II PCB were socketed; although this cost more to manufacture and created the possibility of loose chips causing a system malfunction, it was considered preferable to make servicing and replacement of bad chips easier.

The Apple II PCB lacks any means of generating an interrupt request, although expansion cards may generate one. Program code had to stop everything to perform any I/O task; like many of the computer&#x27;s other idiosyncrasies, this was due to cost reasons and Steve Wozniak assuming interrupts were not needed for gaming or using the computer as a teaching tool.

==Display and graphics==
Color on the Apple II series uses a quirk of the NTSC television signal standard, which made color display relatively easy and inexpensive to implement. The original NTSC television signal specification was black and white. Color was added later by adding a 3.58-megahertz subcarrier signal that was partially ignored by black-and-white TV sets. Color is encoded based on the phase of this signal in relation to a reference color burst signal. The result is that the position, size, and intensity of a series of pulses define color information. These pulses can translate into pixels on the computer screen, with the possibility of exploiting composite artifact colors.

The Apple II display provides two pixels per subcarrier cycle. When the color burst reference signal is turned on and the computer attached to a color display, it can display green by showing one alternating pattern of pixels, magenta with an opposite pattern of alternating pixels, and white by placing two pixels next to each other. Blue and orange are available by tweaking the pixel offset by half a pixel-width in relation to the color-burst signal. The high-resolution display offers more colors by compressing more (and narrower) pixels into each subcarrier cycle.

The coarse, low-resolution graphics display mode works differently, as it can output a pattern of dots per pixel to offer more color options. These patterns are stored in the character generator ROM, and replace the text character bit patterns when the computer is switched to low-res graphics mode. The text mode and low-res graphics mode use the same memory region and the same circuitry is used for both.

A single HGR page occupied 8 KiB of RAM; in practice this meant that the user had to have at least 12 KiB of total RAM to use HGR mode and 20 KiB to use two pages. Early Apple II games from the 1977–79 period often ran only in text or low-resolution mode in order to support users with small memory configurations; HGR not being near universally supported by games until 1980.

==Sound==
Rather than a dedicated sound-synthesis chip, the Apple II contains a toggle circuit that can only emit a click through a built-in speaker or a line-out jack. More complex sounds, such as music or audio samples, are generated by software manually toggling the speaker at an appropriate frequency. This technique requires careful and precise timing, rendering it difficult to display moving graphics while sound is playing. Third party expansion cards were later released which addressed this problem.

A similar technique is used for cassette storage: cassette output works the same as the speaker, and input uses a simple zero-crossing detector as a 1-bit audio digitizer. Routines in machine ROM encode and decode data in frequency-shift keying for the cassette.

==Programming languages==

Initially, the Apple II was shipped with Integer BASIC encoded in the motherboard ROM chips. Written by Wozniak, the interpreter enabled users to write software applications without needing to purchase additional development utilities. Written with game programmers and hobbyists in mind, the language only supported the encoding of numbers in 16-bit integer format. Since it only supported integers between -32768 and +32767 (signed 16-bit integer), it was less suitable to business software, and Apple soon received complaints from customers. Because Steve Wozniak was busy developing the Disk II hardware, he did not have time to modify Integer BASIC for floating point support. Apple instead licensed Microsoft&#x27;s 6502 BASIC to create Applesoft BASIC.

Disk users normally purchased a so-called Language Card, which had Applesoft in ROM, and was located below the Integer BASIC ROM in system memory. The user could switch between either BASIC by typing or in BASIC prompt. Apple also offered a different version of Applesoft for cassette users, which occupied low memory, and was started by using the command in Integer BASIC.

As shipped, Apple II incorporated a machine code monitor with commands for displaying and altering the computer&#x27;s RAM, either one byte at a time, or in blocks of 256 bytes at once. This enabled programmers to write and debug machine code programs without further development software. The computer powers on into the monitor ROM, displaying a prompt. From there, enters BASIC, or a machine language program can be loaded from cassette. Disk software can be booted with followed by , referring to Slot 6 which normally contained the Disk II controller.

A 6502 assembler was soon offered on disk, and later the UCSD compiler and operating system for the Pascal language were made available. The Pascal system requires a 16 KiB RAM card to be installed in the language card position (expansion slot 0) in addition to the full 48 KiB of motherboard memory.

==Manual==
The first 1,000 or so Apple IIs shipped in 1977 with a 68-page mimeographed &quot;Apple II Mini Manual&quot;, hand-bound with brass paper fasteners. This was the basis for the &quot;Apple II Reference Manual,&quot; which became known as the Red Book for its red cover, published in January 1978. All existing customers who sent in their warranty cards were sent free copies of the Red Book. The &quot;Apple II Reference Manual&quot; contained the complete schematic of the entire computer&#x27;s circuitry, and a complete source listing of the &quot;Monitor&quot; ROM firmware that served as the machine&#x27;s BIOS.

An Apple II manual signed by Steve Jobs in 1980 with the inscription &quot;Julian, your generation is the first to grow up with computers. Go change the world.&quot; sold at auction for $787,484 in 2021.

==Operating system==
The original Apple II came with an 8 KiB ROM containing a BASIC variant called Integer BASIC as well as a resident monitor called the Apple System Monitor. Initially, only cassette tape was available for storage, which was considered too slow and unreliable for business use. In late 1977, Apple began to develop the Disk II floppy disk drive and required an operating system to utilize it. The existing standard at the time was CP/M, but due to incompatibility with the 6502 processor and a perceived clunkiness, Apple contracted Shepardson Microsystems for $13,000 to write Apple DOS. At Shepardson, Paul Laughton developed the software in just 35 days, a remarkably short deadline, even for the time. The Disk II and Apple DOS were released in late 1978. The final and most popular version of this software was Apple DOS 3.3.

Apple DOS was superseded by ProDOS, which supported a hierarchical filesystem and larger storage devices. With an optional third-party Z80-based expansion card, the Apple II could boot into the CP/M operating system and run WordStar, dBase II, and other CP/M software.

Apple released Applesoft BASIC in 1977, a more advanced variant of the language which users could run instead of Integer BASIC for more capabilities, such as the ability to use floating point numbers.

Some commercial Apple II software came on self-booting disks and did not use standard DOS disk formats. This discouraged the copying or modifying of the software on the disks, and improved loading speed.

==Third-party devices and applications==
When the Apple II initially shipped in June 1977, no expansion cards were available for the slots. This meant that the user did not have any way of connecting a modem or a printer. One popular hack involved connecting a teletype machine to the cassette output.

Wozniak&#x27;s open-architecture design and Apple II&#x27;s multiple expansion slots permitted a wide variety of third-party devices, including peripheral cards, such as serial controllers, display controllers, memory boards, hard disks, networking components, and real-time clocks. There were plug-in expansion cards—such as the Z-80 SoftCard—that permitted Apple II to use the Z80 processor and run programs for the CP/M operating system, including the dBase II database and the WordStar word processor. The Z80 card also allowed the connection to a modem, and thereby to any networks that a user might have access to. In the early days, such networks were scarce. But they expanded significantly with the development of bulletin board systems in later years. There was also a third-party 6809 card that allowed OS-9 Level One to be run. Third-party sound cards greatly improved audio capabilities, allowing simple music synthesis and text-to-speech functions. Apple II accelerator cards doubled or quadrupled the computer&#x27;s speed.

Early Apple IIs were often sold with a Sup&#x27;R&#x27;Mod, which allowed the composite video signal to be viewed in a television.

The Soviet Union radio-electronics industry designed Apple II-compatible computer Agat. Roughly 12,000 Agat 7 and 9 models were produced and they were widely used in Soviet schools. Agat 9 computers could run &quot;Apple II&quot; compatibility and native modes. &quot;Apple II&quot; mode allowed to run a wider variety of (presumably pirated) Apple II software, but at the expense of less RAM. Because of that Soviet developers preferred native mode over &quot;Apple II&quot; compatibility mode.

In 1978, Bob Bishop of Apple Computer, Inc. programmed 9 Apple II computers to run the gameboard on the TV game show &quot;Tic-Tac-Dough&quot;;. Each Apple was responsible for displaying various contents for each box of the gameboard (category, X, O, bonus game numbers and amounts, TIC, TAC or Dragon, as well displaying custom messages and an active screensaver), and in turn controlled by an Altair 8800 system. It was the first game show to use computerized graphics.

==Reception==

Jesse Adams Stein wrote, &quot;As the first company to release a &#x27;consumer appliance&#x27; micro-computer, Apple Computer offers us a clear view of this shift from a &quot;machine&quot; to an &quot;appliance&quot;.&quot; But the company also had &quot;to negotiate the attitudes of its potential buyers, bearing in mind social anxieties about the uptake of new technologies in multiple contexts. The office, the home and the &#x27;office-in-the-home&#x27; were implicated in these changing spheres of gender stereotypes and technological development.&quot; After seeing a crude, wire-wrapped prototype demonstrated by Wozniak and Steve Jobs in November 1976, &quot;Byte&quot; predicted in April 1977, that the Apple II &quot;may be the first product to fully qualify as the &#x27;appliance computer&#x27; ... a completed system which is purchased off the retail shelf, taken home, plugged in and used&quot;. The computer&#x27;s color graphics capability especially impressed the magazine. The magazine published a favorable review of the computer in March 1978, concluding: &quot;For the user that wants color graphics, the Apple II is the only practical choice available in the &#x27;appliance&#x27; computer class.&quot;

&quot;Personal Computer World&quot; in August 1978 also cited the color capability as a strength, stating that &quot;the prime reason that anyone buys an Apple II must surely be for the colour graphics&quot;. While mentioning the &quot;oddity&quot; of the artifact colors that produced output &quot;that is not always what one wishes to do&quot;, it noted that &quot;no-one has colour graphics like this at this sort of price&quot;. The magazine praised the sophisticated monitor software, user expandability, and comprehensive documentation. The author concluded that &quot;the Apple II is a very promising machine&quot; which &quot;would be even more of a temptation were its price slightly lower ... for the moment, colour is an Apple II&quot;.

Although it sold well from the launch, the initial market was to hobbyists and computer enthusiasts. Sales expanded exponentially into the business and professional market, when the spreadsheet program VisiCalc was launched in mid-1979. VisiCalc is credited as the defining killer app in the microcomputer industry.

By the end of 1977 Apple had sales of for the fiscal year, which included sales of the Apple I. This puts Apple clearly behind the others of the &quot;holy trinity&quot; of the TRS-80 and Commodore PET, even though the TRS-80 was launched last of the three. However, during the first five years of operations, revenues doubled about every four months. Between September 1977 and September 1980, annual sales grew from to . During this period the sole products of the company were the Apple II and its peripherals, accessories, and software.

In 2006, PC World wrote that the Apple II was the greatest PC of all time.

==References==
==External links==

* Additional documentation in Bitsavers PDF Document archive
* Apple II on Old-computers.com
* Online Apple II Resource
* Apple2History.org
* How the Apple [ Works!] – on YouTube by the 8-Bit Guy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3017175" start="4" end="12" title="Apple II (original)" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="33" end="50" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="63" end="73" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q32738" start="137" end="150" title="microcomputer" label="microcomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q473708" start="275" end="289" title="Home computer" label="home computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="312" end="320" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q483382" start="374" end="387" title="Steve Wozniak" label="Steve Wozniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="420" end="425" title="8-bit" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="426" end="445" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="MOS Technology 6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q19958103" start="514" end="522" title="Rod Holt" label="Rod Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q587008" start="537" end="559" title="Switched-mode power supply" label="switching power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="567" end="577" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019072" start="676" end="701" title="West Coast Computer Faire" label="West Coast Computer Faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018709" start="863" end="879" title="Byte (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Byte&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q946661" start="915" end="933" title="Commodore PET" label="Commodore PET 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q610305" start="939" end="945" title="TRS-80" label="TRS-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q116483436" start="1065" end="1075" title="Apple logo" label="Apple logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q654182" start="1101" end="1109" title="spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="1206" end="1214" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q621254" start="1244" end="1253" title="Apple II Plus" label="Apple II+"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761667" start="1255" end="1264" title="Apple IIe" label="Apple IIe"/>
<link wikidata="Q420782" start="1266" end="1275" title="Apple IIc" label="Apple IIc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321571" start="1277" end="1291" title="Apple IIc Plus" label="Apple IIc Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282269" start="1308" end="1318" title="Apple IIGS" label="Apple IIGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="1760" end="1774" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="1795" end="1816" title="printed circuit board" label="printed circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="1839" end="1846" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="1851" end="1860" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q255528" start="1920" end="1939" title="MOS Technology 6502" label="MOS Technology 6502"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="1972" end="1975" title="MHz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017055" start="1985" end="2006" title="Colorburst" label="NTSC color subcarrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q449573" start="2013" end="2025" title="Paddle (game controller)" label="game paddles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810092" start="2079" end="2094" title="Title 47 CFR Part 15" label="FCC regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="2106" end="2109" title="random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2114" end="2128" title="Cassette tape#Data recording" label="audio cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q588806" start="2186" end="2199" title="Integer BASIC" label="Integer BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="2232" end="2236" title="read-only memory" label="ROMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="2377" end="2382" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="2412" end="2416" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q185644" start="2417" end="2432" title="composite video" label="composite video"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563565" start="2525" end="2537" title="RF modulator" label="RF modulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781176" start="2679" end="2693" title="Apple II graphics" label="color graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409231" start="3049" end="3060" title="Atari, Inc." label="Atari, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q192851" start="3068" end="3085" title="arcade video game" label="arcade video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q177491" start="3092" end="3100" title="Breakout (video game)" label="Breakout"/>
<link wikidata="Q588806" start="3460" end="3473" title="Integer BASIC" label="Integer BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195191" start="3716" end="3738" title="Homebrew Computer Club" label="Homebrew Computer Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="3910" end="3922" title="arcade games" label="arcade games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018709" start="4048" end="4064" title="Byte (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Byte&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q483382" start="4066" end="4079" title="Steve Wozniak" label="Steve Wozniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815755" start="4675" end="4682" title="Memory refresh" label="refresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="4695" end="4699" title="DRAM" label="DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4772" end="4779" title="Memory refresh#Refresh interval" label="timeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q190169" start="5065" end="5082" title="analog-to-digital" label="analog-to-digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q383672" start="5192" end="5204" title="555 timer IC" label="555 timer IC"/>
<link wikidata="Q452912" start="6363" end="6381" title="subpixel rendering" label="subpixel rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502645" start="6531" end="6544" title="data cassette" label="data cassette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="6648" end="6659" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228769" start="6674" end="6681" title="Disk II" label="Disk II"/>
<link wikidata="Q216158" start="6783" end="6797" title="expansion slot" label="expansion slot"/>
<link wikidata="Q381364" start="7081" end="7110" title="programmable read-only memory" label="programmable read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="7544" end="7547" title="printed circuit board" label="PCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="7782" end="7803" title="printed circuit board" label="printed circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="8535" end="8538" title="random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q189396" start="8757" end="8761" title="DRAM" label="DRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q621254" start="8907" end="8916" title="Apple II Plus" label="Apple II+"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="9199" end="9217" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144586" start="9501" end="9518" title="Interrupt request (PC architecture)" label="interrupt request"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="9614" end="9617" title="Input/output" label="I/O"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="9890" end="9894" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q185553" start="10217" end="10222" title="phase (waves)" label="phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017055" start="10265" end="10276" title="color burst" label="color burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="10418" end="10423" title="pixel" label="pixel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986618" start="10484" end="10509" title="composite artifact colors" label="composite artifact colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781179" start="12317" end="12332" title="Apple II sound cards" label="expansion cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007408" start="12505" end="12527" title="Zero crossing threshold detector" label="zero-crossing detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166054" start="12606" end="12628" title="frequency-shift keying" label="frequency-shift keying"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="12757" end="12760" title="read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q621556" start="13418" end="13433" title="Applesoft BASIC" label="Applesoft BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780522" start="13847" end="13867" title="machine code monitor" label="machine code monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q176984" start="14426" end="14460" title="UCSD Pascal" label="UCSD compiler and operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="14469" end="14475" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q877869" start="14745" end="14755" title="mimeograph" label="mimeograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q226264" start="15293" end="15297" title="BIOS" label="BIOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="15567" end="15570" title="read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q588806" start="15605" end="15618" title="Integer BASIC" label="Integer BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q605708" start="15632" end="15648" title="resident monitor" label="resident monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502645" start="15698" end="15711" title="magnetic-tape data storage" label="cassette tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228769" start="15843" end="15850" title="Disk II" label="Disk II"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="15955" end="15959" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494434" start="16057" end="16080" title="Shepardson Microsystems" label="Shepardson Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q621234" start="16102" end="16111" title="Apple DOS" label="Apple DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q621234" start="16340" end="16349" title="Apple DOS" label="Apple DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q621328" start="16384" end="16390" title="Apple ProDOS" label="ProDOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q203315" start="16491" end="16494" title="Zilog Z80" label="Z80"/>
<link wikidata="Q216158" start="16501" end="16515" title="expansion card" label="expansion card"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="16550" end="16554" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435134" start="16580" end="16588" title="WordStar" label="WordStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q300971" start="16590" end="16598" title="dBase" label="dBase II"/>
<link wikidata="Q621556" start="16641" end="16656" title="Applesoft BASIC" label="Applesoft BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="16803" end="16825" title="floating point numbers" label="floating point numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419081" start="16870" end="16887" title="self-booting disk" label="self-booting disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318309" start="17351" end="17368" title="open architecture" label="open-architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q621258" start="17480" end="17496" title="Apple II peripheral cards" label="peripheral cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781178" start="17506" end="17524" title="Apple II serial cards" label="serial controllers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781180" start="17601" end="17617" title="Apple II system clocks" label="real-time clocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781177" start="17638" end="17653" title="Apple II processor cards" label="expansion cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574321" start="17666" end="17679" title="Z-80 SoftCard" label="Z-80 SoftCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q203315" start="17715" end="17718" title="Zilog Z80" label="Z80"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="17754" end="17758" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q300971" start="17791" end="17799" title="dBase" label="dBase II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435134" start="17817" end="17825" title="WordStar" label="WordStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545600" start="18127" end="18131" title="Motorola 6809" label="6809"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008085" start="18150" end="18154" title="OS-9" label="OS-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781179" start="18188" end="18199" title="Apple II sound cards" label="sound cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781175" start="18299" end="18325" title="Apple II accelerators" label="Apple II accelerator cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q56064534" start="18415" end="18434" title="Sup&amp;#x27;R&amp;#x27;Mod" label="Sup&amp;#x27;R&amp;#x27;Mod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717008" start="18590" end="18594" title="Agat (computer)" label="Agat"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="19028" end="19048" title="Apple, Inc." label="Apple Computer, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2431690" start="19128" end="19141" title="Tic-Tac-Dough" label="Tic-Tac-Dough"/>
<link wikidata="Q223493" start="19400" end="19411" title="Altair 8800" label="Altair 8800"/>
<link wikidata="Q605181" start="20077" end="20089" title="wire-wrapped" label="wire-wrapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="20128" end="20138" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170488" start="20728" end="20751" title="Personal Computer World" label="Personal Computer World"/>
<link wikidata="Q725401" start="21673" end="21681" title="VisiCalc" label="VisiCalc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047507" start="21745" end="21755" title="killer app" label="killer app"/>
<link wikidata="Q61465649" start="22627" end="22636" title="The 8-Bit Guy" label="8-Bit Guy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2279" wikidata="Q2509" url="?curid=2279" title="April 3">
<text>==Events==
===Pre-1600===
* 686 – Maya king Yuknoom Yich&#x27;aak K&#x27;ahk&#x27; assumes the crown of Calakmul.
*1043 – Edward the Confessor is crowned King of England.
*1077 – The Patriarchate of Friûl, the first Friulian state, is created.
*1559 – The second of two treaties making up the Peace of Cateau-Cambrésis is signed, ending the Italian Wars.
*1589 – The janissaries revolt in response to the debasement of coins.

===1601–1900===
*1721 – Robert Walpole becomes, in effect, the first Prime Minister of Great Britain, though he himself denied that title.
*1851 – Rama IV is crowned King of Thailand after the death of his half-brother, Rama III.
*1860 – The first successful United States Pony Express run from St. Joseph, Missouri, to Sacramento, California, begins.
*1865 – American Civil War: Union forces capture Richmond, Virginia, the capital of the Confederate States of America.
*1882 – American Old West: Robert Ford kills Jesse James.
*1885 – Gottlieb Daimler is granted a German patent for a light, high-speed, four-stroke engine, which he uses seven months later to create the world&#x27;s first motorcycle, the Daimler Reitwagen.
*1888 – Jack the Ripper: The first of 11 unsolved brutal murders of women committed in or near the impoverished Whitechapel district in the East End of London, occurs.
*1895 – The trial in the libel case brought by Oscar Wilde begins, eventually resulting in his imprisonment on charges of homosexuality.

===1901–present===
*1920 – Attempts are made to carry out the failed assassination attempt on General Mannerheim, led by Aleksander Weckman by order of Eino Rahja, during the White Guard parade in Tampere, Finland.
*1922 – Joseph Stalin becomes the first General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
*1933 – First flight over Mount Everest, the British Houston-Mount Everest Flight Expedition, led by the Marquis of Clydesdale and funded by Lucy, Lady Houston.
*1936 – Bruno Richard Hauptmann is executed for the kidnapping and death of Charles Augustus Lindbergh Jr., the infant son of pilot Charles Lindbergh.
*1942 – World War II: Japanese forces begin an assault on the United States and Filipino troops on the Bataan Peninsula.
*1946 – Japanese Lt. General Masaharu Homma is executed in the Philippines for leading the Bataan Death March.
*1948 – Cold War: U.S. President Harry S. Truman signs the Marshall Plan, authorizing $5 billion in aid for 16 countries.
* 1948 – In Jeju Province, South Korea, a civil-war-like period of violence and human rights abuses known as the Jeju uprising begins.
*1955 – The American Civil Liberties Union announces it will defend Allen Ginsberg&#x27;s book &quot;Howl&quot; against obscenity charges.
*1956 – Hudsonville–Standale tornado: The western half of the Lower Peninsula of Michigan is struck by a deadly F5 tornado.
*1968 – Martin Luther King Jr. delivers his &quot;I&#x27;ve Been to the Mountaintop&quot; speech; he was assassinated the next day.
*1969 – Vietnam War: United States Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird announces that the United States will start to &quot;Vietnamize&quot; the war effort.
*1973 – Martin Cooper of Motorola makes the first handheld mobile phone call to Joel S. Engel of Bell Labs.
*1974 – The 1974 Super Outbreak occurs, the second largest tornado outbreak in recorded history (after the 2011 Super Outbreak). The death toll is 315, with nearly 5,500 injured.
*1975 – Vietnam War: Operation Babylift, a mass evacuation of children in the closing stages of the war begins.
* 1975 – Bobby Fischer refuses to play in a chess match against Anatoly Karpov, giving Karpov the title of World Champion by default.
*1980 – US Congress restores a federal trust relationship with the 501 members of the Shivwits, Kanosh, Koosharem, and the Indian Peaks and Cedar City bands of the Paiute people of Utah.
*1981 – The Osborne 1, the first successful portable computer, is unveiled at the West Coast Computer Faire in San Francisco.
*1989 – The US Supreme Court upholds the jurisdictional rights of tribal courts under the Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 in Mississippi Choctaw Band v. Holyfield.
*1993 – The outcome of the Grand National horse race is declared void for the first (and only) time
*1996 – Suspected &quot;Unabomber&quot; Theodore Kaczynski is captured at his Montana cabin in the United States.
* 1996 – A United States Air Force Boeing T-43 crashes near Dubrovnik Airport in Croatia, killing 35, including Secretary of Commerce Ron Brown.
*1997 – The Thalit massacre begins in Algeria; all but one of the 53 inhabitants of Thalit are killed by guerrillas.
*2000 – &quot;United States v. Microsoft Corp.&quot;: Microsoft is ruled to have violated United States antitrust law by keeping &quot;an oppressive thumb&quot; on its competitors.
*2004 – Islamic terrorists involved in the 2004 Madrid train bombings are trapped by the police in their apartment and kill themselves.
*2007 – Conventional-Train World Speed Record: A French TGV train on the LGV Est high speed line sets an official new world speed record of 574.8 km/h (159.6 m/s, 357.2 mph).
*2008 – ATA Airlines, once one of the ten largest U.S. passenger airlines and largest charter airline, files for bankruptcy for the second time in five years and ceases all operations.
* 2008 – Texas law enforcement cordons off the FLDS&#x27;s YFZ Ranch. Eventually 533 women and children will be taken into state custody.
*2009 – Jiverly Antares Wong opens fire at the American Civic Association immigration center in Binghamton, New York, killing thirteen and wounding four before committing suicide.
*2010 – Apple Inc. released the first generation iPad, a tablet computer.
*2013 – More than 50 people die in floods resulting from record-breaking rainfall in La Plata and Buenos Aires, Argentina.
*2016 – The Panama Papers, a leak of legal documents, reveals information on 214,488 offshore companies.
*2017 – A bomb explodes in the St Petersburg metro system, killing 14 and injuring several more people.
*2018 – YouTube headquarters shooting: A 38-year-old gunwoman opens fire at YouTube Headquarters in San Bruno, California, injuring three people before committing suicide.

==Births==

===Pre-1600===
*1016 – Xing Zong, Chinese emperor (d. 1055)
*1151 – Igor Svyatoslavich, Russian prince (d. 1202)
*1395 – George of Trebizond, Greek philosopher, scholar and humanist (d. 1486)
*1438 – John III of Egmont, Dutch nobleman (d. 1516)
*1529 – Michael Neander, German mathematician and astronomer (d. 1581)
*1540 – Maria de&#x27; Medici, Italian noblewoman, the eldest daughter of Cosimo I de&#x27; Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany and Eleonora di Toledo. (d. 1557)
*1593 – George Herbert, English poet (d. 1633)

===1601–1900===
*1643 – Charles V, duke of Lorraine (d. 1690)
*1682 – Valentin Rathgeber, German organist and composer (d. 1750)
*1693 – George Edwards, English ornithologist and entomologist (d. 1773)
*1715 – William Watson, English physician, physicist, and botanist (d. 1787)
*1764 – John Abernethy, English surgeon and anatomist (d. 1831)
*1769 – Christian Günther von Bernstorff, Danish-Prussian politician and diplomat (d. 1835)
*1770 – Theodoros Kolokotronis, Greek general (d. 1843)
*1778 – Pierre Bretonneau, French doctor who performed the first successful tracheotomy (d. 1862)
*1781 – Swaminarayan, Indian religious leader (d. 1830)
*1782 – Alexander Macomb, American general (d. 1841)
*1783 – Washington Irving, American short story writer, essayist, biographer, historian (d. 1859)
*1791 – Anne Lister, English diarist, mountaineer, and traveller (d. 1840)
*1798 – Charles Wilkes, American admiral, geographer, and explorer (d. 1877)
*1807 – Mary Carpenter, English educational and social reformer (d. 1877)
*1814 – Lorenzo Snow, American religious leader, 5th President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (d. 1901)
*1822 – Edward Everett Hale, American minister, historian, and author (d. 1909)
*1823 – George Derby, American lieutenant and journalist (d. 1861)
* 1823 – William M. Tweed, American politician (d. 1878)
*1826 – Cyrus K. Holliday, American businessman (d. 1900)
*1837 – John Burroughs, American botanist and author (d. 1921)
*1842 – Ulric Dahlgren, American colonel (d. 1864)
*1848 – Arturo Prat, Chilean lawyer and captain (d. 1879)
*1852 – Talbot Baines Reed, English author (d. 1893)
*1858 – Jacob Gaudaur, Canadian rower (d. 1937)
*1860 – Frederik van Eeden, Dutch psychiatrist and author (d. 1932)
*1864 – Emil Kellenberger, Swiss target shooter (d. 1943)
*1875 – Mistinguett, French actress and singer (d. 1956)
*1876 – Margaret Anglin, Canadian actress, director, and producer (d. 1958)
* 1876 – Tomáš Baťa, Czech businessman, founded Bata Shoes (d. 1932)
*1880 – Otto Weininger, Jewish-Austrian philosopher and author (d. 1903)
*1881 – Alcide De Gasperi, Italian journalist and politician, 30th Prime Minister of Italy (d. 1954)
*1882 – Philippe Desranleau, Canadian archbishop (d. 1952)
*1883 – Ikki Kita, Japanese philosopher and author (d. 1937)
*1885 – Allan Dwan, Canadian-American director, producer, and screenwriter (d. 1981)
* 1885 – Bud Fisher, American cartoonist (d. 1954)
* 1885 – Marie-Victorin Kirouac, Canadian botanist and academic (d. 1944)
* 1885 – St John Philby, English colonial and explorer (d. 1960)
*1886 – Dooley Wilson, American actor and singer (d. 1953)
*1887 – Ōtori Tanigorō, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 24th Yokozuna (d. 1956)
* 1887 – Nishizō Tsukahara, Japanese admiral (d. 1966)
*1888 – Thomas C. Kinkaid, American admiral (d. 1972)
*1889 – Grigoraș Dinicu, Romanian violinist and composer (d. 1949)
*1893 – Leslie Howard, English actor (d. 1943)
*1895 – Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco, Italian-American composer and educator (d. 1968)
* 1895 – Zez Confrey, American pianist and composer (d. 1971)
*1897 – Joe Kirkwood Sr., Australian golfer (d. 1970)
* 1897 – Thrasyvoulos Tsakalotos, Greek general (d. 1989)
*1898 – David Jack, English footballer and manager (d. 1958)
* 1898 – George Jessel, American actor, singer, and producer (d. 1981)
* 1898 – Henry Luce, American publisher, co-founded &quot;Time&quot; magazine (d. 1967)
*1900 – Camille Chamoun, Lebanese lawyer and politician, 7th President of Lebanon (d. 1987)
* 1900 – Albert Walsh, Canadian lawyer and politician, 1st Lieutenant Governor of Newfoundland (d. 1958)

===1901–present===
* 1903 – Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay, Indian social reformer and freedom fighter (d. 1988)
*1904 – Iron Eyes Cody, American actor and stuntman (d. 1999)
* 1904 – Sally Rand, American dancer (d. 1979)
* 1904 – Russel Wright, American furniture designer (d. 1976)
*1905 – Robert Sink, American general (d. 1965)
*1910 – Ted Hook, Australian public servant (d. 1990)
*1911 – Nanette Bordeaux, Canadian-American actress (d. 1956)
* 1911 – Michael Woodruff, English-Scottish surgeon and academic (d. 2001)
* 1911 – Stanisława Walasiewicz, Polish-American runner (d. 1980)
*1912 – Dorothy Eden, New Zealand-English author (d. 1982)
* 1912 – Grigoris Lambrakis, Greek physician and politician (d. 1963)
*1913 – Per Borten, Norwegian politician, 18th Prime Minister of Norway (d. 2005)
*1914 – Ray Getliffe, Canadian ice hockey player (d. 2008)
* 1914 – Sam Manekshaw, Indian field marshal (d. 2008)
*1915 – Piet de Jong, Dutch politician and naval officer, Prime Minister of the Netherlands (d. 2016)
* 1915 – İhsan Doğramacı, Turkish physician and academic (d. 2010)
*1916 – Herb Caen, American journalist and author (d. 1997)
* 1916 – Cliff Gladwin, English cricketer (d. 1988)
* 1916 – Louis Guglielmi, Catalan composer (d. 1991)
*1918 – Mary Anderson, American actress (d. 2014)
* 1918 – Louis Applebaum, Canadian composer and conductor (d. 2000)
*1919 – Ervin Drake, American songwriter and composer (d. 2015)
* 1919 – Clairette Oddera, French-Canadian actress and singer (d. 2008)
*1920 – Stan Freeman, American composer and conductor (d. 2001)
* 1920 – Yoshibayama Junnosuke, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 43rd Yokozuna (d. 1977)
*1921 – Robert Karvelas, American actor (d. 1991)
* 1921 – Jan Sterling, American actress (d. 2004)
*1922 – Yevhen Bulanchyk, Ukrainian hurdler (d. 1996)
* 1922 – Doris Day, American singer and actress (d. 2019)
*1923 – Daniel Hoffman, American poet and academic (d. 2013)
*1924 – Marlon Brando, American actor and director (d. 2004)
* 1924 – Roza Shanina, Russian sergeant and sniper (d. 1945)
*1925 – Tony Benn, English pilot and politician, Secretary of State for Industry (d. 2014)
*1926 – Alex Grammas, American baseball player, manager, and coach (d. 2019)
* 1926 – Gus Grissom, American colonel, pilot, and astronaut (d. 1967)
* 1927 – Wesley A. Brown, American general and engineer (d. 2012)
*1928 – Don Gibson, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2003)
* 1928 – Emmett Johns, Canadian priest, founded Dans la Rue (d. 2018)
* 1928 – Earl Lloyd, American basketball player and coach (d. 2015)
* 1928 – Jennifer Paterson, English chef and television personality (d. 1999)
*1929 – Fazlur Rahman Khan, Bangladeshi engineer and architect, co-designed the Willis Tower and John Hancock Center (d. 1982)
* 1929 – Poul Schlüter, Danish lawyer and politician, 37th Prime Minister of Denmark (d. 2021)
*1930 – Lawton Chiles, American soldier, lawyer, and politician, 41st Governor of Florida (d. 1998)
* 1930 – Helmut Kohl, German politician, Chancellor of Germany (d. 2017)
* 1930 – Mario Benjamín Menéndez, Argentinian general and politician (d. 2015)
* 1930 – Wally Moon, American baseball player and coach (d. 2018)
*1931 – William Bast, American screenwriter and author (d. 2015)
*1933 – Bob Dornan, American politician
* 1933 – Rod Funseth, American golfer (d. 1985)
*1934 – Pamela Allen, New Zealand children&#x27;s writer and illustrator 
* 1934 – Jane Goodall, English primatologist and anthropologist
* 1934 – Jim Parker, American football player (d. 2005)
*1935 – Harold Kushner, American rabbi and author (d. 2023)
*1936 – Jimmy McGriff, American organist and bandleader (d. 2008)
* 1936 – Harold Vick, American saxophonist and flute player (d. 1987)
*1938 – Jeff Barry, American singer-songwriter, and producer
* 1938 – Phil Rodgers, American golfer (d. 2018)
*1939 – François de Roubaix, French composer (d. 1975)
* 1939 – Hawk Taylor, American baseball player and coach (d. 2012)
* 1939 – Paul Craig Roberts, American economist and politician
*1941 – Jan Berry, American singer-songwriter (d. 2004)
* 1941 – Philippé Wynne, American soul singer (d. 1984)
*1942 – Marsha Mason, American actress 
* 1942 – Wayne Newton, American singer 
* 1942 – Billy Joe Royal, American singer-songwriter and guitarist (d. 2015)
*1943 – Mario Lavista, Mexican composer (d. 2021)
* 1943 – Jonathan Lynn, English actor, director, and screenwriter
* 1943 – Richard Manuel, Canadian singer-songwriter and pianist (d. 1986)
* 1943 – Hikaru Saeki, Japanese admiral, the first female star officer of the Japan Self-Defense Forces
*1944 – Peter Colman, Australian biologist and academic
* 1944 – Tony Orlando, American singer 
*1945 – Doon Arbus, American author and journalist
* 1945 – Bernie Parent, Canadian ice hockey player and coach
* 1945 – Catherine Spaak, French actress (d. 2022) 
*1946 – Nicholas Jones, English actor
* 1946 – Dee Murray, English bass player (d. 1992)
* 1946 – Marisa Paredes, Spanish film actress (d. 2024)
* 1946 – Hanna Suchocka, Polish politician, Prime Minister of Poland
*1947 – Anders Eliasson, Swedish composer (d. 2013)
*1948 – Arlette Cousture, Canadian author and screenwriter
* 1948 – Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, Dutch academic, politician, and diplomat, 11th Secretary General of NATO
* 1948 – Hans-Georg Schwarzenbeck, German footballer
* 1948 – Carlos Salinas de Gortari, Mexican economist and politician, 53rd President of Mexico
*1949 – Lyle Alzado, American football player and actor (d. 1992)
* 1949 – A. C. Grayling, English philosopher and academic
* 1949 – Richard Thompson, English singer-songwriter and guitarist
*1950 – Indrajit Coomaraswamy, Sri Lankan cricketer and economist
*1951 – Brendan Barber, English trade union leader
* 1951 – Annette Dolphin, British academician and educator 
* 1951 – Mitch Woods, American singer-songwriter and pianist
*1952 – Mike Moore, American lawyer and politician
*1953 – Sandra Boynton, American author and illustrator
* 1953 – Wakanohana Kanji II, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 56th Yokozuna (d. 2022)
* 1953 – James Smith, American boxer
*1954 – Elisabetta Brusa, Italian composer
* 1954 – K. Krishnasamy, Indian physician and politician
*1956 – Kalle Kulbok, Estonian politician
* 1956 – Boris Miljković, Serbian director and producer
* 1956 – Miguel Bosé, Spanish musician and actor
* 1956 – Ray Combs, American game show host (d. 1996)
*1958 – Alec Baldwin, American actor, comedian, producer and television host
* 1958 – Adam Gussow, American scholar, musician, and memoirist
* 1958 – Francesca Woodman, American photographer (d. 1981)
*1959 – David Hyde Pierce, American actor and activist 
*1960 – Arjen Anthony Lucassen, Dutch singer-songwriter, guitarist, and producer 
*1961 – Tim Crews, American baseball player (d. 1993)
* 1961 – Eddie Murphy, American actor and comedian
*1962 – Dave Miley, American baseball player and manager
* 1962 – Mike Ness, American singer-songwriter and guitarist 
* 1962 – Jaya Prada, Indian actress and politician
*1963 – Les Davidson, Australian rugby league player
* 1963 – Ricky Nixon, Australian footballer and manager
* 1963 – Criss Oliva, American guitarist and songwriter (d. 1993)
*1964 – Marco Ballotta, Italian footballer and manager
* 1964 – Nigel Farage, English politician
* 1964 – Claire Perry, English banker and politician
* 1964 – Bjarne Riis, Danish cyclist and manager
* 1964 – Andy Robinson, English rugby player and coach
* 1964 – Jay Weatherill, Australian politician, 45th Premier of South Australia
*1965 – Nazia Hassan, Pakistani pop singer-songwriter, lawyer and social activist (d. 2000)
*1966 – John de Vries, Australian race car driver
*1967 – Cat Cora, American chef and author
* 1967 – Pervis Ellison, American basketball player
* 1967 – Brent Gilchrist, Canadian ice hockey player
* 1967 – Cristi Puiu, Romanian director and screenwriter
* 1967 – Mark Skaife, Australian race car driver and sportscaster
*1968 – Sebastian Bach, Bahamian-Canadian singer-songwriter and actor 
* 1968 – Charlotte Coleman, English actress (d. 2001)
* 1968 – Jamie Hewlett, English director and performer
* 1968 – Tomoaki Kanemoto, Japanese baseball player
*1969 – Rodney Hampton, American football player
* 1969 – Peter Matera, Australian footballer and coach
* 1969 – Ben Mendelsohn, Australian actor
* 1969 – Lance Storm, Canadian wrestler and trainer
*1971 – Vitālijs Astafjevs, Latvian footballer and manager
* 1971 – Emmanuel Collard, French race car driver
* 1971 – Picabo Street, American skier
*1972 – Jennie Garth, American actress and director
* 1972 – Catherine McCormack, English actress
* 1972 – Sandrine Testud, French tennis player
*1973 – Nilesh Kulkarni, Indian cricketer
* 1973 – Adam Scott, American actor
*1974 – Marcus Brown, American basketball player
* 1974 – Lee Williams, Welsh model and actor
*1975 – Shawn Bates, American ice hockey player
* 1975 – Michael Olowokandi, Nigerian-American basketball player
* 1975 – Aries Spears, American comedian and actor
* 1975 – Yoshinobu Takahashi, Japanese baseball player
* 1975 – Koji Uehara, Japanese baseball player
*1976 – Nicolas Escudé, French tennis player
*1978 – Matthew Goode, English actor
* 1978 – Tommy Haas, German-American tennis player
* 1978 – John Smit, South African rugby player
*1979 – Simon Black, Australian footballer and coach
*1980 – Andrei Lodis, Belarusian footballer
* 1980 – Megan Rohrer, American pastor and transgender activist
*1981 – Aaron Bertram, American trumpet player 
* 1981 – DeShawn Stevenson, American basketball player
*1982 – Jared Allen, American football player
* 1982 – Iain Fyfe, Australian footballer
* 1982 – Cobie Smulders, Canadian actress
*1983 – Ben Foster, English footballer
* 1983 – Stephen Weiss, Canadian ice hockey player
*1984 – Jonathan Blondel, Belgian footballer
* 1984 – Maxi López, Argentinian footballer
*1985 – Jari-Matti Latvala, Finnish race car driver
* 1985 – Leona Lewis, English singer-songwriter and producer
*1986 – Amanda Bynes, American actress
* 1986 – Stephanie Cox, American soccer player
* 1986 – Annalisa Cucinotta, Italian cyclist
* 1986 – Sergio Sánchez Ortega, Spanish footballer
*1987 – Rachel Bloom, American actress, writer, and producer
* 1987 – Jay Bruce, American baseball player
* 1987 – Yileen Gordon, Australian rugby league player
* 1987 – Jason Kipnis, American baseball player
* 1987 – Martyn Rooney, English sprinter
* 1987 – Julie Sokolow, American singer-songwriter and guitarist
* 1987 – Yuval Spungin, Israeli footballer
*1988 – Kam Chancellor, American football player
* 1988 – Brandon Graham, American football player
* 1988 – Peter Hartley, English footballer
* 1988 – Tim Krul, Dutch footballer
*1989 – Romain Alessandrini, French footballer
* 1989 – Israel Folau, Australian rugby player and footballer
* 1989 – Joel Romelo, Australian rugby league player
* 1989 – Thisara Perera, Sri Lankan cricketer
*1990 – Karim Ansarifard, Iranian footballer
* 1990 – Madison Brengle, American tennis player
* 1990 – Sotiris Ninis, Greek footballer
* 1990 – Natasha Negovanlis, Canadian actress and singer
*1991 – Hayley Kiyoko, American actress and singer 
*1992 – Simone Benedetti, Italian footballer
* 1992 – Yuliya Yefimova, Russian swimmer
*1993 – Pape Moussa Konaté, Senegalese footballer
*1994 – Kodi Nikorima, New Zealand rugby league player
* 1994 – Dylann Roof, American mass murderer
*1996 – Mayo Hibi, Japanese tennis player
*1997 – Gabriel Jesus, Brazilian footballer
*1998 – Paris Jackson, American actress, model and singer
*1999 – Chanel Harris-Tavita, New Zealand-Samoan rugby league player
==Deaths==
===Pre-1600===
* 33 – Jesus of Nazareth
* 963 – William III, Duke of Aquitaine (b. 915)
*1153 – al-Adil ibn al-Sallar, vizier of the Fatimid Caliphate
*1171 – Philip of Milly, seventh Grand Master of the Knights Templar (b. )
*1203 – Arthur I, Duke of Brittany (b. 1187)
*1253 – Saint Richard of Chichester
*1287 – Pope Honorius IV (b. 1210)
*1325 – Nizamuddin Auliya, Sufi saint (b. 1238)
*1350 – Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy (b. 1295)
*1538 – Elizabeth Boleyn, Countess of Wiltshire (b. 1480)
*1545 – Antonio de Guevara, Spanish chronicler and moralist (b. 1481)

===1601–1900===
*1606 – Charles Blount, 8th Baron Mountjoy, English general and politician, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (b. 1563)
*1630 – Christopher Villiers, 1st Earl of Anglesey, English noble (b. c.  1593)
*1637 – Joseph Yuspa Nördlinger Hahn, German rabbi
*1680 – Chatrapati Shivaji Maharaj, Indian emperor, founded the Maratha Empire (b. 1630)
*1682 – Bartolomé Esteban Murillo, Spanish painter and educator (b. 1618)
*1691 – Jean Petitot, French-Swiss painter (b. 1608)
*1695 – Melchior d&#x27;Hondecoeter, Dutch painter (b. 1636)
*1717 – Jacques Ozanam, French mathematician and academic (b. 1640)
*1728 – James Anderson, Scottish lawyer and historian (b. 1662)
*1792 – George Pocock, English admiral (b. 1706)
*1804 – Jędrzej Kitowicz, Polish priest, historian, and author (b. 1727)
*1826 – Reginald Heber, English priest (b. 1783)
*1827 – Ernst Chladni, German physicist and academic (b. 1756)
*1838 – François Carlo Antommarchi, French physician and author (b. 1780)
*1844 – Edward Bigge, English cleric, 1st Archdeacon of Lindisfarne (b. 1807)
*1846 – William Braine, English soldier and explorer (b. 1814)
*1849 – Juliusz Słowacki, Polish-French poet and playwright (b. 1809)
*1868 – Franz Berwald, Swedish composer and surgeon (b. 1796)
*1880 – Felicita Vestvali, German actress and opera singer (b. 1831)
*1882 – Jesse James, American criminal and outlaw (b. 1847)
*1897 – Johannes Brahms, German pianist and composer (b. 1833)

===1901–present===
*1901 – Richard D&#x27;Oyly Carte, English composer and talent agent (b. 1844)
*1902 – Esther Hobart Morris, American lawyer and judge (b. 1814)
*1930 – Emma Albani, Canadian-English operatic soprano (b. 1847)
*1936 – Richard Hauptmann, German-American murderer (b. 1899)
*1941 – Tachiyama Mineemon, Japanese sumo wrestler, the 22nd Yokozuna (b. 1877)
* 1941 – Pál Teleki, Hungarian academic and politician, 22nd Prime Minister of Hungary (b. 1879)
*1943 – Conrad Veidt, German actor, director, and producer (b. 1893)
*1946 – Masaharu Homma, Japanese general (b. 1887)
*1950 – Kurt Weill, German-American composer and pianist (b. 1900)
* 1950 – Carter G. Woodson, American historian, author, and journalist, founded Black History Month (b. 1875)
*1951 – Henrik Visnapuu, Estonian poet and playwright (b. 1890)
*1952 – Miina Sillanpää, Finnish minister and politician (b. 1866)
*1957 – Ned Sparks, Canadian-American actor (b. 1883)
*1958 – Jaan Kärner, Estonian poet and author (b. 1891)
*1962 – Manolis Kalomiris, Greek composer and educator (b. 1883)
*1970 – Avigdor Hameiri, Israeli author (b. 1890)
*1971 – Joseph Valachi, American gangster (b. 1904)
*1972 – Ferde Grofé, American pianist and composer (b. 1892)
*1975 – Mary Ure, Scottish-English actress (b. 1933)
*1976 – David M. Dennison, American physicist and academic (b. 1900)
* 1976 – Claude-Henri Grignon, Canadian journalist and politician (b. 1894)
*1978 – Ray Noble, English bandleader, composer, and actor (b. 1903)
* 1978 – Winston Sharples, American composer (b. 1909)
*1981 – Juan Trippe, American businessman, founded Pan American World Airways (b. 1899)
*1982 – Warren Oates, American actor (b. 1928)
*1983 – Jimmy Bloomfield, English footballer and manager (b. 1934)
*1986 – Peter Pears, English tenor and educator (b. 1910)
*1987 – Tom Sestak, American football player (b. 1936)
*1988 – Milton Caniff, American cartoonist (b. 1907)
*1990 – Sarah Vaughan, American singer (b. 1924)
*1991 – Charles Goren, American bridge player and author (b. 1901)
* 1991 – Graham Greene, English novelist, playwright, and critic (b. 1904)
*1993 – Pinky Lee, American television host (b. 1907)
*1994 – Frank Wells, American businessman (b. 1932)
*1995 – Alfred J. Billes, Canadian businessman, co-founded Canadian Tire (b. 1902)
*1996 – Ron Brown, American captain and politician, 30th United States Secretary of Commerce (b. 1941)
*1997 – John Ugelstad, Norwegian chemical engineer and inventor (b. 1921)
*1998 – Mary Cartwright, English mathematician and academic (b. 1900)
*1999 – Lionel Bart, English composer (b. 1930)
* 1999 – Geoffrey Walsh, Canadian general (b. 1909)
*2000 – Terence McKenna, American botanist and philosopher (b. 1946)
* 2000 – Dina Abramowicz, Librarian and YIVO and Yiddish language expert (b. 1909)
*2005 – François Gérin, Canadian lawyer and politician (b. 1944)
*2007 – Nina Wang, Chinese businesswoman (b. 1937)
*2008 – Hrvoje Ćustić, Croatian footballer (b. 1983)
*2012 – Mingote, Spanish cartoonist and journalist (b. 1919)
* 2012 – Richard Descoings, French civil servant (b. 1958)
* 2012 – Govind Narain, Indian politician, 8th Governor of Karnataka (b. 1917)
* 2012 – Chief Jay Strongbow, American wrestler (b. 1928)
* 2012 – José María Zárraga, Spanish footballer and manager (b. 1930)
*2013 – Mariví Bilbao, Spanish actress (b. 1930)
* 2013 – Ruth Prawer Jhabvala, German-American author and screenwriter (b. 1927)
*2014 – Régine Deforges, French author, playwright, and director (b. 1935)
* 2014 – Fred Kida, American illustrator (b. 1920)
* 2014 – Prince Michael of Prussia (b. 1940)
* 2014 – Jovan Pavlović, Serbian metropolitan (b. 1936)
* 2014 – Arthur &quot;Guitar Boogie&quot; Smith, American guitarist, fiddler, and composer (b. 1921)
*2015 – Sarah Brady, American activist and author (b. 1942)
* 2015 – Bob Burns, American drummer and songwriter (b. 1950)
* 2015 – Shmuel Wosner, Austrian-Israeli rabbi and author (b. 1913)
*2016 – Cesare Maldini, Italian footballer and manager (b. 1932)
* 2016 – Joe Medicine Crow, American anthropologist, historian, and author (b. 1913)
* 2016 – Koji Wada, Japanese singer and songwriter (b. 1974)
*2017 – Kishori Amonkar, Indian classical vocalist (b. 1931)
*2021 – Stan Stephens, Canadian-American politician, 20th Governor of Montana (b. 1929)
*2022 – June Brown, English actress (b. 1927)
*2024 – Bob Lanigan, Australian rugby league player (b. 1942)
* 2024 – Gaetano Pesce, Italian architect and designer (b. 1939)
==Holidays and observances==
* Christian feast day:
** Agape, Chionia, and Irene
** Burgundofara
** Luigi Scrosoppi
** Richard of Chichester
** April 3 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)

==References==
==External links==

* BBC: On This Day
* Historical Events on April 3</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q30619" start="28" end="31" title="686" label="686"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="34" end="38" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179190" start="44" end="82" title="Yuknoom Yich&amp;#x27;aak K&amp;#x27;ahk&amp;#x27;" label="Yuknoom Yich&amp;#x27;aak K&amp;#x27;ahk&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q272771" start="104" end="112" title="Calakmul" label="Calakmul"/>
<link wikidata="Q19348" start="115" end="119" title="1043" label="1043"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="122" end="142" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="154" end="169" title="King of England" label="King of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q19441" start="172" end="176" title="1077" label="1077"/>
<link wikidata="Q160570" start="216" end="222" title="Friuli" label="Friuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609" start="245" end="249" title="1559" label="1559"/>
<link wikidata="Q836963" start="293" end="318" title="Peace of Cateau-Cambrésis" label="Peace of Cateau-Cambrésis"/>
<link wikidata="Q273348" start="341" end="353" title="Italian Wars" label="Italian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759" start="356" end="360" title="1589" label="1589"/>
<link wikidata="Q130263" start="367" end="378" title="janissaries" label="janissaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899882" start="379" end="385" title="Beylerbeyi event" label="revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913" start="444" end="448" title="1721" label="1721"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="451" end="465" title="Robert Walpole" label="Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="496" end="527" title="Prime Minister of Great Britain" label="Prime Minister of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7656" start="567" end="571" title="1851" label="1851"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="574" end="581" title="Mongkut" label="Rama IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663787" start="593" end="597" title="Monarchy of Thailand" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="601" end="609" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q319669" start="647" end="655" title="Rama III" label="Rama III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691" start="658" end="662" title="1860" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q859130" start="700" end="712" title="Pony Express" label="Pony Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q745120" start="722" end="742" title="St. Joseph, Missouri" label="St. Joseph, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="747" end="769" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708" start="780" end="784" title="1865" label="1865"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="787" end="805" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="807" end="812" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q43421" start="828" end="846" title="Richmond, Virginia" label="Richmond, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="867" end="896" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="899" end="903" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="906" end="923" title="American Old West" label="American Old West"/>
<link wikidata="Q918943" start="925" end="936" title="Robert Ford (outlaw)" label="Robert Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q213626" start="943" end="954" title="Jesse James" label="Jesse James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821" start="957" end="961" title="1885" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q57098" start="964" end="980" title="Gottlieb Daimler" label="Gottlieb Daimler"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="1001" end="1007" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q44167" start="1045" end="1051" title="engine" label="engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q474502" start="1135" end="1152" title="Daimler Reitwagen" label="Daimler Reitwagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829" start="1155" end="1159" title="1888" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q43963" start="1162" end="1177" title="Jack the Ripper" label="Jack the Ripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062923" start="1195" end="1218" title="Whitechapel murders" label="unsolved brutal murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q124539" start="1266" end="1277" title="Whitechapel" label="Whitechapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="1294" end="1312" title="East End of London" label="East End of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844" start="1323" end="1327" title="1895" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="1347" end="1352" title="libel" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="1369" end="1380" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="1444" end="1457" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="1480" end="1484" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1529" end="1572" title="Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim#The 1920 assassination attempt" label="assassination attempt on General Mannerheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q972912" start="1612" end="1622" title="Eino Rahja" label="Eino Rahja"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014199" start="1635" end="1646" title="White Guard (Finland)" label="White Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="1657" end="1664" title="Tampere" label="Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="1676" end="1680" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="1683" end="1696" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="1715" end="1775" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="1778" end="1782" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q513" start="1803" end="1816" title="Mount Everest" label="Mount Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741110" start="1830" end="1869" title="Houston-Mount Everest Flight Expedition" label="Houston-Mount Everest Flight Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q332941" start="1882" end="1903" title="Douglas Douglas-Hamilton, 14th Duke of Hamilton" label="Marquis of Clydesdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698142" start="1918" end="1936" title="Lucy, Lady Houston" label="Lucy, Lady Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="1939" end="1943" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q63731" start="1946" end="1969" title="Bruno Richard Hauptmann" label="Bruno Richard Hauptmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q844495" start="2014" end="2044" title="Lindbergh kidnapping" label="Charles Augustus Lindbergh Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1618" start="2070" end="2087" title="Charles Lindbergh" label="Charles Lindbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="2090" end="2094" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2097" end="2109" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="2111" end="2119" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q146328" start="2169" end="2177" title="Commonwealth of the Philippines" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q703482" start="2192" end="2208" title="Battle of Bataan" label="Bataan Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="2211" end="2215" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="2227" end="2238" title="Lt. General" label="Lt. General"/>
<link wikidata="Q517297" start="2239" end="2253" title="Masaharu Homma" label="Masaharu Homma"/>
<link wikidata="Q555797" start="2301" end="2319" title="Bataan Death March" label="Bataan Death March"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="2322" end="2326" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="2329" end="2337" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="2354" end="2369" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="2380" end="2393" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41164" start="2455" end="2468" title="Jeju Province" label="Jeju Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="2523" end="2542" title="human rights abuses" label="human rights abuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q483458" start="2556" end="2569" title="Jeju Uprising" label="Jeju uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577" start="2579" end="2583" title="1955" label="1955"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="2590" end="2620" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="American Civil Liberties Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="2646" end="2660" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545259" start="2679" end="2683" title="Howl (poem)" label="Howl"/>
<link wikidata="Q31110" start="2698" end="2707" title="obscenity" label="obscenity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="2718" end="2722" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781874" start="2725" end="2753" title="Hudsonville–Standale tornado of April 1956" label="Hudsonville–Standale tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596" start="2779" end="2806" title="Lower Peninsula of Michigan" label="Lower Peninsula of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q380770" start="2829" end="2831" title="Fujita scale" label="F5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="2842" end="2846" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="2849" end="2871" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5967210" start="2891" end="2924" title="I&amp;#x27;ve Been to the Mountaintop" label="I&amp;#x27;ve Been to the Mountaintop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="2974" end="2978" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="2981" end="2992" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="2994" end="3028" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="United States Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q499056" start="3029" end="3041" title="Melvin Laird" label="Melvin Laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q927708" start="3095" end="3105" title="Vietnamization" label="Vietnamize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="3129" end="3133" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q319383" start="3136" end="3149" title="Martin Cooper (inventor)" label="Martin Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q259011" start="3153" end="3161" title="Motorola" label="Motorola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630862" start="3172" end="3204" title="History of mobile phones" label="first handheld mobile phone call"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547637" start="3208" end="3221" title="Joel S. Engel" label="Joel S. Engel"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="3225" end="3234" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="3237" end="3241" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q428362" start="3244" end="3267" title="1974 Super Outbreak" label="The 1974 Super Outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741117" start="3343" end="3362" title="2011 Super Outbreak" label="2011 Super Outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="3416" end="3420" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025973" start="3436" end="3454" title="Operation Babylift" label="Operation Babylift"/>
<link wikidata="Q41314" start="3536" end="3549" title="Bobby Fischer" label="Bobby Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092034" start="3550" end="3565" title="World Chess Championship 1975" label="refuses to play"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="3571" end="3576" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q131674" start="3591" end="3605" title="Anatoly Karpov" label="Anatoly Karpov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="3662" end="3666" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="3669" end="3680" title="Us congress" label="US Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499438" start="3747" end="3755" title="Shivwits Band of Paiutes" label="Shivwits"/>
<link wikidata="Q510023" start="3825" end="3831" title="Paiute" label="Paiute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="3849" end="3853" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129603" start="3860" end="3869" title="Osborne 1" label="Osborne 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820120" start="3892" end="3909" title="portable computer" label="portable computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019072" start="3930" end="3955" title="West Coast Computer Faire" label="West Coast Computer Faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="3959" end="3972" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="3975" end="3979" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="3986" end="4002" title="US supreme court" label="US Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q124022891" start="4040" end="4052" title="tribal court" label="tribal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020008" start="4064" end="4096" title="Indian Child Welfare Act" label="Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879063" start="4100" end="4137" title="Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians v. Holyfield" label="Mississippi Choctaw Band v. Holyfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="4140" end="4144" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542651" start="4166" end="4180" title="Grand National" label="Grand National"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="4240" end="4244" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q222134" start="4279" end="4297" title="Theodore Kaczynski" label="Theodore Kaczynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="4317" end="4324" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="4364" end="4387" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q968277" start="4388" end="4399" title="Boeing T-43" label="Boeing T-43"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268842" start="4400" end="4407" title="1996 Croatia USAF CT-43 crash" label="crashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147000" start="4413" end="4430" title="Dubrovnik Airport" label="Dubrovnik Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="4434" end="4441" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003296" start="4465" end="4486" title="United States Secretary of Commerce" label="Secretary of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193187" start="4487" end="4496" title="Ron Brown" label="Ron Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="4499" end="4503" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738493" start="4510" end="4525" title="Thalit massacre" label="Thalit massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="4536" end="4543" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709675" start="4582" end="4588" title="Thalit" label="Thalit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="4616" end="4620" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345977" start="4629" end="4661" title="United States v. Microsoft Corp. (2001)" label="United States v. Microsoft Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="4669" end="4678" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277149" start="4705" end="4732" title="United States antitrust law" label="United States antitrust law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014" start="4797" end="4801" title="2004" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q847731" start="4804" end="4822" title="Islamic terrorists" label="Islamic terrorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q213531" start="4839" end="4865" title="2004 Madrid train bombings" label="2004 Madrid train bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="4933" end="4937" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4940" end="4977" title="TGV world speed record#Record of 2007" label="Conventional-Train World Speed Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q129337" start="4988" end="4991" title="TGV" label="TGV"/>
<link wikidata="Q945937" start="5005" end="5012" title="LGV Est" label="LGV Est"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="5108" end="5112" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q298738" start="5115" end="5127" title="ATA Airlines" label="ATA Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="5301" end="5306" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q499224" start="5339" end="5343" title="Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints" label="FLDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045881" start="5351" end="5360" title="YFZ Ranch" label="YFZ Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996" start="5431" end="5435" title="2009" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658753" start="5459" end="5469" title="2009 Binghamton shooting" label="opens fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743402" start="5477" end="5503" title="American Civic Association (Binghamton)" label="American Civic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q213814" start="5526" end="5546" title="Binghamton, New York" label="Binghamton, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995" start="5611" end="5615" title="2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="5618" end="5628" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q59802" start="5642" end="5663" title="IPad (1st generation)" label="first generation iPad"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="5667" end="5682" title="tablet computer" label="tablet computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="5685" end="5689" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q10310765" start="5719" end="5725" title="2013 Argentina floods" label="floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q44059" start="5769" end="5777" title="La Plata" label="La Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="5782" end="5794" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="5808" end="5812" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q23702848" start="5819" end="5832" title="Panama Papers" label="Panama Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q21694520" start="5836" end="5840" title="news leak" label="leak"/>
<link wikidata="Q205181" start="5892" end="5910" title="Offshore financial centre" label="offshore companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="5913" end="5917" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q29113584" start="5922" end="5935" title="2017 St. Petersburg Metro bombing" label="bomb explodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="5943" end="5956" title="St Petersburg" label="St Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q25291" start="6017" end="6021" title="2018" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q51339458" start="6024" end="6053" title="YouTube headquarters shooting" label="YouTube headquarters shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q667738" start="6116" end="6137" title="San Bruno, California" label="San Bruno, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q19247" start="6217" end="6221" title="1016" label="1016"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005" start="6224" end="6233" title="Emperor Xingzong of Liao" label="Xing Zong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19642" start="6262" end="6266" title="1151" label="1151"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497107" start="6269" end="6287" title="Igor Svyatoslavich" label="Igor Svyatoslavich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6400" start="6315" end="6319" title="1395" label="1395"/>
<link wikidata="Q533514" start="6322" end="6341" title="George of Trebizond" label="George of Trebizond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377" start="6394" end="6398" title="1438" label="1438"/>
<link wikidata="Q1694751" start="6401" end="6419" title="John III of Egmont" label="John III of Egmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421" start="6447" end="6451" title="1529" label="1529"/>
<link wikidata="Q106596" start="6454" end="6469" title="Michael Neander" label="Michael Neander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482" start="6518" end="6522" title="1540" label="1540"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280021" start="6525" end="6546" title="Maria de&amp;#x27; Medici (1540–1557)" label="Maria de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772" start="6674" end="6678" title="1593" label="1593"/>
<link wikidata="Q317887" start="6681" end="6695" title="George Herbert" label="George Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917" start="6738" end="6742" title="1643" label="1643"/>
<link wikidata="Q156949" start="6745" end="6754" title="Charles V, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648" start="6784" end="6788" title="1682" label="1682"/>
<link wikidata="Q883137" start="6791" end="6809" title="Valentin Rathgeber" label="Valentin Rathgeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689" start="6851" end="6855" title="1693" label="1693"/>
<link wikidata="Q257668" start="6858" end="6872" title="George Edwards (naturalist)" label="George Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884" start="6924" end="6928" title="1715" label="1715"/>
<link wikidata="Q462269" start="6931" end="6945" title="William Watson (scientist)" label="William Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659" start="7001" end="7005" title="1764" label="1764"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232386" start="7008" end="7022" title="John Abernethy (surgeon)" label="John Abernethy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679" start="7065" end="7069" title="1769" label="1769"/>
<link wikidata="Q213851" start="7072" end="7104" title="Christian Günther von Bernstorff" label="Christian Günther von Bernstorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683" start="7157" end="7161" title="1770" label="1770"/>
<link wikidata="Q319678" start="7164" end="7186" title="Theodoros Kolokotronis" label="Theodoros Kolokotronis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713" start="7213" end="7217" title="1778" label="1778"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004700" start="7220" end="7237" title="Pierre Bretonneau" label="Pierre Bretonneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719" start="7311" end="7315" title="1781" label="1781"/>
<link wikidata="Q931506" start="7318" end="7330" title="Swaminarayan" label="Swaminarayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740" start="7367" end="7371" title="1782" label="1782"/>
<link wikidata="Q328356" start="7374" end="7390" title="Alexander Macomb (general)" label="Alexander Macomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745" start="7420" end="7424" title="1783" label="1783"/>
<link wikidata="Q181667" start="7427" end="7444" title="Washington Irving" label="Washington Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784" start="7518" end="7522" title="1791" label="1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745195" start="7525" end="7536" title="Anne Lister" label="Anne Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823" start="7593" end="7597" title="1798" label="1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q119329" start="7600" end="7614" title="Charles Wilkes" label="Charles Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909" start="7670" end="7674" title="1807" label="1807"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942057" start="7677" end="7691" title="Mary Carpenter" label="Mary Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323572" start="7717" end="7732" title="social reformer" label="social reformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943" start="7744" end="7748" title="1814" label="1814"/>
<link wikidata="Q635520" start="7751" end="7763" title="Lorenzo Snow" label="Lorenzo Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000892" start="7796" end="7856" title="President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983" start="7868" end="7872" title="1822" label="1822"/>
<link wikidata="Q786616" start="7875" end="7894" title="Edward Everett Hale" label="Edward Everett Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988" start="7948" end="7952" title="1823" label="1823"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538493" start="7955" end="7967" title="George Derby" label="George Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353450" start="8023" end="8039" title="William M. Tweed" label="William M. Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004" start="8072" end="8076" title="1826" label="1826"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201107" start="8079" end="8096" title="Cyrus K. Holliday" label="Cyrus K. Holliday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608" start="8130" end="8134" title="1837" label="1837"/>
<link wikidata="Q938841" start="8137" end="8151" title="John Burroughs" label="John Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7625" start="8193" end="8197" title="1842" label="1842"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879773" start="8200" end="8214" title="Ulric Dahlgren" label="Ulric Dahlgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647" start="8244" end="8248" title="1848" label="1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q715410" start="8251" end="8262" title="Arturo Prat" label="Arturo Prat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661" start="8302" end="8306" title="1852" label="1852"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679011" start="8309" end="8327" title="Talbot Baines Reed" label="Talbot Baines Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684" start="8355" end="8359" title="1858" label="1858"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118666" start="8362" end="8375" title="Jacob Gaudaur" label="Jacob Gaudaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7691" start="8403" end="8407" title="1860" label="1860"/>
<link wikidata="Q211514" start="8410" end="8428" title="Frederik van Eeden" label="Frederik van Eeden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704" start="8471" end="8475" title="1864" label="1864"/>
<link wikidata="Q676915" start="8478" end="8495" title="Emil Kellenberger" label="Emil Kellenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764" start="8529" end="8533" title="1875" label="1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q235507" start="8536" end="8547" title="Mistinguett" label="Mistinguett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766" start="8586" end="8590" title="1876" label="1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290465" start="8593" end="8608" title="Margaret Anglin" label="Margaret Anglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359893" start="8670" end="8680" title="Tomáš Baťa" label="Tomáš Baťa"/>
<link wikidata="Q688082" start="8709" end="8719" title="Bata Shoes" label="Bata Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806" start="8731" end="8735" title="1880" label="1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q78513" start="8738" end="8752" title="Otto Weininger" label="Otto Weininger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808" start="8804" end="8808" title="1881" label="1881"/>
<link wikidata="Q153832" start="8811" end="8828" title="Alcide De Gasperi" label="Alcide De Gasperi"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="8870" end="8893" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="Prime Minister of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="8905" end="8909" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379734" start="8912" end="8931" title="Philippe Desranleau" label="Philippe Desranleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816" start="8964" end="8968" title="1883" label="1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q721416" start="8971" end="8980" title="Ikki Kita" label="Ikki Kita"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821" start="9025" end="9029" title="1885" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q959677" start="9032" end="9042" title="Allan Dwan" label="Allan Dwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000471" start="9118" end="9128" title="Bud Fisher" label="Bud Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596174" start="9169" end="9191" title="Marie-Victorin Kirouac" label="Marie-Victorin Kirouac"/>
<link wikidata="Q584868" start="9243" end="9257" title="St John Philby" label="St John Philby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822" start="9300" end="9304" title="1886" label="1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q908998" start="9307" end="9320" title="Dooley Wilson" label="Dooley Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826" start="9359" end="9363" title="1887" label="1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081773" start="9366" end="9380" title="Ōtori Tanigorō" label="Ōtori Tanigorō"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9415" end="9423" title="Makuuchi#Yokozuna" label="Yokozuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q927942" start="9443" end="9460" title="Nishizō Tsukahara" label="Nishizō Tsukahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829" start="9490" end="9494" title="1888" label="1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q202365" start="9497" end="9514" title="Thomas C. Kinkaid" label="Thomas C. Kinkaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831" start="9544" end="9548" title="1889" label="1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q740461" start="9551" end="9566" title="Grigoraș Dinicu" label="Grigoraș Dinicu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840" start="9611" end="9615" title="1893" label="1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q156178" start="9618" end="9631" title="Leslie Howard (actor)" label="Leslie Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844" start="9658" end="9662" title="1895" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q377558" start="9665" end="9690" title="Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco" label="Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263974" start="9750" end="9761" title="Zez Confrey" label="Zez Confrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847" start="9804" end="9808" title="1897" label="1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210706" start="9811" end="9827" title="Joe Kirkwood Sr." label="Joe Kirkwood Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q974438" start="9866" end="9889" title="Thrasyvoulos Tsakalotos" label="Thrasyvoulos Tsakalotos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848" start="9916" end="9920" title="1898" label="1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q377883" start="9923" end="9933" title="David Jack (footballer)" label="David Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q506146" start="9985" end="9998" title="George Jessel (actor)" label="George Jessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q516473" start="10056" end="10066" title="Henry Luce" label="Henry Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="10105" end="10109" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034" start="10136" end="10140" title="1900" label="1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q365971" start="10143" end="10158" title="Camille Chamoun" label="Camille Chamoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q22001564" start="10196" end="10216" title="President of Lebanon" label="President of Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711427" start="10236" end="10248" title="Albert Walsh" label="Albert Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238286" start="10286" end="10321" title="Lieutenant Governor of Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Lieutenant Governor of Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045" start="10354" end="10358" title="1903" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347911" start="10361" end="10385" title="Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay" label="Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046" start="10441" end="10445" title="1904" label="1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q587113" start="10448" end="10462" title="Iron Eyes Cody" label="Iron Eyes Cody"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988024" start="10511" end="10521" title="Sally Rand" label="Sally Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381291" start="10558" end="10571" title="Russel Wright" label="Russel Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047" start="10612" end="10616" title="1905" label="1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q487609" start="10619" end="10630" title="Robert Sink" label="Robert Sink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075" start="10660" end="10664" title="1910" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808805" start="10667" end="10675" title="Ted Hook" label="Ted Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076" start="10714" end="10718" title="1911" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335641" start="10721" end="10737" title="Nanette Bordeaux" label="Nanette Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q541650" start="10784" end="10800" title="Michael Woodruff" label="Michael Woodruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q172820" start="10859" end="10881" title="Stanisława Walasiewicz" label="Stanisława Walasiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077" start="10917" end="10921" title="1912" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945679" start="10924" end="10936" title="Dorothy Eden" label="Dorothy Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q700611" start="10984" end="11002" title="Grigoris Lambrakis" label="Grigoris Lambrakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080" start="11046" end="11050" title="1913" label="1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q380659" start="11053" end="11063" title="Per Borten" label="Per Borten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334076" start="11092" end="11116" title="Prime Minister of Norway" label="Prime Minister of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="11128" end="11132" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420518" start="11135" end="11147" title="Ray Getliffe" label="Ray Getliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q558194" start="11195" end="11208" title="Sam Manekshaw" label="Sam Manekshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084" start="11242" end="11246" title="1915" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q345481" start="11249" end="11261" title="Piet de Jong" label="Piet de Jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058109" start="11299" end="11332" title="Prime Minister of the Netherlands" label="Prime Minister of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q343516" start="11352" end="11367" title="İhsan Doğramacı" label="İhsan Doğramacı"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087" start="11411" end="11415" title="1916" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091058" start="11418" end="11427" title="Herb Caen" label="Herb Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132604" start="11479" end="11492" title="Cliff Gladwin" label="Cliff Gladwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260260" start="11531" end="11546" title="Louis Guglielmi" label="Louis Guglielmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094" start="11576" end="11580" title="1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q287688" start="11583" end="11596" title="Mary Anderson (actress, born 1918)" label="Mary Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q506312" start="11634" end="11649" title="Louis Applebaum" label="Louis Applebaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157" start="11694" end="11698" title="1919" label="1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357264" start="11701" end="11712" title="Ervin Drake" label="Ervin Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975153" start="11766" end="11782" title="Clairette Oddera" label="Clairette Oddera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155" start="11830" end="11834" title="1920" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597643" start="11837" end="11849" title="Stan Freeman" label="Stan Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055990" start="11902" end="11923" title="Yoshibayama Junnosuke" label="Yoshibayama Junnosuke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11958" end="11966" title="Makuuchi#Yokozuna" label="Yokozuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2162" start="11978" end="11982" title="1921" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346263" start="11985" end="12000" title="Robert Karvelas" label="Robert Karvelas"/>
<link wikidata="Q259581" start="12036" end="12048" title="Jan Sterling" label="Jan Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165" start="12078" end="12082" title="1922" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q355922" start="12085" end="12101" title="Yevhen Bulanchyk" label="Yevhen Bulanchyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q104372" start="12140" end="12149" title="Doris Day" label="Doris Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169" start="12190" end="12194" title="1923" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217498" start="12197" end="12211" title="Daniel Hoffman" label="Daniel Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173" start="12251" end="12255" title="1924" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="12258" end="12271" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q257977" start="12320" end="12332" title="Roza Shanina" label="Roza Shanina"/>
<link wikidata="Q18107" start="12373" end="12377" title="1925" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="12380" end="12389" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858507" start="12421" end="12452" title="Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills" label="Secretary of State for Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259" start="12464" end="12468" title="1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717079" start="12471" end="12483" title="Alex Grammas" label="Alex Grammas"/>
<link wikidata="Q110879" start="12549" end="12560" title="Gus Grissom" label="Gus Grissom"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110" start="12613" end="12617" title="1927" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563953" start="12620" end="12635" title="Wesley A. Brown" label="Wesley A. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715" start="12678" end="12682" title="1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239171" start="12685" end="12695" title="Don Gibson" label="Don Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053023" start="12757" end="12769" title="Emmett Johns" label="Emmett Johns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015437" start="12796" end="12807" title="Dans la Rue" label="Dans la Rue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277115" start="12827" end="12837" title="Earl Lloyd" label="Earl Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178702" start="12895" end="12912" title="Jennifer Paterson" label="Jennifer Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18792" start="12965" end="12969" title="1929" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q62918" start="12972" end="12990" title="Fazlur Rahman Khan" label="Fazlur Rahman Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29294" start="13044" end="13056" title="Willis Tower" label="Willis Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q217727" start="13061" end="13080" title="John Hancock Center" label="John Hancock Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q327190" start="13100" end="13113" title="Poul Schlüter" label="Poul Schlüter"/>
<link wikidata="Q795477" start="13150" end="13175" title="Prime Minister of Denmark" label="Prime Minister of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="13187" end="13191" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q744098" start="13194" end="13207" title="Lawton Chiles" label="Lawton Chiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q20198851" start="13256" end="13275" title="Governor of Florida" label="Governor of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518" start="13295" end="13306" title="Helmut Kohl" label="Helmut Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="13327" end="13348" title="Chancellor of Germany (Federal Republic)" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q196263" start="13368" end="13391" title="Mario Benjamín Menéndez" label="Mario Benjamín Menéndez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963442" start="13447" end="13457" title="Wally Moon" label="Wally Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="13505" end="13509" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399642" start="13512" end="13524" title="William Bast" label="William Bast"/>
<link wikidata="Q18726" start="13570" end="13574" title="1933" label="1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q887889" start="13577" end="13587" title="Bob Dornan" label="Bob Dornan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356198" start="13618" end="13629" title="Rod Funseth" label="Rod Funseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18714" start="13658" end="13662" title="1934" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129090" start="13665" end="13677" title="Pamela Allen" label="Pamela Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184746" start="13740" end="13752" title="Jane Goodall" label="Jane Goodall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689186" start="13804" end="13814" title="Jim Parker (American football)" label="Jim Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658" start="13852" end="13856" title="1935" label="1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826749" start="13859" end="13873" title="Harold Kushner" label="Harold Kushner"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="13912" end="13916" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q726100" start="13919" end="13932" title="Jimmy McGriff" label="Jimmy McGriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q267572" start="13986" end="13997" title="Harold Vick" label="Harold Vick"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645" start="14048" end="14052" title="1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q339458" start="14055" end="14065" title="Jeff Barry" label="Jeff Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182345" start="14117" end="14129" title="Phil Rodgers" label="Phil Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639" start="14158" end="14162" title="1939" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353562" start="14165" end="14184" title="François de Roubaix" label="François de Roubaix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684854" start="14221" end="14232" title="Hawk Taylor" label="Hawk Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987836" start="14288" end="14306" title="Paul Craig Roberts" label="Paul Craig Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="14343" end="14347" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682401" start="14350" end="14359" title="Jan and Dean" label="Jan Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185501" start="14407" end="14421" title="Philippé Wynne" label="Philippé Wynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q18625" start="14455" end="14459" title="1942" label="1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q235211" start="14462" end="14474" title="Marsha Mason" label="Marsha Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q552806" start="14503" end="14515" title="Wayne Newton" label="Wayne Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q863142" start="14543" end="14558" title="Billy Joe Royal" label="Billy Joe Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="14612" end="14616" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898879" start="14619" end="14632" title="Mario Lavista" label="Mario Lavista"/>
<link wikidata="Q524711" start="14670" end="14683" title="Jonathan Lynn" label="Jonathan Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q546035" start="14736" end="14750" title="Richard Manuel" label="Richard Manuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463474" start="14810" end="14822" title="Hikaru Saeki" label="Hikaru Saeki"/>
<link wikidata="Q977459" start="14859" end="14871" title="flag officer" label="star officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q275488" start="14879" end="14904" title="Japan Self-Defense Forces" label="Japan Self-Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268" start="14906" end="14910" title="1944" label="1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q18228602" start="14913" end="14925" title="Peter Colman" label="Peter Colman"/>
<link wikidata="Q726057" start="14970" end="14982" title="Tony Orlando" label="Tony Orlando"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240" start="15002" end="15006" title="1945" label="1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297144" start="15009" end="15019" title="Doon Arbus" label="Doon Arbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q826579" start="15061" end="15074" title="Bernie Parent" label="Bernie Parent"/>
<link wikidata="Q437406" start="15122" end="15137" title="Catherine Spaak" label="Catherine Spaak"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="15166" end="15170" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210141" start="15173" end="15187" title="Nicholas Jones (actor)" label="Nicholas Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182288" start="15212" end="15222" title="Dee Murray" label="Dee Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q235398" start="15263" end="15277" title="Marisa Paredes" label="Marisa Paredes"/>
<link wikidata="Q55930" start="15319" end="15333" title="Hanna Suchocka" label="Hanna Suchocka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259469" start="15354" end="15378" title="Prime Minister of Poland" label="Prime Minister of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263" start="15380" end="15384" title="1947" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q490899" start="15387" end="15402" title="Anders Eliasson" label="Anders Eliasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165" start="15432" end="15436" title="1948" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861626" start="15439" end="15455" title="Arlette Cousture" label="Arlette Cousture"/>
<link wikidata="Q273812" start="15499" end="15520" title="Jaap de Hoop Scheffer" label="Jaap de Hoop Scheffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q167662" start="15569" end="15594" title="Secretary General of NATO" label="Secretary General of NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q44820" start="15604" end="15628" title="Hans-Georg Schwarzenbeck" label="Hans-Georg Schwarzenbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q315633" start="15657" end="15682" title="Carlos Salinas de Gortari" label="Carlos Salinas de Gortari"/>
<link wikidata="Q628004" start="15723" end="15742" title="President of Mexico" label="President of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188" start="15744" end="15748" title="1949" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q726360" start="15751" end="15762" title="Lyle Alzado" label="Lyle Alzado"/>
<link wikidata="Q278583" start="15818" end="15832" title="A. C. Grayling" label="A. C. Grayling"/>
<link wikidata="Q539955" start="15876" end="15892" title="Richard Thompson (musician)" label="Richard Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="15935" end="15939" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026889" start="15942" end="15963" title="Indrajit Coomaraswamy" label="Indrajit Coomaraswamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="16001" end="16005" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924417" start="16008" end="16022" title="Brendan Barber" label="Brendan Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q19945385" start="16060" end="16075" title="Annette Dolphin" label="Annette Dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15438856" start="16120" end="16131" title="Mitch Woods" label="Mitch Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="16173" end="16177" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848089" start="16180" end="16190" title="Mike Moore (U.S. politician)" label="Mike Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q18585" start="16224" end="16228" title="1953" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416555" start="16231" end="16245" title="Sandra Boynton" label="Sandra Boynton"/>
<link wikidata="Q328575" start="16288" end="16307" title="Wakanohana Kanji II" label="Wakanohana Kanji II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16342" end="16350" title="Makuuchi#Yokozuna" label="Yokozuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027519" start="16370" end="16381" title="James Smith (boxer)" label="James Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q18581" start="16399" end="16403" title="1954" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051113" start="16406" end="16422" title="Elisabetta Brusa" label="Elisabetta Brusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323511" start="16450" end="16464" title="K. Krishnasamy" label="K. Krishnasamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221" start="16499" end="16503" title="1956" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353630" start="16506" end="16518" title="Kalle Kulbok" label="Kalle Kulbok"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945334" start="16549" end="16564" title="Boris Miljković" label="Boris Miljković"/>
<link wikidata="Q356762" start="16605" end="16616" title="Miguel Bosé" label="Miguel Bosé"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648201" start="16654" end="16663" title="Ray Combs" label="Ray Combs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="16700" end="16704" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q170572" start="16707" end="16719" title="Alec Baldwin" label="Alec Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q349622" start="16785" end="16796" title="Adam Gussow" label="Adam Gussow"/>
<link wikidata="Q242308" start="16849" end="16866" title="Francesca Woodman" label="Francesca Woodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302" start="16901" end="16905" title="1959" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q373976" start="16908" end="16925" title="David Hyde Pierce" label="David Hyde Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754" start="16957" end="16961" title="1960" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q455959" start="16964" end="16986" title="Arjen Anthony Lucassen" label="Arjen Anthony Lucassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696" start="17039" end="17043" title="1961" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528617" start="17046" end="17055" title="Tim Crews" label="Tim Crews"/>
<link wikidata="Q43874" start="17101" end="17113" title="Eddie Murphy" label="Eddie Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="17144" end="17148" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229389" start="17151" end="17161" title="Dave Miley" label="Dave Miley"/>
<link wikidata="Q713521" start="17209" end="17218" title="Mike Ness" label="Mike Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518383" start="17271" end="17281" title="Jaya Prada" label="Jaya Prada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755" start="17314" end="17318" title="1963" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529402" start="17321" end="17333" title="Les Davidson" label="Les Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332146" start="17375" end="17386" title="Ricky Nixon" label="Ricky Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q869758" start="17431" end="17442" title="Criss Oliva" label="Criss Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652" start="17489" end="17493" title="1964" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q440935" start="17496" end="17510" title="Marco Ballotta" label="Marco Ballotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q318471" start="17552" end="17564" title="Nigel Farage" label="Nigel Farage"/>
<link wikidata="Q575452" start="17594" end="17606" title="Claire Perry" label="Claire Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q310288" start="17647" end="17658" title="Bjarne Riis" label="Bjarne Riis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849163" start="17696" end="17709" title="Andy Robinson" label="Andy Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446178" start="17751" end="17765" title="Jay Weatherill" label="Jay Weatherill"/>
<link wikidata="Q676357" start="17795" end="17821" title="Premier of South Australia" label="Premier of South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650" start="17823" end="17827" title="1965" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242258" start="17830" end="17842" title="Nazia Hassan" label="Nazia Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2649" start="17915" end="17919" title="1966" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265665" start="17922" end="17935" title="John de Vries (racing driver)" label="John de Vries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2648" start="17965" end="17969" title="1967" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232577" start="17972" end="17980" title="Cat Cora" label="Cat Cora"/>
<link wikidata="Q180860" start="18016" end="18030" title="Pervis Ellison" label="Pervis Ellison"/>
<link wikidata="Q472555" start="18068" end="18083" title="Brent Gilchrist" label="Brent Gilchrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140264" start="18121" end="18132" title="Cristi Puiu" label="Cristi Puiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q963937" start="18178" end="18189" title="Mark Skaife" label="Mark Skaife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644" start="18236" end="18240" title="1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q363490" start="18243" end="18257" title="Sebastian Bach" label="Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338118" start="18315" end="18332" title="Charlotte Coleman" label="Charlotte Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q522966" start="18369" end="18382" title="Jamie Hewlett" label="Jamie Hewlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q704487" start="18424" end="18440" title="Tomoaki Kanemoto" label="Tomoaki Kanemoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="18468" end="18472" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356939" start="18475" end="18489" title="Rodney Hampton" label="Rodney Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175702" start="18525" end="18537" title="Peter Matera" label="Peter Matera"/>
<link wikidata="Q816565" start="18580" end="18594" title="Ben Mendelsohn" label="Ben Mendelsohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q965119" start="18622" end="18633" title="Lance Storm" label="Lance Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="18666" end="18670" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q362955" start="18673" end="18691" title="Vitālijs Astafjevs" label="Vitālijs Astafjevs"/>
<link wikidata="Q918453" start="18733" end="18749" title="Emmanuel Collard" label="Emmanuel Collard"/>
<link wikidata="Q10101" start="18783" end="18796" title="Picabo Street" label="Picabo Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="18814" end="18818" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q230015" start="18821" end="18833" title="Jennie Garth" label="Jennie Garth"/>
<link wikidata="Q138327" start="18874" end="18893" title="Catherine McCormack" label="Catherine McCormack"/>
<link wikidata="Q259026" start="18920" end="18935" title="Sandrine Testud" label="Sandrine Testud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477" start="18959" end="18963" title="1973" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q3763965" start="18966" end="18981" title="Nilesh Kulkarni" label="Nilesh Kulkarni"/>
<link wikidata="Q201842" start="19009" end="19019" title="Adam Scott (actor)" label="Adam Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478" start="19037" end="19041" title="1974" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q542563" start="19044" end="19056" title="Marcus Brown" label="Marcus Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423984" start="19094" end="19106" title="Lee Williams (actor)" label="Lee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="19131" end="19135" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q449417" start="19138" end="19149" title="Shawn Bates" label="Shawn Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q548735" start="19187" end="19205" title="Michael Olowokandi" label="Michael Olowokandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q660241" start="19252" end="19264" title="Aries Spears" label="Aries Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069915" start="19303" end="19322" title="Yoshinobu Takahashi" label="Yoshinobu Takahashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194501" start="19358" end="19369" title="Koji Uehara" label="Koji Uehara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="19397" end="19401" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q470879" start="19404" end="19418" title="Nicolas Escudé" label="Nicolas Escudé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="19442" end="19446" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q317337" start="19449" end="19462" title="Matthew Goode" label="Matthew Goode"/>
<link wikidata="Q53560" start="19487" end="19497" title="Tommy Haas" label="Tommy Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396771" start="19538" end="19547" title="John Smit" label="John Smit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484" start="19577" end="19581" title="1979" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213257" start="19584" end="19595" title="Simon Black" label="Simon Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439" start="19630" end="19634" title="1980" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755850" start="19637" end="19649" title="Andrei Lodis" label="Andrei Lodis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30279348" start="19682" end="19694" title="Megan Rohrer" label="Megan Rohrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="19738" end="19742" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661845" start="19745" end="19758" title="Aaron Bertram" label="Aaron Bertram"/>
<link wikidata="Q553265" start="19794" end="19811" title="DeShawn Stevenson" label="DeShawn Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="19841" end="19845" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q82492" start="19848" end="19859" title="Jared Allen" label="Jared Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q497869" start="19895" end="19904" title="Iain Fyfe" label="Iain Fyfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q200566" start="19937" end="19951" title="Cobie Smulders" label="Cobie Smulders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="19971" end="19975" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q10585" start="19978" end="19988" title="Ben Foster (footballer)" label="Ben Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696456" start="20018" end="20031" title="Stephen Weiss" label="Stephen Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="20061" end="20065" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394429" start="20068" end="20084" title="Jonathan Blondel" label="Jonathan Blondel"/>
<link wikidata="Q312317" start="20114" end="20124" title="Maxi López" label="Maxi López"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431" start="20150" end="20154" title="1985" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q351839" start="20157" end="20175" title="Jari-Matti Latvala" label="Jari-Matti Latvala"/>
<link wikidata="Q183519" start="20210" end="20221" title="Leona Lewis" label="Leona Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="20263" end="20267" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q212002" start="20270" end="20282" title="Amanda Bynes" label="Amanda Bynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q460203" start="20310" end="20323" title="Stephanie Cox" label="Stephanie Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850708" start="20357" end="20375" title="Annalisa Cucinotta" label="Annalisa Cucinotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q523965" start="20402" end="20423" title="Sergio Sánchez Ortega" label="Sergio Sánchez Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="20445" end="20449" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199509" start="20452" end="20464" title="Rachel Bloom" label="Rachel Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163218" start="20514" end="20523" title="Jay Bruce" label="Jay Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053590" start="20559" end="20572" title="Yileen Gordon" label="Yileen Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067912" start="20614" end="20626" title="Jason Kipnis" label="Jason Kipnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q785876" start="20662" end="20675" title="Martyn Rooney" label="Martyn Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979570" start="20703" end="20716" title="Julie Sokolow" label="Julie Sokolow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657481" start="20768" end="20781" title="Yuval Spungin" label="Yuval Spungin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="20803" end="20807" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812651" start="20810" end="20824" title="Kam Chancellor" label="Kam Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643702" start="20860" end="20874" title="Brandon Graham" label="Brandon Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900861" start="20910" end="20923" title="Peter Hartley (footballer)" label="Peter Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q296979" start="20953" end="20961" title="Tim Krul" label="Tim Krul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425" start="20981" end="20985" title="1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153015" start="20988" end="21007" title="Romain Alessandrini" label="Romain Alessandrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155646" start="21036" end="21048" title="Israel Folau" label="Israel Folau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213900" start="21098" end="21109" title="Joel Romelo" label="Joel Romelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529830" start="21151" end="21165" title="Thisara Perera" label="Thisara Perera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="21189" end="21193" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367592" start="21196" end="21212" title="Karim Ansarifard" label="Karim Ansarifard"/>
<link wikidata="Q53336" start="21242" end="21257" title="Madison Brengle" label="Madison Brengle"/>
<link wikidata="Q299091" start="21291" end="21304" title="Sotiris Ninis" label="Sotiris Ninis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18887880" start="21332" end="21350" title="Natasha Negovanlis" label="Natasha Negovanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="21381" end="21385" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q239195" start="21388" end="21401" title="Hayley Kiyoko" label="Hayley Kiyoko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060" start="21433" end="21437" title="1992" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q731597" start="21440" end="21456" title="Simone Benedetti" label="Simone Benedetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q238685" start="21486" end="21501" title="Yuliya Yefimova" label="Yuliya Yefimova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="21520" end="21524" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268270" start="21527" end="21545" title="Pape Moussa Konaté" label="Pape Moussa Konaté"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="21570" end="21574" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666785" start="21577" end="21590" title="Kodi Nikorima" label="Kodi Nikorima"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203314" start="21633" end="21644" title="Dylann Roof" label="Dylann Roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="21670" end="21674" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q13646075" start="21677" end="21686" title="Mayo Hibi" label="Mayo Hibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="21712" end="21716" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q19708656" start="21719" end="21732" title="Gabriel Jesus" label="Gabriel Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="21756" end="21760" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137312" start="21763" end="21776" title="Paris Jackson" label="Paris Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="21814" end="21818" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q61608014" start="21821" end="21841" title="Chanel Harris-Tavita" label="Chanel Harris-Tavita"/>
<link wikidata="Q23779" start="21910" end="21912" title="AD 33" label="33"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="21915" end="21932" title="Jesus" label="Jesus of Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23562" start="21935" end="21938" title="963" label="963"/>
<link wikidata="Q543880" start="21941" end="21952" title="William III of Aquitaine" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646" start="21982" end="21986" title="1153" label="1153"/>
<link wikidata="Q11904692" start="21989" end="22010" title="al-Adil ibn al-Sallar" label="al-Adil ibn al-Sallar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19685" start="22045" end="22049" title="1171" label="1171"/>
<link wikidata="Q456888" start="22052" end="22067" title="Philip of Milly" label="Philip of Milly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639603" start="22077" end="22112" title="Grand Master of the Knights Templar" label="Grand Master of the Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227" start="22120" end="22124" title="1203" label="1203"/>
<link wikidata="Q363800" start="22127" end="22153" title="Arthur I, Duke of Brittany" label="Arthur I, Duke of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498" start="22165" end="22169" title="1253" label="1253"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394981" start="22178" end="22199" title="Richard of Chichester" label="Richard of Chichester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549" start="22201" end="22205" title="1287" label="1287"/>
<link wikidata="Q227743" start="22208" end="22224" title="Pope Honorius IV" label="Pope Honorius IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774" start="22236" end="22240" title="1325" label="1325"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427934" start="22243" end="22260" title="Nizamuddin Auliya" label="Nizamuddin Auliya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094" start="22284" end="22288" title="1350" label="1350"/>
<link wikidata="Q707899" start="22291" end="22315" title="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy" label="Odo IV, Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470" start="22327" end="22331" title="1538" label="1538"/>
<link wikidata="Q236905" start="22334" end="22373" title="Elizabeth Boleyn, Countess of Wiltshire" label="Elizabeth Boleyn, Countess of Wiltshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531" start="22385" end="22389" title="1545" label="1545"/>
<link wikidata="Q549523" start="22392" end="22410" title="Antonio de Guevara" label="Antonio de Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747" start="22472" end="22476" title="1606" label="1606"/>
<link wikidata="Q349363" start="22479" end="22513" title="Charles Blount, 8th Baron Mountjoy" label="Charles Blount, 8th Baron Mountjoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752225" start="22547" end="22573" title="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland" label="Lord Lieutenant of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6856" start="22585" end="22589" title="1630" label="1630"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113362" start="22592" end="22634" title="Christopher Villiers, 1st Earl of Anglesey" label="Christopher Villiers, 1st Earl of Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889" start="22665" end="22669" title="1637" label="1637"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714061" start="22672" end="22700" title="Joseph Yuspa Nördlinger Hahn" label="Joseph Yuspa Nördlinger Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642" start="22716" end="22720" title="1680" label="1680"/>
<link wikidata="Q239505" start="22723" end="22749" title="Shivaji" label="Chatrapati Shivaji Maharaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q83618" start="22779" end="22793" title="Maratha Empire" label="Maratha Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648" start="22805" end="22809" title="1682" label="1682"/>
<link wikidata="Q192062" start="22812" end="22837" title="Bartolomé Esteban Murillo" label="Bartolomé Esteban Murillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682" start="22879" end="22883" title="1691" label="1691"/>
<link wikidata="Q556676" start="22886" end="22898" title="Jean Petitot" label="Jean Petitot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696" start="22932" end="22936" title="1695" label="1695"/>
<link wikidata="Q304411" start="22939" end="22966" title="Melchior d&amp;#x27;Hondecoeter" label="Melchior d&amp;#x27;Hondecoeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895" start="22993" end="22997" title="1717" label="1717"/>
<link wikidata="Q378060" start="23000" end="23014" title="Jacques Ozanam" label="Jacques Ozanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947" start="23061" end="23065" title="1728" label="1728"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065277" start="23068" end="23082" title="James Anderson (lawyer)" label="James Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7805" start="23125" end="23129" title="1792" label="1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q472599" start="23132" end="23145" title="George Pocock" label="George Pocock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6894" start="23174" end="23178" title="1804" label="1804"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343396" start="23181" end="23197" title="Jędrzej Kitowicz" label="Jędrzej Kitowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004" start="23247" end="23251" title="1826" label="1826"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271284" start="23254" end="23268" title="Reginald Heber" label="Reginald Heber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7008" start="23296" end="23300" title="1827" label="1827"/>
<link wikidata="Q213579" start="23303" end="23316" title="Ernst Chladni" label="Ernst Chladni"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612" start="23359" end="23363" title="1838" label="1838"/>
<link wikidata="Q714001" start="23366" end="23392" title="François Carlo Antommarchi" label="François Carlo Antommarchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633" start="23433" end="23437" title="1844" label="1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198337" start="23440" end="23452" title="Edward Bigge" label="Edward Bigge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785778" start="23474" end="23499" title="Archdeacon of Lindisfarne" label="Archdeacon of Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640" start="23511" end="23515" title="1846" label="1846"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342964" start="23518" end="23532" title="William Braine" label="William Braine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650" start="23574" end="23578" title="1849" label="1849"/>
<link wikidata="Q243267" start="23581" end="23597" title="Juliusz Słowacki" label="Juliusz Słowacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717" start="23644" end="23648" title="1868" label="1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q217044" start="23651" end="23664" title="Franz Berwald" label="Franz Berwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806" start="23706" end="23710" title="1880" label="1880"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403058" start="23713" end="23730" title="Felicita Vestvali" label="Felicita Vestvali"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812" start="23775" end="23779" title="1882" label="1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q213626" start="23782" end="23793" title="Jesse James" label="Jesse James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847" start="23835" end="23839" title="1897" label="1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294" start="23842" end="23857" title="Johannes Brahms" label="Johannes Brahms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035" start="23918" end="23922" title="1901" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q953440" start="23925" end="23950" title="Richard D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte" label="Richard D&amp;#x27;Oyly Carte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="23997" end="24001" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q499505" start="24004" end="24024" title="Esther Hobart Morris" label="Esther Hobart Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q18787" start="24063" end="24067" title="1930" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503633" start="24070" end="24081" title="Emma Albani" label="Emma Albani"/>
<link wikidata="Q18649" start="24128" end="24132" title="1936" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q63731" start="24135" end="24152" title="Richard Hauptmann" label="Richard Hauptmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231" start="24190" end="24194" title="1941" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673838" start="24197" end="24215" title="Tachiyama Mineemon" label="Tachiyama Mineemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345471" start="24250" end="24258" title="Yokozuna" label="Yokozuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q177610" start="24278" end="24288" title="Pál Teleki" label="Pál Teleki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315094" start="24330" end="24355" title="Prime Minister of Hungary" label="Prime Minister of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q18623" start="24367" end="24371" title="1943" label="1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q58801" start="24374" end="24386" title="Conrad Veidt" label="Conrad Veidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18610" start="24436" end="24440" title="1946" label="1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q517297" start="24443" end="24457" title="Masaharu Homma" label="Masaharu Homma"/>
<link wikidata="Q18597" start="24487" end="24491" title="1950" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q55004" start="24494" end="24504" title="Kurt Weill" label="Kurt Weill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047158" start="24562" end="24579" title="Carter G. Woodson" label="Carter G. Woodson"/>
<link wikidata="Q458206" start="24633" end="24652" title="Black History Month" label="Black History Month"/>
<link wikidata="Q18591" start="24664" end="24668" title="1951" label="1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q329467" start="24671" end="24686" title="Henrik Visnapuu" label="Henrik Visnapuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272" start="24728" end="24732" title="1952" label="1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q468888" start="24735" end="24750" title="Miina Sillanpää" label="Miina Sillanpää"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311" start="24795" end="24799" title="1957" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q539170" start="24802" end="24812" title="Ned Sparks" label="Ned Sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253" start="24849" end="24853" title="1958" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676764" start="24856" end="24867" title="Jaan Kärner" label="Jaan Kärner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764" start="24905" end="24909" title="1962" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q712762" start="24912" end="24929" title="Manolis Kalomiris" label="Manolis Kalomiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474" start="24970" end="24974" title="1970" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q2874331" start="24977" end="24992" title="Avigdor Hameiri" label="Avigdor Hameiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475" start="25020" end="25024" title="1971" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q709866" start="25027" end="25041" title="Joseph Valachi" label="Joseph Valachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="25072" end="25076" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q375958" start="25079" end="25090" title="Ferde Grofé" label="Ferde Grofé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479" start="25133" end="25137" title="1975" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q264759" start="25140" end="25148" title="Mary Ure" label="Mary Ure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480" start="25186" end="25190" title="1976" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236908" start="25193" end="25210" title="David M. Dennison" label="David M. Dennison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976731" start="25263" end="25283" title="Claude-Henri Grignon" label="Claude-Henri Grignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483" start="25331" end="25335" title="1978" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q953019" start="25338" end="25347" title="Ray Noble" label="Ray Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569394" start="25408" end="25424" title="Winston Sharples" label="Winston Sharples"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437" start="25455" end="25459" title="1981" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q8677" start="25462" end="25473" title="Juan Trippe" label="Juan Trippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="25505" end="25531" title="Pan American World Airways" label="Pan American World Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436" start="25543" end="25547" title="1982" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q709133" start="25550" end="25562" title="Warren Oates" label="Warren Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434" start="25590" end="25594" title="1983" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898465" start="25597" end="25613" title="Jimmy Bloomfield" label="Jimmy Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430" start="25657" end="25661" title="1986" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q449274" start="25664" end="25675" title="Peter Pears" label="Peter Pears"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429" start="25715" end="25719" title="1987" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817527" start="25722" end="25732" title="Tom Sestak" label="Tom Sestak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426" start="25770" end="25774" title="1988" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935903" start="25777" end="25790" title="Milton Caniff" label="Milton Caniff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="25823" end="25827" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q229513" start="25830" end="25843" title="Sarah Vaughan" label="Sarah Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062" start="25872" end="25876" title="1991" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251433" start="25879" end="25892" title="Charles Goren" label="Charles Goren"/>
<link wikidata="Q128560" start="25947" end="25960" title="Graham Greene" label="Graham Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065" start="26014" end="26018" title="1993" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196241" start="26021" end="26030" title="Pinky Lee" label="Pinky Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067" start="26068" end="26072" title="1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q712169" start="26075" end="26086" title="Frank Wells" label="Frank Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068" start="26120" end="26124" title="1995" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722916" start="26127" end="26143" title="Alfred J. Billes" label="Alfred J. Billes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032400" start="26178" end="26191" title="Canadian Tire" label="Canadian Tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070" start="26203" end="26207" title="1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193187" start="26210" end="26219" title="Ron Brown" label="Ron Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003296" start="26259" end="26294" title="United States Secretary of Commerce" label="United States Secretary of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088" start="26306" end="26310" title="1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586391" start="26313" end="26326" title="John Ugelstad" label="John Ugelstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089" start="26380" end="26384" title="1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q452158" start="26387" end="26402" title="Mary Cartwright" label="Mary Cartwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091" start="26450" end="26454" title="1999" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q326299" start="26457" end="26468" title="Lionel Bart" label="Lionel Bart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534951" start="26506" end="26520" title="Geoffrey Walsh" label="Geoffrey Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985" start="26550" end="26554" title="2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q380558" start="26557" end="26572" title="Terence McKenna" label="Terence McKenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16750553" start="26627" end="26642" title="Dina Abramowicz" label="Dina Abramowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="26702" end="26706" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084820" start="26709" end="26723" title="François Gérin" label="François Gérin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024" start="26767" end="26771" title="2007" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q455685" start="26774" end="26783" title="Nina Wang" label="Nina Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004" start="26818" end="26822" title="2008" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q460452" start="26825" end="26838" title="Hrvoje Ćustić" label="Hrvoje Ćustić"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990" start="26871" end="26875" title="2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q575886" start="26878" end="26885" title="Mingote" label="Mingote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369872" start="26940" end="26957" title="Richard Descoings" label="Richard Descoings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589843" start="26999" end="27012" title="Govind Narain" label="Govind Narain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276082" start="27037" end="27058" title="List of Governors of Karnataka" label="Governor of Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q187922" start="27078" end="27097" title="Chief Jay Strongbow" label="Chief Jay Strongbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q784837" start="27136" end="27154" title="José María Zárraga" label="José María Zárraga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998" start="27198" end="27202" title="2013" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q251828" start="27205" end="27218" title="Mariví Bilbao" label="Mariví Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q235759" start="27255" end="27275" title="Ruth Prawer Jhabvala" label="Ruth Prawer Jhabvala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999" start="27328" end="27332" title="2014" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085154" start="27335" end="27350" title="Régine Deforges" label="Régine Deforges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495657" start="27411" end="27420" title="Fred Kida" label="Fred Kida"/>
<link wikidata="Q125361" start="27462" end="27487" title="Prince Michael of Prussia" label="Prince Michael of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260108" start="27507" end="27521" title="Jovan Pavlović" label="Jovan Pavlović"/>
<link wikidata="Q363822" start="27563" end="27601" title="Arthur &amp;quot;Guitar Boogie&amp;quot; Smith" label="Arthur &amp;quot;Guitar Boogie&amp;quot; Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002" start="27656" end="27660" title="2015" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422126" start="27663" end="27674" title="Sarah Brady" label="Sarah Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312145" start="27724" end="27733" title="Bob Burns (drummer)" label="Bob Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778134" start="27786" end="27799" title="Shmuel Wosner" label="Shmuel Wosner"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245" start="27846" end="27850" title="2016" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q296350" start="27853" end="27867" title="Cesare Maldini" label="Cesare Maldini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707608" start="27919" end="27936" title="Joe Medicine Crow" label="Joe Medicine Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q739072" start="28004" end="28013" title="Koji Wada" label="Koji Wada"/>
<link wikidata="Q25290" start="28057" end="28061" title="2017" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117321" start="28064" end="28079" title="Kishori Amonkar" label="Kishori Amonkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q49628" start="28118" end="28122" title="2021" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q370262" start="28125" end="28138" title="Stan Stephens" label="Stan Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q878613" start="28175" end="28194" title="Governor of Montana" label="Governor of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q49625" start="28206" end="28210" title="2022" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312230" start="28213" end="28223" title="June Brown" label="June Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q49619" start="28252" end="28256" title="2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q63859913" start="28259" end="28270" title="Bob Lanigan" label="Bob Lanigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491035" start="28322" end="28335" title="Gaetano Pesce" label="Gaetano Pesce"/>
<link wikidata="Q688564" start="28419" end="28428" title="feast day" label="feast day"/>
<link wikidata="Q359116" start="28433" end="28458" title="Agape, Chionia, and Irene" label="Agape, Chionia, and Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627230" start="28462" end="28474" title="Burgundofara" label="Burgundofara"/>
<link wikidata="Q114492" start="28478" end="28493" title="Luigi Scrosoppi" label="Luigi Scrosoppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394981" start="28497" end="28518" title="Richard of Chichester" label="Richard of Chichester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781981" start="28522" end="28558" title="April 3 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)" label="April 3 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2282" wikidata="Q455236" url="?curid=2282" title="Alexis Korner">
<text>Alexis Andrew Nicholas Koerner (19 April 1928 – 1 January 1984), known professionally as Alexis Korner, was a British blues musician and radio broadcaster, who has sometimes been referred to as &quot;a founding father of British blues&quot;. A major influence on the sound of the British music scene in the 1960s, he was instrumental in the formation of several notable British bands including The Rolling Stones and Free. Korner was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in the musical influence category in 2024.

==Early career==
Alexis Andrew Nicholas Koerner was born on 19 April 1928 in Paris, France, to an Austrian Jewish father and a mother of Greek, Turkish and Austrian descent. He spent his childhood in France, Switzerland and North Africa, and arrived in London in 1940 after the start of the Second World War. One memory of his youth was listening to a record by black pianist Jimmy Yancey during a German air raid. Korner said, &quot;From then on all I wanted to do was play the blues.&quot;

After the war, Korner played piano and guitar (his first guitar was built by friend and author Sydney Hopkins, who wrote &quot;Mister God, This Is Anna&quot;) and in 1949 joined Chris Barber&#x27;s Jazz Band where he met blues harmonica player Cyril Davies. They started playing together as a duo, started the influential London Blues and Barrelhouse Club in 1955 and made their first record together in 1957.

Korner made his first official record on Decca Records DFE 6286 in the company of Ken Colyer&#x27;s Skiffle Group. His talent extended to playing mandolin on one of the tracks of this British EP, recorded in London on 28 July 1955. Korner encouraged many American blues artists, previously virtually unknown in Britain, to perform at the London Blues and Barrelhouse Club, which he established with Davies at the Round House pub in Soho.

==The 1960s==

In 1961, Korner and Davies formed Blues Incorporated, initially a loose-knit group of musicians with a shared love of electric blues and R&amp;B music. The group included, at various times, Charlie Watts, Jack Bruce, Ginger Baker, Long John Baldry, Graham Bond, Danny Thompson and Dick Heckstall-Smith. It also attracted a wider crowd of mostly younger fans, some of whom occasionally performed with the group, including Mick Jagger, Keith Richards, Brian Jones, Geoff Bradford, Rod Stewart, John Mayall, and Jimmy Page.

Although Cyril Davies left the group in late 1962, Blues Incorporated continued to record, with Korner at the helm, until 1966. However, by that time its originally stellar line-up (and crowd of followers) had mostly left to start their own bands. While his one-time acolytes, the Rolling Stones and Cream, made the front pages of music magazines all over the world, Korner was relegated to the role of &#x27;elder statesman&#x27;.

In 1966, Korner formed the trio Free At Last with Hughie Flint and Binky McKenzie. Flint later recalled &quot;I played with Alexis, right after leaving The Bluesbreakers, in a trio, which Alexis named &quot;Free At Last&quot;, a sort of mini and slightly restricted version of Blues Incorporated. Playing with Alexis was very loose. We would play anything from Percy Mayfield&#x27;s ‘River&#x27;s Invitation&#x27; to Charles Mingus&#x27; ‘Better Get It In Your Soul&#x27; – with lots of freaky guitar and bass solos. Alexis, like John Mayall had the most eclectic taste in music, very knowledgeable, and generous, and I am indebted to both of them for my wide approach to music&quot;.

Although &quot;Free At Last&quot; was short-lived, Korner ensured its name lived on in part by christening another young group of aspiring musicians, Free. Korner was instrumental in the formation of the band in April 1968, and continued to mentor them until they secured a deal with Island Records.

Although he himself was a blues purist, Korner criticised better-known British blues musicians during the blues boom of the late 1960s for their blind adherence to Chicago blues, as if the music came in no other form. He liked to surround himself with jazz musicians and often performed with a horn section drawn from a pool that included, among others, saxophone players Art Themen, Mel Collins, Dick Heckstall-Smith, and Lol Coxhill.

While touring Scandinavia he formed the band New Church with guitarist and singer Peter Thorup. They subsequently were one of the support bands at the Rolling Stones Free Concert in Hyde Park, London, on 5 July 1969. Jimmy Page reportedly found out about a new singer, Robert Plant, who had been jamming with Korner, who wondered why Plant had not yet been discovered. Plant and Korner were recording an album with Plant on vocals until Page had asked him to join &quot;the New Yardbirds&quot;, a.k.a. Led Zeppelin. Only two songs are in circulation from these recordings: &quot;Steal Away&quot; and &quot;Operator&quot;. Korner gave one of his last radio interviews to BBC Midlands on the &quot;Record Collectors Show&quot; with Mike Adams and Chris Savory.

==Broadcasting==
In the 1960s Korner began a media career, working initially as a showbusiness interviewer and then on ITV&#x27;s &quot;Five O&#x27;Clock Club&quot;, a children&#x27;s TV show. Korner also wrote about blues for the music papers, and continued to maintain his own career as a blues artist, especially in Europe. Korner&#x27;s main career in the 1970s was in broadcasting. In 1973, he presented a six-part documentary on BBC Radio 1, &quot;The Rolling Stones Story&quot;, and in 1977 he established a Sunday-night show on Radio 1, &quot;Alexis Korner&#x27;s Blues and Soul Show&quot;, which ran until 1981. He also used his gravelly voice to great effect as an advertising voice-over artist.
In 1983, Korner presented the 13 part BBC Radio 1 series, Guitar Greats, interviewing each of the artists, and playing their music.

==1970s==
===CCS period===
In 1970, Korner and Thorup formed a big-band ensemble, CCS – short for &quot;The Collective Consciousness Society&quot; – which had several hit singles produced by Mickie Most, including a version of Led Zeppelin&#x27;s &quot;Whole Lotta Love&quot;, which was used as the theme for BBC&#x27;s &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; between 1970 and 1981. Another instrumental called &quot;Brother&quot; was used as the theme to the BBC Radio 1 Top 20/40 when Tom Browne/Simon Bates presented the programme in the 1970s. It was also used in the 1990s on Radio Luxembourg for the Top 20 Singles chart. This was the period of Korner&#x27;s greatest commercial success in the UK. In 1973, he provided a voice part for the Hot Chocolate single release Brother Louie.

===1970s to 1984===

In 1973, he and Peter Thorup formed another group, Snape, with Boz Burrell, Mel Collins, and Ian Wallace, who were previously together in King Crimson. Korner also played on B.B. King&#x27;s &quot;In London&quot; album, and cut his own, similar &quot;supersession&quot; album; &quot;Get Off My Cloud&quot;, with Keith Richards, Steve Marriott, Peter Frampton, Nicky Hopkins and members of Joe Cocker&#x27;s Grease Band. In the mid-1970s, while touring Germany, Korner established an intensive working relationship with bassist Colin Hodgkinson who played for the support act Back Door. They would continue to collaborate right up until Korner&#x27;s death.

In 1978, for Korner&#x27;s 50th birthday, an all-star concert was held featuring many of his above-mentioned friends, as well as Eric Clapton, Paul Jones, Chris Farlowe, Zoot Money and others, which was later released as &quot;The Party Album&quot;, and as a video.

In 1981, Korner joined another &quot;supergroup&quot;, Rocket 88, a project led by Ian Stewart based on boogie-woogie keyboard players, which featured a rhythm section comprising Jack Bruce and Charlie Watts, among others, as well as a horn section. They toured Europe and released an album on Atlantic Records. He played in Italy with Paul Jones and the Blues Society of Italian bluesman Guido Toffoletti.

==Family life and death==
In 1950, Korner married Roberta Melville (died 2021), daughter of art critic Robert Melville. He had a daughter, singer Sappho Gillett Korner (died 2006), and two sons, guitarist Nicholas &#x27;Nico&#x27; Korner (died 1989) and sound engineer Damian Korner (died 2008).

Alexis Korner died in London from lung cancer on 1 January 1984, at the age of 55.

Korner was posthumously inducted, by Keith Richards, into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2024 in the musical influence category. 

==Album discography (selected UK and other releases)==
* &quot;Blues from the Roundhouse&quot; 10-inch (1957) – Alexis Korner&#x27;s Breakdown Group
* &quot;R&amp;B from the Marquee&quot; (1962) – Alexis Korner&#x27;s Blues Incorporated
* &quot;Red Hot from Alex&quot; (1964) – Alexis Korner&#x27;s Blues Incorporated
* &quot;At the Cavern&quot; (1964) – Alexis Korner&#x27;s Blues Incorporated
* &quot;Alexis Korner&#x27;s Blues Incorporated&quot; (1965) – Alexis Korner&#x27;s Blues Incorporated
* &quot;Sky High&quot; (1966) – Alexis Korner Blues Incorporated
* &quot;I Wonder Who&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Alexis Korner&#x27;s Blues Incorporated&quot; (re-issue of &quot;Sky High&quot;) – Alexis Korner&#x27;s Blues Incorporated
* &quot;A New Generation of Blues&quot; (1968)
* &quot;Both Sides&quot; (1970) – New Church
* &quot;CCS 1st&quot; (1970) – CCS
* &quot;Alexis Korner&quot; (1971)
* &quot;Bootleg Him!&quot; (1972)
* &quot;CCS 2nd&quot; (1972) – CCS
* &quot;Accidentally Borne in New Orleans&quot; (1972) – with Peter Thorup; Snape
* &quot;Live on Tour in Germany&quot; (1973) – with Peter Thorup; Snape
* &quot;The Best Band in the Land&quot; (1973) – CCS
* &quot;Alexis Korner&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Get Off My Cloud&quot; (1975)
* &quot;The Lost Album&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Just Easy&quot; (1978)
* &quot;The Party Album&quot; (1979) – Alexis Korner and Friends
* &quot;Me&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Rocket 88&quot; (1981) – Rocket 88
* &quot;Juvenile Delinquent&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Testament&quot; (1985) – with Colin Hodgkinson
* &quot;Live in Paris&quot; (1988) – with Colin Hodgkinson

==Bibliography==
* Bob Brunning (1986), &quot;Blues: The British Connection&quot;, London: Helter Skelter, 2002. 
* Bob Brunning, &quot;The Fleetwood Mac Story: Rumours and Lies&quot;, Omnibus Press, 2004; foreword by B.B. King
* Dick Heckstall-Smith (2004), &quot;The Safest Place in the World: A Personal History of British Rhythm and Blues&quot;, Clear Books. . First Edition: &quot;Blowing the Blues – Fifty Years Playing the British Blues&quot;
* Christopher Hjort, &quot;Strange Brew: Eric Clapton and the British Blues Boom, 1965–1970&quot;, foreword by John Mayall, Jawbone, 2007. 
* Harry Shapiro, &quot;Alexis Korner: The Biography&quot;, London: Bloomsbury Publishing PLC, 1997; Discography by Mark Troster. 

==References==
==External links==

* [ Biography] at AllMusic
* Biography at British Music Experience
* Alexis Korner page at Radio Rewind
* BBC Radio 2 radio documentary about Alexis Korner on Vimeo
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q455236" start="0" end="30" title="Alexis Korner" label="Alexis Andrew Nicholas Koerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q455236" start="89" end="102" title="Alexis Korner" label="Alexis Korner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="118" end="123" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q918542" start="221" end="234" title="British blues" label="British blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="394" end="412" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q45650" start="417" end="421" title="Free (band)" label="Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="452" end="478" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346384" start="899" end="911" title="Jimmy Yancey" label="Jimmy Yancey"/>
<link wikidata="Q841418" start="928" end="936" title="Strategic bombing" label="air raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571779" start="1143" end="1167" title="Mister God, This Is Anna" label="Mister God, This Is Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q491092" start="1194" end="1206" title="Chris Barber" label="Chris Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q563395" start="1260" end="1272" title="Cyril Davies" label="Cyril Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q85781963" start="1338" end="1371" title="London Blues and Barrelhouse Club" label="London Blues and Barrelhouse Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="1468" end="1481" title="Decca Records" label="Decca Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738588" start="1509" end="1519" title="Ken Colyer" label="Ken Colyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q606089" start="1527" end="1534" title="Skiffle" label="Skiffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="1573" end="1581" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="1619" end="1621" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q124010" start="1859" end="1863" title="Soho" label="Soho"/>
<link wikidata="Q886036" start="1915" end="1933" title="Blues Incorporated" label="Blues Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q640097" start="1999" end="2013" title="electric blues" label="electric blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="2018" end="2025" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q216051" start="2071" end="2084" title="Charlie Watts" label="Charlie Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q313683" start="2086" end="2096" title="Jack Bruce" label="Jack Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q122232" start="2098" end="2110" title="Ginger Baker" label="Ginger Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q712880" start="2112" end="2128" title="Long John Baldry" label="Long John Baldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q933013" start="2130" end="2141" title="Graham Bond" label="Graham Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164775" start="2143" end="2157" title="Danny Thompson" label="Danny Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209691" start="2162" end="2182" title="Dick Heckstall-Smith" label="Dick Heckstall-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="2302" end="2313" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q189599" start="2315" end="2329" title="Keith Richards" label="Keith Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q204943" start="2331" end="2342" title="Brian Jones" label="Brian Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760209" start="2344" end="2358" title="Geoff Bradford (musician)" label="Geoff Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q182655" start="2360" end="2371" title="Rod Stewart" label="Rod Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q316282" start="2373" end="2384" title="John Mayall" label="John Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="2390" end="2400" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q203736" start="2703" end="2708" title="Cream (band)" label="Cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634708" start="2886" end="2898" title="Hughie Flint" label="Hughie Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q58100339" start="2903" end="2917" title="Binky McKenzie" label="Binky McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q886072" start="2988" end="3005" title="John Mayall &amp;amp; the Bluesbreakers" label="The Bluesbreakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q322600" start="3197" end="3211" title="Percy Mayfield" label="Percy Mayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q107432" start="3253" end="3267" title="Charles Mingus" label="Charles Mingus"/>
<link wikidata="Q316282" start="3366" end="3377" title="John Mayall" label="John Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q45650" start="3672" end="3676" title="Free (band)" label="Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q190585" start="3806" end="3820" title="Island Records" label="Island Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071873" start="3987" end="4000" title="Chicago blues" label="Chicago blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="4075" end="4079" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902628" start="4117" end="4129" title="horn section" label="horn section"/>
<link wikidata="Q705760" start="4195" end="4205" title="Art Themen" label="Art Themen"/>
<link wikidata="Q364869" start="4207" end="4218" title="Mel Collins" label="Mel Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209691" start="4220" end="4240" title="Dick Heckstall-Smith" label="Dick Heckstall-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868645" start="4246" end="4257" title="Lol Coxhill" label="Lol Coxhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="4274" end="4285" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q351977" start="4342" end="4354" title="Peter Thorup" label="Peter Thorup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316624" start="4411" end="4438" title="Stones in the Park" label="Rolling Stones Free Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738" start="4442" end="4451" title="Hyde Park, London" label="Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q165467" start="4477" end="4487" title="Jimmy Page" label="Jimmy Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q428223" start="4529" end="4541" title="Robert Plant" label="Robert Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q192725" start="4738" end="4747" title="Yardbirds" label="Yardbirds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="4762" end="4774" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="5139" end="5142" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="5455" end="5466" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108971" start="5941" end="5944" title="C. C. S. (pop group)" label="CCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q331030" start="6050" end="6061" title="Mickie Most" label="Mickie Most"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="6086" end="6098" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q643423" start="6112" end="6128" title="Whole Lotta Love" label="Whole Lotta Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="6185" end="6200" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="6307" end="6318" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815105" start="6334" end="6344" title="Tom Browne (broadcaster and actor)" label="Tom Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16107210" start="6345" end="6356" title="Simon Bates" label="Simon Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368881" start="6593" end="6606" title="Hot Chocolate" label="Hot Chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926263" start="6622" end="6635" title="Brother Louie (Hot Chocolate song)" label="Brother Louie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041904" start="6722" end="6733" title="Boz Burrell" label="Boz Burrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q364869" start="6735" end="6746" title="Mel Collins" label="Mel Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864685" start="6752" end="6763" title="Ian Wallace (drummer)" label="Ian Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="6797" end="6809" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188969" start="6833" end="6842" title="B.B. King" label="B.B. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q189599" start="6971" end="6985" title="Keith Richards" label="Keith Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q506950" start="6987" end="7001" title="Steve Marriott" label="Steve Marriott"/>
<link wikidata="Q337089" start="7003" end="7017" title="Peter Frampton" label="Peter Frampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28348" start="7019" end="7032" title="Nicky Hopkins" label="Nicky Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q190076" start="7048" end="7058" title="Joe Cocker" label="Joe Cocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q463025" start="7066" end="7077" title="The Grease Band" label="Grease Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q324058" start="7186" end="7202" title="Colin Hodgkinson" label="Colin Hodgkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q798304" start="7234" end="7243" title="Back Door (jazz trio)" label="Back Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="7446" end="7458" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q123870" start="7460" end="7470" title="Paul Jones (singer)" label="Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077211" start="7472" end="7485" title="Chris Farlowe" label="Chris Farlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q220351" start="7487" end="7497" title="Zoot Money" label="Zoot Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413360" start="7544" end="7559" title="The Party Album (Alexis Korner album)" label="The Party Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160666" start="7639" end="7648" title="Rocket 88 (band)" label="Rocket 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q319737" start="7667" end="7678" title="Ian Stewart (musician)" label="Ian Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q212952" start="7688" end="7701" title="boogie-woogie" label="boogie-woogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456785" start="7737" end="7751" title="rhythm section" label="rhythm section"/>
<link wikidata="Q313683" start="7763" end="7773" title="Jack Bruce" label="Jack Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q216051" start="7778" end="7791" title="Charlie Watts" label="Charlie Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902628" start="7820" end="7832" title="horn section" label="horn section"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="7878" end="7894" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q123870" start="7920" end="7930" title="Paul Jones (singer)" label="Paul Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347620" start="8095" end="8110" title="Robert Melville (art critic)" label="Robert Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="8323" end="8334" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189599" start="8410" end="8424" title="Keith Richards" label="Keith Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="8435" end="8461" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123772" start="8664" end="8688" title="R&amp;amp;B from the Marquee" label="R&amp;amp;B from the Marquee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005998" start="9335" end="9342" title="C.C.S. (album)" label="CCS 1st"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005999" start="9439" end="9446" title="C.C.S. 2 (album)" label="CCS 2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243545" start="9628" end="9653" title="The Best Band in the Land" label="The Best Band in the Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413360" start="9821" end="9836" title="The Party Album (Alexis Korner album)" label="The Party Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931965" start="10120" end="10132" title="Bob Brunning" label="Bob Brunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q106648" start="10241" end="10254" title="Fleetwood Mac" label="Fleetwood Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q188969" start="10319" end="10328" title="B.B. King" label="B.B. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="10592" end="10604" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q918542" start="10613" end="10626" title="British Blues" label="British Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q316282" start="10662" end="10673" title="John Mayall" label="John Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="10875" end="10883" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156376" start="11016" end="11021" title="Vimeo" label="Vimeo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2284" wikidata="Q745798" url="?curid=2284" title="Assault gun">
<text>An assault gun (from , , meaning &quot;assault gun&quot;) is a type of armored infantry support vehicle and self-propelled artillery, mounting an infantry support gun on a protected self-propelled chassis, intended for providing infantry with heavy direct fire support during engagement, especially against other infantry or fortified positions, secondarily also giving some armored protection and anti-armor capability. 

Assault guns were pioneered by the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany during the 1930s, initially being self-propelled guns with direct fire in mind (such as the Soviet SU-5-1), with Germany introducing the first purpose-built (and purpose-named) assault gun, the , in 1940.

== Concept, doctrine and design ==
The concept of the assault gun can be simplified into: a protected self propelled infantry gun, intended for the infantry brigades, in order to give infantry: mobile heavy direct fire capability against protected enemy positions and threats, which can move with infantry in assaults, and secondarily give some armored protection against enemy fire.

Historically, the concept of assault guns was very similar to that of the infantry tank, as both were combat vehicles intended to accompany infantry formations into battle, but where assault gun designs often skipped tank features and design elements deemed unnecessary for reasons of cost and doctrine. However, during World War II assault guns were more mobile than tanks and could be utilized as both direct and indirect fire artillery. Although they could approximate the firepower of a tank, assault guns mostly fired high explosive shells at relatively low velocities, which were well suited for their role of knocking out hard points such as fortified positions and buildings. They were not intended to be deployed as tank substitutes or dedicated tank destroyers. Nevertheless, as the conflict progressed, the increasing proliferation of tanks on the battlefield forced many assault gun units to engage armor in defense of the infantry, and led to armies becoming more dependent on multipurpose designs which combined the traditionally separate roles of an assault gun and a tank destroyer.

German and Soviet assault guns introduced during World War II usually carried their main armament in a fully enclosed casemate rather than a gun turret. Although this limited the field of fire and traverse of the armament, it also had the advantage of a reduced silhouette and simplified the manufacturing process. The United States never developed a purpose-built assault gun during the war, although it did modify preexisting armored fighting vehicles for that role, including the M4 Sherman (as the M4(105)), the M5 Stuart (as the M8 Scott), and the M3 half-track (as the T19 Howitzer Motor Carriage). The classic assault gun concept was largely abandoned during the postwar era in favor of tanks or multipurpose tank destroyers attached to infantry formations, which were also capable of providing direct fire support as needed. In the United States and most Western countries, the assault gun ceased to be recognized as a unique niche, with individual examples being classified either as a self-propelled howitzer or a tank, one exception being Sweden, which continued to develop casemate assault guns post-war, such as the Infanterikanonvagn 72, all the way into the 1960s before settling on a turreted design in 1968, becoming the Infanterikanonvagn 91. The Soviet Union continued funding development of new assault guns as late as 1967, although few of its postwar designs were adopted in large numbers. In Soviet and Eastern European armies, the traditional assault gun was primarily superseded by tank destroyers, such as the SU-100, which is capable of supporting either infantry or armor. Since the 1980s, the multi-purpose assault gun concept has seen a resurgence, mainly in the form of turreted wheeled designs, such as the South African Rooikat and Italian B1 Centauro. Today, modern assault guns include the Japanese Type 16 maneuver combat vehicle and the American M1128 Stryker and M10 Booker.

== History ==

=== World War II ===
Assault guns were primarily developed during World War II by the forces of Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. Early in the war, the Germans began to create makeshift assault guns by mounting their infantry support weapons on the bed of a truck or on obsolete tanks with the turret removed. Later in the war, both the Germans and the Soviets introduced fully armoured purpose-built assault guns into their arsenals.

Early on, the Soviets built the KV-2, a variant of the KV-1 heavy tank with a short-barreled 152 mm howitzer mounted in an oversized turret. This was not a success in battle, and was replaced with a very successful series of turretless assault guns: the SU-76, SU-122, and the heavy SU-152, which were followed by the ISU-122 and ISU-152 on the new IS heavy tank chassis.
The primary German assault gun was the (StuG III). At about the same time (March 1942) as the howitzer-like KwK 37 gun was dropped from the Panzer IV&#x27;s use, its &quot;Sturmkanone&quot; equivalent in the StuG III up to that time, was likewise replaced with a longer-barreled, high-velocity dual-purpose 75 mm gun that had also been derived from the successful PaK 40 anti-tank towed artillery piece. The Germans also built a number of other fully armoured turretless assault guns, including the StuG IV, StuIG 33B, and . This last one was a very heavy vehicle, and was built only in small quantities.

Battalions of assault guns, usually StuG IIIs, commonly replaced the intended panzer battalion in the German divisions due to the chronic shortage of tanks, and were sometimes used as makeshifts even in the panzer divisions. Independent battalions were also deployed as &quot;stiffeners&quot; for infantry divisions, and the StuG III&#x27;s anti-tank capabilities bolstered dwindling tank numbers on the Eastern and Western fronts.
US and UK forces also deployed vehicles designed for a close support role, but these were conventional tanks whose only significant modification was the replacement of the main gun with a howitzer. Two versions of the American Sherman tank were armed with the M4 105 mm howitzer, the M4(105) and the M4A3(105); these were designated assault guns in US usage of the term. The M8 Scott, based on the chassis of the M5 Stuart light tank, was also an assault cannon and carried a 75 mm short howitzer. The Churchill, Centaur and Cromwell tanks were all produced in versions armed with 95 mm howitzers: the Churchill Mark V and Mark VIII, the Centaur Mark IV and the Cromwell Mark VI. Earlier British tanks, such as the Crusader cruiser tank and the Matilda II Infantry tank were produced in versions armed with the 3-inch howitzer; the first versions of the Churchill tank also had this gun in a hull mounting. American tank destroyer units were often used in the assault gun role for infantry support.

The AVRE version of the Churchill tank was armed with a spigot mortar that fired a HE-filled projectile (nicknamed the &quot;Flying Dustbin&quot;) . Its task was to attack fortified positions such as bunkers at close range (see Hobart&#x27;s Funnies).

=== Since World War II ===
In the post-World War II era, most vehicles fitting into an &quot;assault gun&quot; category were developed as a light-weight, air-deployable, direct fire combat vehicles for use with airborne troops. Those weapons were either based on light utility vehicles or small tracked vehicles and the airborne troops thus always fought at a distinct disadvantage in terms of heavy weapons. The Soviet Union and the United States were the most attracted to the idea of providing this capability to traditionally light airborne forces. Their answers to the problem were similar, with the United States developing the M56 Scorpion and the Soviet Union developing the ASU-57, both essentially airdroppable light anti-tank guns.
The Soviets went on to develop an improved airdroppable assault gun, the ASU-85, which served through the 1980s, while their SU-100 remained in service with Communist countries, including Vietnam and Cuba, years after World War II. The US M56 and another armoured vehicle, the M50 Ontos, were to be the last of the more traditional assault guns in US service. Improvised arrangements such as M113 personnel carriers with recoilless rifles were quickly replaced by missile carrier vehicles in the anti-tank role.

The only vehicle with the qualities of an assault gun to be fielded after the removal of the M50 and M56 from service within the US military was the M551 Sheridan. The Sheridan&#x27;s gun was a low-velocity weapon suitable in the assault role, but with the addition of the Shillelagh missile could double in the anti-tank role as well. The Sheridan, however, was not developed as an assault gun but as a light reconnaissance vehicle.

Currently, there appears to be a move toward wheeled vehicles fitting a &quot;tank destroyer&quot; or &quot;assault gun&quot; role, such as the M1128 mobile gun system of the United States Army, the B1 Centauro wheeled tank destroyer of the Italian and Spanish Armies, the Chinese anti-tank gun PTL-02 and ZBL08 assault gun, and the French AMX-10 RC heavy armoured car. While these vehicles might be useful in a direct fire role, none were developed with this specifically in mind, reminiscent of the use of tank destroyers by the US military in the assault gun role during World War II.

== Assault guns per nation ==
=== Germany ===

* 1940 – Sturmgeschütz III
* 1940 – Sturmpanzer I Bison
* 1941 – Sturmpanzer II
* 1942 – Sturmpanzer III
* 1942 – Sturm-Infanteriegeschütz 33B
* 1943 – Sturmhaubitze 42
* 1943 – Sturmgeschütz IV
* 1943 – Sturmpanzer IV Stupa
* 1943 – Sturmpanzer 38(t) Grille Ausf. H
* 1944 – Sturmpanzer 38(t) Grille Ausf. K
* 1944 – Sturmpanzer VI Sturmtiger

=== Hungary ===

* 1943 – 43M Zrínyi II
* 1944 – 44M Zrínyi I

=== Sweden ===

* 1943 – Stormpjäs fm/43
* 1944 – Stormpjäs fm/43-44
* 1944 – Stormartillerivagn m/43
* 1953 – Infanterikanonvagn 72
* 1957 – Infanterikanonvagn 73
* 1957 – Infanterikanonvagn 102
* 1957 – Infanterikanonvagn 103
* 1976 – Infanterikanonvagn 91
* 1994 – Stridsfordon 90105
* 1998 – Stridsfordon 90120

=== USA ===

* 1941 – T18 HMC
* 1942 – M8 Scott
* 1944 – M4 Sherman 105
* 1953 – M56 Scorpion
* 1956 – M50 Ontos
* 1969 – M551 Sheridan
* 1985 – CCVL
* 1992 – M8 AGS
* 2002 – M1128 Stryker (LAV-105)
* 2021 – XM1302 MPF
* 2022 – M10 Booker

== See also ==
* 
* List of infantry support guns

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q745798" start="3" end="14" title="Assault gun" label="assault gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="71" end="103" title="Armored fighting vehicle" label="armored infantry support vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000908" start="108" end="132" title="self-propelled artillery" label="self-propelled artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141166" start="146" end="166" title="infantry support gun" label="infantry support gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="229" end="237" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097241" start="249" end="260" title="direct fire" label="direct fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="325" end="334" title="fortified" label="fortified"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="458" end="470" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="475" end="487" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q96474563" start="587" end="593" title="SU-5-1" label="SU-5-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="786" end="795" title="Armoured fighting vehicle" label="protected"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000908" start="796" end="810" title="Self-propelled artillery" label="self propelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141166" start="811" end="823" title="infantry gun" label="infantry gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="842" end="858" title="infantry brigade" label="infantry brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097241" start="901" end="912" title="direct fire" label="direct fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267919" start="1153" end="1166" title="infantry tank" label="infantry tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q117850" start="1373" end="1381" title="doctrine" label="doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1399" end="1411" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097656" start="1494" end="1507" title="indirect fire" label="indirect fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="1602" end="1623" title="High explosive shell" label="high explosive shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="1834" end="1848" title="tank destroyer" label="tank destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q89521" start="2297" end="2305" title="casemate" label="casemate"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="2320" end="2330" title="gun turret" label="gun turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q3744583" start="2358" end="2371" title="field of fire" label="field of fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q191643" start="2662" end="2672" title="M4 Sherman" label="M4 Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q502910" start="2695" end="2704" title="M5 Stuart" label="M5 Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316016" start="2713" end="2721" title="M8 Scott" label="M8 Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q696879" start="2732" end="2745" title="M3 half-track" label="M3 half-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q16271655" start="2754" end="2781" title="T19 Howitzer Motor Carriage" label="T19 Howitzer Motor Carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="3229" end="3235" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10535358" start="3308" end="3329" title="Infanterikanonvagn 72" label="Infanterikanonvagn 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635921" start="3417" end="3438" title="Infanterikanonvagn 91" label="Infanterikanonvagn 91"/>
<link wikidata="Q315671" start="3715" end="3721" title="SU-100" label="SU-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756471" start="3932" end="3939" title="Rooikat" label="Rooikat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053528" start="3952" end="3963" title="B1 Centauro" label="B1 Centauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748449" start="4013" end="4044" title="Type 16 maneuver combat vehicle" label="Type 16 maneuver combat vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500737" start="4062" end="4075" title="M1128 mobile gun system" label="M1128 Stryker"/>
<link wikidata="Q83565164" start="4080" end="4090" title="M10 Booker" label="M10 Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4174" end="4186" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="4204" end="4216" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="4225" end="4237" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141166" start="4326" end="4349" title="infantry support weapon" label="infantry support weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="4367" end="4372" title="truck" label="truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="4388" end="4392" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q568312" start="4487" end="4495" title="armoured warfare" label="armoured"/>
<link wikidata="Q622299" start="4577" end="4581" title="KV-2" label="KV-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q622299" start="4600" end="4604" title="KV-1 (tank)" label="KV-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q192203" start="4638" end="4653" title="152 mm howitzer M1938 (M-10)" label="152 mm howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q645903" start="4799" end="4804" title="SU-76" label="SU-76"/>
<link wikidata="Q174720" start="4806" end="4812" title="SU-122" label="SU-122"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435707" start="4828" end="4834" title="SU-152" label="SU-152"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632326" start="4863" end="4870" title="ISU-122" label="ISU-122"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420351" start="4875" end="4882" title="ISU-152" label="ISU-152"/>
<link wikidata="Q779903" start="4894" end="4896" title="Iosif Stalin tank" label="IS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068107" start="4908" end="4915" title="chassis" label="chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492422" start="5224" end="5233" title="7.5 cm KwK 40" label="75 mm gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q259122" start="5281" end="5287" title="PaK 40" label="PaK 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q156165" start="5416" end="5423" title="StuG IV" label="StuG IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q13406467" start="5425" end="5434" title="Sturm-Infanteriegeschütz 33B" label="StuIG 33B"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="5523" end="5532" title="Battalion" label="Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683569" start="5601" end="5607" title="panzer" label="panzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="5632" end="5641" title="division (military)" label="divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779157" start="5730" end="5745" title="panzer division" label="panzer division"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="5820" end="5828" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="5864" end="5873" title="anti-tank" label="anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q191643" start="6182" end="6194" title="M4 Sherman" label="Sherman tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q918486" start="6215" end="6233" title="M101 howitzer" label="M4 105 mm howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316016" start="6330" end="6338" title="M8 Scott" label="M8 Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q502910" start="6368" end="6377" title="M5 Stuart" label="M5 Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520061" start="6431" end="6451" title="M116 howitzer" label="75 mm short howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q696182" start="6457" end="6466" title="Churchill tank" label="Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q304303" start="6480" end="6488" title="Cromwell tank" label="Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100886" start="6536" end="6551" title="Ordnance QF 95 mm Howitzer" label="95 mm howitzers"/>
<link wikidata="Q696083" start="6670" end="6691" title="Crusader tank" label="Crusader cruiser tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q502412" start="6700" end="6724" title="Matilda II" label="Matilda II Infantry tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100889" start="6766" end="6781" title="Ordnance QF 3-inch howitzer" label="3-inch howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="6871" end="6885" title="tank destroyer" label="tank destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7011" end="7024" title="Mortar (weapon)#Spigot mortar" label="spigot mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="7038" end="7040" title="High explosive" label="HE"/>
<link wikidata="Q91122" start="7155" end="7161" title="bunker" label="bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q716180" start="7183" end="7204" title="Hobart&amp;#x27;s Funnies" label="Hobart&amp;#x27;s Funnies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546105" start="7471" end="7493" title="Military light utility vehicle" label="light utility vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="7503" end="7519" title="tracked vehicles" label="tracked vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q542319" start="7842" end="7854" title="M56 Scorpion" label="M56 Scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q298078" start="7891" end="7897" title="ASU-57" label="ASU-57"/>
<link wikidata="Q298080" start="8024" end="8030" title="ASU-85" label="ASU-85"/>
<link wikidata="Q315671" start="8076" end="8082" title="SU-100" label="SU-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881005" start="8228" end="8237" title="M50 Ontos" label="M50 Ontos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8343" end="8366" title="M113 Armored Personnel Carrier#Armament" label="M113 personnel carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q495189" start="8613" end="8626" title="M551 Sheridan" label="M551 Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881423" start="8737" end="8755" title="Shillelagh missile" label="Shillelagh missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500737" start="9043" end="9066" title="M1128 mobile gun system" label="M1128 mobile gun system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="9074" end="9092" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053528" start="9098" end="9109" title="B1 Centauro" label="B1 Centauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="9140" end="9147" title="Italian Army" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322103" start="9152" end="9166" title="Spanish Army" label="Spanish Armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299034" start="9194" end="9200" title="PTL-02" label="PTL-02"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053519" start="9205" end="9222" title="Type 08" label="ZBL08 assault gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q295405" start="9239" end="9248" title="AMX-10 RC" label="AMX-10 RC"/>
<link wikidata="Q117936" start="9544" end="9561" title="Sturmgeschütz III" label="Sturmgeschütz III"/>
<link wikidata="Q81094" start="9571" end="9590" title="15 cm sIG 33 (Sf) auf Panzerkampfwagen I Ausf B" label="Sturmpanzer I Bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q583475" start="9600" end="9614" title="15 cm sIG 33 auf Fahrgestell Panzerkampfwagen II (Sf)" label="Sturmpanzer II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9624" end="9639" title="15 cm sIG 33 auf Fahrgestell Panzerkampfwagen III (Sf)" label="Sturmpanzer III"/>
<link wikidata="Q13406467" start="9649" end="9677" title="Sturm-Infanteriegeschütz 33B" label="Sturm-Infanteriegeschütz 33B"/>
<link wikidata="Q117936" start="9687" end="9703" title="Sturmhaubitze 42" label="Sturmhaubitze 42"/>
<link wikidata="Q156165" start="9713" end="9729" title="Sturmgeschütz IV" label="Sturmgeschütz IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q157466" start="9739" end="9759" title="Brummbär" label="Sturmpanzer IV Stupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q160881" start="9769" end="9801" title="Grille (artillery)" label="Sturmpanzer 38(t) Grille Ausf. H"/>
<link wikidata="Q160881" start="9811" end="9843" title="Grille (artillery)" label="Sturmpanzer 38(t) Grille Ausf. K"/>
<link wikidata="Q158308" start="9853" end="9878" title="Sturmtiger" label="Sturmpanzer VI Sturmtiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q665596" start="9906" end="9919" title="43M Zrínyi II" label="43M Zrínyi II"/>
<link wikidata="Q114289241" start="9929" end="9941" title="44M Zrínyi I" label="44M Zrínyi I"/>
<link wikidata="Q924417" start="9968" end="9983" title="Landsverk L-60" label="Stormpjäs fm/43"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373114" start="9993" end="10011" title="Stridsvagn m/41" label="Stormpjäs fm/43-44"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049087" start="10021" end="10044" title="Stormartillerivagn m/43" label="Stormartillerivagn m/43"/>
<link wikidata="Q10535358" start="10054" end="10075" title="Infanterikanonvagn 72" label="Infanterikanonvagn 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816946" start="10085" end="10106" title="Infanterikanonvagn 73" label="Infanterikanonvagn 73"/>
<link wikidata="Q10535358" start="10116" end="10138" title="Infanterikanonvagn 102" label="Infanterikanonvagn 102"/>
<link wikidata="Q10535358" start="10148" end="10170" title="Infanterikanonvagn 103" label="Infanterikanonvagn 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635921" start="10180" end="10201" title="Infanterikanonvagn 91" label="Infanterikanonvagn 91"/>
<link wikidata="Q659630" start="10211" end="10229" title="Combat Vehicle 90" label="Stridsfordon 90105"/>
<link wikidata="Q659630" start="10239" end="10257" title="Combat Vehicle 90" label="Stridsfordon 90120"/>
<link wikidata="Q17502524" start="10281" end="10288" title="T18 Howitzer Motor Carriage" label="T18 HMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316016" start="10298" end="10306" title="Howitzer motor carriage M8" label="M8 Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q191643" start="10316" end="10330" title="M4 Sherman" label="M4 Sherman 105"/>
<link wikidata="Q542319" start="10340" end="10352" title="M56 Scorpion" label="M56 Scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881005" start="10362" end="10371" title="M50 Ontos" label="M50 Ontos"/>
<link wikidata="Q495189" start="10381" end="10394" title="M551 Sheridan" label="M551 Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q777527" start="10404" end="10408" title="CCVL" label="CCVL"/>
<link wikidata="Q777527" start="10418" end="10424" title="M8 armored gun system" label="M8 AGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500737" start="10434" end="10447" title="M1128 mobile gun system" label="M1128 Stryker"/>
<link wikidata="Q119779591" start="10467" end="10477" title="XM1302 Mobile Protected Firepower" label="XM1302 MPF"/>
<link wikidata="Q83565164" start="10487" end="10497" title="M10 Booker" label="M10 Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297612" start="10519" end="10548" title="List of infantry support guns" label="List of infantry support guns"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2286" wikidata="Q161161" url="?curid=2286" title="Tank destroyer">
<text>A tank destroyer, tank hunter or tank killer is a type of armoured fighting vehicle, predominantly intended for anti-tank duties. They are typically armed with a direct fire artillery gun, also known as a self-propelled anti-tank gun, or missile launcher, also called an anti-tank missile carrier. The vehicles are designed specifically to engage and destroy enemy tanks, often with limited operational capacities.

While tanks are designed for front-line combat, combining operational mobility and tactical offensive and defensive capabilities and performing all primary tasks of the armoured troops, the tank destroyer is specifically designed to take on enemy tanks and other armoured fighting vehicles. Many are based on a tracked tank chassis, while others are wheeled.

Since World War II, gun-armed powerful tank destroyers have fallen out of favor as armies have favored multirole main battle tanks. However, lightly armoured anti-tank guided missile (ATGM) carriers are commonly used for supplementary long-range anti-tank work. The resurgence of expeditionary warfare in the first two decades of the 21st century has seen the emergence of gun-armed wheeled vehicles, sometimes called &quot;protected gun systems&quot;, which may bear a superficial resemblance to tank destroyers, but are employed as direct fire support units typically providing support in low-intensity operations, as was done in wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.

== World War II ==
Dedicated anti-tank vehicles made their first major appearance in the Second World War as combatants developed effective armoured vehicles and tactics. Some were little more than stopgap solutions, mounting an anti-tank gun on a tracked vehicle to give mobility, while others were more sophisticated designs. An example of the development of tank destroyer technology throughout the war are the Marder III and Jagdpanzer 38 vehicle, that were very different in spite of being based on the same chassis: Marder was straightforwardly an anti-tank gun on tracks whereas the Jagdpanzer 38 traded some firepower (its 7.5 cm Pak 39, designed to operate within the confines of a fully armoured fighting compartment, fires the same projectiles from a reduced propellant charge compared to Marder&#x27;s 7.5 cm Pak 40) for better armour protection and ease of concealment on the battlefield.

Except for most American designs, all tank destroyers were turretless vehicles with fixed or casemate superstructures. When a tank destroyer was used against enemy tanks from a defensive position such as by ambush, the lack of a rotating turret was not particularly critical, while the lower silhouette was highly desirable. The turretless design allowed accommodation of a more powerful gun, typically a dedicated anti-tank gun (in lieu of a regular tank&#x27;s general-purpose main gun that fired both anti-tank and high explosive ammunition) that had a longer barrel than could be mounted in a turreted tank on the same chassis. The lack of a turret increased the vehicle&#x27;s internal volume, allowing for increased ammunition stowage and crew comfort. Eliminating the turret let the vehicle carry thicker armour, and also let this armour be concentrated in the hull. Sometimes there was no armoured roof (only a weather cover) to keep the overall weight down to the limit that the chassis could bear. The absence of a turret meant that tank destroyers could be manufactured significantly cheaper, faster, and more easily than the tanks on which they were based, and they found particular favor when production resources were lacking.

=== Germany ===
The first German tank destroyers were the &quot;Panzerjäger&quot; (&quot;Tank Hunters&quot;), which mounted an existing anti-tank gun on a convenient chassis for mobility, usually with just a three-sided gun shield for crew protection. For instance, 202 obsolete Panzer I light tanks were modified by removing the turret and were rebuilt as the Panzerjäger I self-propelled 4.7 cm PaK(t). Similarly, Panzer II tanks were used on the eastern front. Captured Soviet anti-tank guns were mounted on modified Panzer II chassis, producing the Marder II self-propelled anti-tank gun. The most common mounting was a German anti-tank gun on the Czech Panzer 38(t) chassis as the Marder III. The Panzer 38(t) chassis was also used to make the Jagdpanzer 38 casemate style tank destroyer. The Panzerjäger series continued up to the equipped Nashorn.

German tank destroyers based on the Panzer III medium tank and later German tanks had more armour than their tank counterparts. One of the more successful German tank destroyers was designed as a self-propelled artillery gun, the &quot;Sturmgeschütz III&quot;. Based on the Panzer III tank chassis, the &quot;Sturmgeschütz III&quot; was originally fitted with a short barreled low-velocity howitzer-like gun, and was assigned to the artillery arm for infantry fire support as an assault gun. Later, after encountering Soviet tanks, it was refitted with a comparatively short-barreled high-velocity anti-tank gun, usually with a muzzle brake, enabling it to function as a tank destroyer. The &quot;Sturmgeschütz III&quot; from its 1938 origin used a new casemate-style superstructure with an integrated design, similar to the later &quot;Jagdpanzer&quot; vehicle designs&#x27; superstructure, to completely enclose the crew. It was employed in infantry support and offensive armoured operations as well as in the defensive anti-tank role. The StuG III assault gun was Germany&#x27;s most-produced fully tracked armoured fighting vehicle during World War II, and second-most produced German armoured combat vehicle of any type after the Sd.Kfz. 251 half-track.

Although the early German &quot;Panzerjäger&quot; carried more effective weapons than the tanks on which they were based, they were generally lacking in protection for the crew, having thinly armoured open-topped superstructures. The &quot;open-topped&quot; design format of the &quot;Panzerjäger&quot; vehicles was succeeded by the &quot;Jagdpanzer&quot; (&quot;hunting tanks&quot;), which mounted the gun in true casemate-style superstructures, completely enclosing the crew compartment in armor that was usually integral to the hull. The first of these &quot;Jagdpanzer&quot;s was the 70-ton &quot;Ferdinand&quot; (later renamed &quot;Elefant&quot;), based on the chassis, hulls, and drive systems of ninety-one Porsche VK4501 (P) heavy tanks, mounting a long-barreled 88 mm cannon in an added casemate, more like the earlier &quot;Panzerjägers&quot; had with their added-on armour shielding for the gun crew, but in the &quot;Ferdinand&quot; completely enclosing the gun and firing crew in the added casemate, as the later purpose-built &quot;Jagdpanzers&quot; would. However, the &quot;Ferdinand&quot; was mechanically unreliable and difficult to maneuver, and once all ninety-one unturreted &quot;Porsche Tiger&quot; hulls/drive systems were converted, no more were built. The German Army had more success with the Jagdpanther. Introduced in mid-1944, the Jagdpanther, of which some 415 examples were produced, was considered the best of the casemate-design Jagdpanzer designs. It featured the same powerful PaK 43 88 mm cannon used on the unwieldy &quot;Elefant&quot;, now fitted to the chassis of the medium Panther tank, providing greatly improved armour-penetrating capability in a medium-weight vehicle.

Facing an increasingly defensive war, the German Army turned to larger and more powerfully armed Jagdpanzer designs, and in July 1944 the first &quot;Jagdtiger&quot; rolled off the production line; it was the heaviest German armoured fighting vehicle to go into active service. The &quot;Jagdtiger&quot; was based on the Tiger II heavy tank featured a very large 128 mm PaK 44 cannon and heavy armour protection. Only 88 &quot;Jagdtiger&quot; vehicles were produced, barely matching the total number of the earlier Ferdinand / Elefant vehicles. They were first deployed to combat units in September 1944.

The decision of German armoured vehicle designers to use a casemate-style superstructure for all tank destroyers had the advantage of a reduced silhouette, allowing the crew to more frequently fire from defilade ambush positions. Such designs were also easier and faster to manufacture and offered good crew protection from artillery fire and shell splinters. However, the lack of a rotating turret limited the gun&#x27;s traverse to a few degrees. This meant that the driver normally had to turn the entire tank onto its target, a much slower process than simply rotating a powered turret. If the vehicle became immobilized due to engine failure or track damage, it could not rotate its gun to counter opposing tanks, making it highly vulnerable to counterfire. This vulnerability was later exploited by opposing tank forces. Even the largest and most powerful of German tank destroyers were found abandoned on the field after a battle, having been immobilized by one or more hits by high explosive (HE) or armour-piercing (AP) shells to the track or front drive sprocket.

=== Italy ===

The most famous Italian tank destroyer of the Second World War was a self-propelled gun. The Semovente da 75/18, based on the M13/40 frame, was developed to support front-line infantry, and therefore had fixed armament: a 75 mm gun in casemate. However, thanks to its low height (185 cm) and the caliber of its gun the 75/18 also had good results in anti-tank combat, fighting against British and American (but not Soviet) units. After the Armistice of 1943, the 75/18 remained in use by German forces.

Built on the same frame, the Semovente da 105/25 was equipped with a 105 mm gun and known as &quot;bassotto&quot; (Italian for dachshund) due to its lower height. As manufacturing began in 1943, the 105/25 was used by German forces. A further development was the Semovente da 75/46, which had a longer gun than the 75/18 and inclined armour 100 mm thick, making it similar to &quot;Sturmgeschütz&quot; III. Only 11 of these were manufactured. Before the Semovente da 75/18, the L40, built on an L6/40 light tank chassis, saw action in Africa and in Russia, but with disappointing results.

=== Japan ===
The Type 1 Ho-Ni I was the first self-propelled gun design of the Imperial Japanese Army. They were meant to be self-propelled artillery and tank destroyers for armoured divisions. The plan was for the Type 1 Ho-Ni I gun tank to form part of a fire support company in each of the tank regiments. The Type 1 Ho-Ni I was developed by using the existing Type 97 Chi-Ha medium tank chassis and engine, and replacing the gun turret with a Type 90 75 mm field gun mounted in an open casemate with frontal and side armour only. They entered service in 1942 and were first deployed in combat at the Battle of Luzon in the Philippines in 1945. Some were used in static entrenched positions.

A variant, known as the Type 1 Ho-Ni II mounted a Type 91 105 mm howitzer and had a slightly changed superstructure as far as the side armor with re-positioned observation visors. Production began in 1943, with only 54 completed.

The other variant produced was the Type 3 Ho-Ni III, which mounted a Type 3 75 mm tank gun in a completely enclosed armored casemate to address the issue of crew protection in close combat. The welded superstructure had sloped armour and the gun mount had additional stamped armour plate. The total number produced of all three types in the Ho-Ni series were 111 units. Most of the Ho-Ni units were retained within the Japanese home islands to form part of the defenses against the projected American invasion, and did not see combat before the surrender of Japan.

The Type 2 Ho-I Gun tank used the Type 1 Chi-He medium tank chassis. It was designed as a self-propelled howitzer, mounting a short barreled Type 99 75 mm gun to provide close-in fire support. For deployment, the gun tank was intended to be used in a fire support company for each of the tank regiments. No Type 2 Ho-I gun tanks are known to have engaged in combat prior to Japan&#x27;s surrender. The prototype was built in 1942 and 31 units were produced in 1944.

The Type 4 Ho-Ro self-propelled artillery used a modified Type 97 chassis. On to this platform, a Type 38 150 mm howitzer was mounted. The main gun could fire Type 88 APHE rounds and HEAT rounds. Given its breech loader, the maximum rate of fire was only 5 rounds per minute. The gun&#x27;s elevation was restricted to 30 degrees by the construction of the chassis. Other design issues included the fact that although the gun crew was protected by a gun shield with armour thickness of 25 mm at the front, the shield only extended a very short distance on the sides; leaving the rest of the sides and back exposed. They were rushed into service, deployed and saw combat during the Philippines Campaign in the last year of World War II. Remaining units were deployed to Okinawa in ones and twos for island defense during the Battle of Okinawa, but were severely outnumbered by American artillery.

=== Soviet Union ===

As with the Germans of 1943, most of the Soviet designs mounted anti-tank guns, with limited traverse in casemate-style turretless hulls, in a general design format looking much like the Germans&#x27; own &quot;Jagdpanzer&quot; vehicles. The results were smaller, lighter, and simpler to build weapons that could carry larger guns than any contemporary tank, including the King Tiger. The Soviets produced high numbers of the SU-85 and SU-100 self-propelled guns based on the same chassis as the T-34 medium tank; the heavier-duty powertrain and hull of the IS-2 heavy tank were instead used to produce the heavier-hitting -armed ISU-122 and -armed ISU-152, both of which had impressive anti-tank capabilities earning each of them the Russian nickname &quot;Zveroboy&quot; (&quot;beast killer&quot;) for their ability to destroy German Tigers, Panthers and Elefants. The predecessor of the ISU 152 was the SU-152, built on the KV-1s chassis and shared many similarities (including its gun) with the ISU-152. The ISU-152 built as a heavy assault gun, relied on the weight of the shell fired from its M-1937/43 howitzer to defeat tanks. In 1943, the Soviets also shifted all production of light tanks like the T-70 to much simpler and better-armed SU-76 self-propelled guns, which used the same drive train. The SU-76 was originally designed as an anti-tank vehicle, but was soon relegated to the infantry-support role.

=== United States ===

U.S. Army and counterpart British designs were very different in conception. U.S. doctrine was based, in light of the fall of France, on the perceived need to defeat German blitzkrieg tactics, and U.S. units expected to face large numbers of German tanks, attacking on relatively narrow fronts. These were expected to break through a thin screen of anti-tank guns, hence the decision that the main anti-tank units—the Tank Destroyer (TD) battalions—should be concentrated and very mobile. In practice, such German attacks rarely happened. Throughout the war, only one battalion ever fought in an engagement like that originally envisaged (the 601st, at the Battle of El Guettar). The Tank Destroyer Command eventually numbered over 100,000 men and 80 battalions each equipped with 36 self-propelled tank destroyers or towed guns.


Only a few shots were expected to be fired from any firing position. Strong reconnaissance elements were provided so that TDs could use pre-arranged firing positions to best advantage. Flanking fire by TDs was emphasized, both to penetrate thinner enemy side armour, and to reduce the likelihood of accurate enemy return fire.

All American tank destroyers were officially known by exactly the same collective term used for American self-propelled artillery ordnance, &quot;gun motor carriage&quot;. The designs were intended to be very mobile and heavily armed. Most of the tank-hull based designs used special open-topped turrets of a differing design from the original tank it was based on, which was meant to both save weight and to accommodate a larger gun. The earliest expedient design was mounting a 75 mm M1897 field gun in a limited-traverse mount on an M3 half-track, which was designated 75 mm gun motor carriage M3. Another, considerably less successful, early design was the M6 gun motor carriage which mounted the US 37 mm anti-tank gun facing to the rear on the bed of a Dodge 3/4-ton light truck. 

The M3 was first used against the Japanese in the Philippines and then in the Tunisian campaign of the war in North Africa. Some were supplied to British units who used them within armoured car reconnaissance regiments for fire support. The M6 GMC was unarmoured and the 37 mm gun was ineffective against most enemy tanks by the time it entered service.

By far the most common US design, and the first that was fully tracked and turreted (which became the American hallmark of World War II &quot;tank destroyer&quot; design) was the 3-inch gun motor carriage M10, later supplemented by the 90 mm gun motor carriage M36—both based on the M4 Sherman hull and powertrain—and the 76 mm gun motor carriage M18 (Hellcat), based on a unique hull and powertrain design, with a slight visual resemblance to what was used for the later M24 Chaffee light tank. The M18 came closest to the US ideal; the vehicle was very fast, small, and mounted a gun in a roofless open turret. The M36 Jackson GMC possessed the only American-origin operational gun that could rival the German 8.8 cm Pak 43 anti-tank gun and its tank mounted variant, the 90 mm M3 gun, and the M36 remained in service well after World War II. The only dedicated American casemate hull design fighting vehicle of any type built during the war, that resembled the German and Soviet tank destroyers in hull and general gun mounting design, was the experimental T28 super-heavy tank, which mounted a 105 mm T5E1 long-barrel cannon. This gun had a maximum firing range of 12 miles (20 km), and the vehicle was originally designed as a very heavily armoured self-propelled assault gun to breach Germany&#x27;s Siegfried Line defenses.

Of these tank destroyers, only the gun of the M36 proved effective against the frontal armour of Germans&#x27; larger armored vehicles at long range. The open top and light armour made these tank destroyers vulnerable to anything greater than small-arms fire. As the number of German tanks encountered by American forces steadily decreased throughout the war, most battalions were split up and assigned to infantry units as supporting arms, fighting as assault guns or being used essentially as tanks. In this sense they were an alternative to the Independent tank battalions that were attached to various Infantry Divisions.

The expectation that German tanks would be engaged in mass formation was a failed assumption. In reality, German attacks effectively used combined arms on the ground, fighting cohesively. American tank destroyer battalions comprised three tank destroyer companies supported by nine security sections. The single-purpose tactics of the tank destroyer battalion failed to account for non-tank threats.

In the 1950s the goal of providing airborne forces with a parachute-capable self-propelled anti-tank weapon led to the deployment of the M56 Scorpion and M50 Ontos. The concept later led to the M551 Sheridan light tank of the mid-1960s.

=== United Kingdom ===

British tanks in the early years of the war, both infantry tanks and cruiser tanks, were (with the exception of the pre-war Matilda I design) equipped with a gun capable of use against contemporary enemy tanks—the 40 mm Ordnance QF 2 pounder. This was replaced with the 57 mm Ordnance QF 6 pounder when that became available. There was extra impetus given to the development of anti-tank weaponry, which culminated in the 76mm Ordnance QF 17 pounder, widely considered one of the best anti-tank guns of the war.

Towed anti-tank guns were the domain of the Royal Artillery and vehicles adapted to mount artillery, including anti-tank self-propelled guns such as the Deacon (6pdr on an armoured wheeled truck chassis) and Archer (17pdr on tracked chassis) and US-supplied vehicles, were their preserve rather than the Royal Armoured Corps.

The self-propelled guns that were built in the &quot;tank destroyer&quot; mould came about through the desire to field the QF 17 pounder anti-tank gun and simultaneous lack of suitable standard tanks to carry it. As a result, they were of a somewhat extemporized nature. Mounting the gun on the Valentine tank chassis in a fixed superstructure gave the Archer, looking somewhat like the light-chassis German Marder III in appearance. The 17 pounder was also used to re-equip the US-supplied M10 tank destroyer, replacing the American 3-inch gun to produce the 17pdr SP Achilles.

In 1942 the General Staff agreed on investigating self-propelled mountings of the 6-pounder, 17-pounder, 3-inch 20cwt guns and the 25-pounder field gun/howitzer on the Matilda II, Valentine, Crusader and Cavalier (Cruiser Mark VII) tank chassis. In October 1942 it was decided to progress using the Valentine chassis with a 17-pdr (which would become Archer) and 25-pdr (which entered service as Bishop).

While there was a general move to a general purpose gun that was usable against both tanks and in supporting infantry, there was a need to put the 17 pdr into a tank for use against the enemy&#x27;s heavy tanks. The Cruiser Mk VIII Challenger was a project to bring a 17 pdr tank into use to support the Cromwell cruiser tank. Delays led to it being outnumbered in use by the Sherman Firefly—but a derivative of Challenger was the more or less open-topped variant &quot;Avenger&quot;, which was delayed until post war before entering service. A cut-down 17 pdr, the 77mmHV was used to equip the Comet tank in the last year of the war.
The closest the British came to developing an armoured tank destroyer in the vein of the German Jagdpanzers or Soviet ISU series was the Churchill 3-inch gun carrier—a Churchill tank chassis with a boxy superstructure in place of the turret and mounting a 3-inch anti-aircraft gun. Although a number were ordered and fifty delivered in 1942, they were not put into service as the immediate threat passed. The design was rejected in favor of developing a 17 pounder armed Cromwell tank variant, ultimately leading to the Comet tank. The Tortoise &quot;heavy assault tank&quot;, intended for use in breaking through fixed defensive lines, was well armoured and had a very powerful 32-pounder (94 mm) gun, but did not reach service use.

By 1944, a number of the Shermans in British use were being converted to Sherman Fireflies by adding the QF 17 pounder gun. Initially this gave each troop (platoon) of Shermans one powerfully armed tank. By war&#x27;s end—through the production of more Fireflies and the replacement of Shermans by British tanks—about 50% of Shermans in British service were Fireflies. The Sherman Firefly, however, is not considered a tank destroyer since it could still perform the other duties of the regular M4 Sherman, albeit the Firefly was less capable due to the late development of a HE round for the QF 17 pounder.

=== Romania ===
Until 1942, the Romanian tank force was equipped exclusively with obsolete R-1, R-2 and R35 tanks. Having faced big problems against Soviet T-34 and KV-1 tanks on the Eastern Front, the Romanian Army leadership sought for ways to improve its anti-tank capabilities. The initial plan was the creation of a tank comparable in characteristics to the T-34; instead, Romania went for a number of tank destroyers, since they were more adequate for its industry.

The Mareșal is probably the best known Romanian AFV from the war; historians Steven Zaloga and Mark Axworthy state that it inspired the design of the later German Hetzer. Standing at only around 1.5 m tall, which would have made it very difficult to hit for its enemies, the Mareșal was a lightly armored, but highly mobile vehicle. It was armed with the Romanian 75 mm Reșița M1943 anti-tank gun, which proved to be among the best of its class during World War II, according to Mark Axworthy. During tests, the Mareșal proved to be superior in many aspects to the StuG III G, against which it competed. Those facts suggest that the Mareșal would have been an effective tank destroyer, had it been deployed into combat. There were, however, also critics of the vehicle, especially among high-ranking Romanian officials. It never saw action because the invading Soviet army had stopped its production.

Other Romanian tank destroyers include the TACAM R-2 and TACAM T-60, which were converted from R-2 and T-60 light tanks respectively. Both of them saw action. One TACAM R-2 survives today and is displayed at the National Military Museum in Bucharest. Another conversion was the VDC R-35, Romania&#x27;s only turreted tank destroyer. Two other proposed tank destroyers existed: the TACAM R-1 and TACAM T-38.

=== Poland ===
Variants of the Polish TKS and TK-3 tankettes up-armed with 20 mm gun (23–26 vehicles) were operationally deployed in the invasion of Poland. They were used as an anti-tank component of the reconnaissance units. There were also 37 mm armed TKS-D (2 experimental vehicles) and 47 mm armed TKD (4 experimental vehicles). It is not certain whether they were used operationally at all.

=== France ===
Due to the quick defeat of France, few French vehicles were built. The Laffly W15 TCC (&quot;Chasseur de chars&quot;) was an attempt to quickly build a light tank destroyer by mounting a 47 mm SA37 anti-tank gun onto a lightly armoured Laffly W15T artillery tractor. Other French tank destroyers were being developed, including the SOMUA SAu-40, ARL V39 and various ad hoc conversions of the Lorraine 37L.

== Subsequent developments ==
===Missile-based tank destroyers===

In the face of the Warsaw Pact, a general need for extra firepower was identified. In the late 1960s, West Germany developed the Kanonenjagdpanzer, essentially a modernized World War II Jagdpanzer mounting a gun. As Soviet designs became more heavily armoured, the gun became ineffective and the Kanonenjagdpanzers were retrofitted for different roles or retired. Some provisions were made for the fitting of a 105 mm cannon, and many of the vehicles were modified to fire HOT or TOW missiles in place of a main gun. These upgraded variants remained in service into the 1990s.

With the development of flexible anti-tank missiles, which were capable of installation on almost any vehicle in the 1960s, the concept of the tank destroyer has morphed into light vehicles with missiles. With the weight of main battle tanks growing to the forty to seventy-tonne range, airborne forces were unable to deploy reasonable anti-tank forces. The result was a number of attempts to make a light vehicle, including the conventional ASU-85, M56 Scorpion, the recoilless rifle-armed Ontos, and missile-armed Humber Hornet armoured truck and Sheridan light assault vehicle. The recent entries into that category are the 2S25 Sprut-SD, armed with a current-issue 125 mm tank gun that is also capable of launching missiles like the 9M119 Svir, and Israeli-modified Pandur IIs, which is to enter service with the Philippine Army by 2022 armed with an Elbit Turret and a 105 mm gun.

Many forces&#x27; infantry fighting vehicles (IFVs) carry anti-tank missiles in every infantry platoon, and attack helicopters have also added anti-tank capability to the modern battlefield. But there are still dedicated anti-tank vehicles with very heavy long-range missiles, and ones intended for airborne use.

There have also been dedicated anti-tank vehicles built on ordinary armoured personnel carrier or armored car chassis. Examples include the U.S. M901 ITV (Improved TOW Vehicle) and the Norwegian NM142, both on an M113 chassis, several Soviet ATGM launchers based on the BRDM reconnaissance car, the British FV438 Swingfire and FV102 Striker and the German Raketenjagdpanzer series built on the chassis of the HS 30 and Marder IFV. India fields the NAMIS (Nag Missile System) equipped with Nag Missiles on certain modified BMP-2 IFV&#x27;s called NAMICA.

A US Army combined arms battalion has two infantry companies with TOW missile-armed Bradley IFVs and can bring a large concentration of accurate and lethal fire to bear on an attacking enemy unit that uses AFVs. They can be complemented by mobile units of AH-64 Apache helicopters armed with Hellfire antitank missiles.

Missile carrying vehicles are often referred to as anti-tank missile carriers instead of tank destroyers.

===Postwar gun-based tank destroyers===

Despite the proliferation of ATGMs, some gun-armed tank destroyers remain in use. China has developed the tracked PTZ89 and the wheeled PTL02 tank destroyers. The PTZ89 is armed with a smoothbore cannon while the PTL02, developed by NORINCO for the PLA&#x27;s new light (rapid reaction) mechanized infantry divisions, carries a one (a version armed with a 105 mm rifled gun is available for export). The PTL02 is built on the 6×6 wheeled chassis of the WZ551 APC.

Italy and Spain use the Italian-built B1 Centauro, a wheeled tank destroyer with a cannon.

Russia, meanwhile, uses the Russian-built 2S25 Sprut-SD, operating as an amphibious light tank/tank destroyer armed with a cannon.

The Sabrah Pandur II is a wheeled tank destroyer variant of the Sabrah light tank developed by the Elbit Systems of Israel for the Philippine Army&#x27;s future combat systems.

== See also ==
* Armoured warfare
* Self-propelled anti-aircraft weapon
* Self-propelled artillery

== Notes ==


== References ==
* 
* Harry Yeide, (2005) &quot;The Tank Killers: A History of America&#x27;s World War II Tank Destroyer Force.&quot; Havertown, PA: Casemate. 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Tankdestroyer.net
* &quot;Popular Science&quot;, April 1940, &quot;Tanks Can Be Destroyed&quot; article on early US Army concepts for tank destroyers
* Tank Destroyer List</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="2" end="16" title="Tank destroyer" label="tank destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="18" end="29" title="Tank destroyer" label="tank hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="33" end="44" title="Tank destroyer" label="tank killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="58" end="83" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="armoured fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="112" end="121" title="anti-tank" label="anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097241" start="162" end="173" title="direct fire" label="direct fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370129" start="174" end="187" title="anti-tank gun" label="artillery gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="205" end="233" title="Tank destroyer" label="self-propelled anti-tank gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216918" start="238" end="254" title="missile launcher" label="missile launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="271" end="296" title="Tank destroyer" label="anti-tank missile carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="365" end="369" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384456" start="445" end="455" title="front-line" label="front-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287072" start="474" end="494" title="operational mobility" label="operational mobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q207645" start="499" end="507" title="Military tactics" label="tactical"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="727" end="734" title="Continuous track" label="tracked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068107" start="740" end="747" title="chassis" label="chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="782" end="794" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="889" end="905" title="main battle tank" label="main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q282472" start="934" end="958" title="Anti-tank missile" label="anti-tank guided missile"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="966" end="974" title="anti-tank missile carrier#missile-based tank destroyers" label="carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682252" start="1056" end="1077" title="expeditionary warfare" label="expeditionary warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q369799" start="1367" end="1391" title="low-intensity operations" label="low-intensity operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="1416" end="1420" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="1425" end="1436" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–14)" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370129" start="1668" end="1681" title="anti-tank gun" label="anti-tank gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q159692" start="1853" end="1863" title="Marder III" label="Marder III"/>
<link wikidata="Q156662" start="1868" end="1881" title="Hetzer" label="Jagdpanzer 38"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642910" start="2070" end="2083" title="7.5 cm PaK 39" label="7.5 cm Pak 39"/>
<link wikidata="Q259122" start="2253" end="2266" title="7.5 cm Pak 40" label="7.5 cm Pak 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q89521" start="2435" end="2443" title="casemate" label="casemate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2580" end="2586" title="Gun turret#Combat vehicles" label="turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241267" start="2821" end="2829" title="tank gun" label="main gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="3610" end="3616" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920860" start="3648" end="3659" title="Panzerjäger" label="Panzerjäger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096972" start="3804" end="3814" title="gun shield" label="gun shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q151465" start="3863" end="3871" title="Panzer I" label="Panzer I"/>
<link wikidata="Q160886" start="3945" end="3958" title="Panzerjäger I" label="Panzerjäger I"/>
<link wikidata="Q229874" start="3974" end="3987" title="4,7cm KPÚV vz. 38" label="4.7 cm PaK(t)"/>
<link wikidata="Q151068" start="4000" end="4009" title="Panzer II" label="Panzer II"/>
<link wikidata="Q156931" start="4137" end="4146" title="Marder II" label="Marder II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152915" start="4242" end="4254" title="Panzer 38(t)" label="Panzer 38(t)"/>
<link wikidata="Q159692" start="4270" end="4280" title="Marder III" label="Marder III"/>
<link wikidata="Q156662" start="4333" end="4346" title="Hetzer" label="Jagdpanzer 38"/>
<link wikidata="Q156929" start="4430" end="4437" title="Nashorn" label="Nashorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q151475" start="4476" end="4486" title="Panzer III" label="Panzer III"/>
<link wikidata="Q117936" start="4676" end="4693" title="Sturmgeschütz III" label="Sturmgeschütz III"/>
<link wikidata="Q745798" start="4919" end="4930" title="assault gun" label="assault gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q840773" start="5068" end="5080" title="muzzle brake" label="muzzle brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049870" start="5277" end="5287" title="Jagdpanzer" label="Jagdpanzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q157467" start="5675" end="5686" title="Sd.Kfz. 251" label="Sd.Kfz. 251"/>
<link wikidata="Q941081" start="5687" end="5697" title="half-track" label="half-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q17049870" start="6039" end="6049" title="Jagdpanzer" label="Jagdpanzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q81661" start="6338" end="6345" title="Elefant" label="Elefant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047701" start="6423" end="6433" title="VK 4501 (P)" label="VK4501 (P)"/>
<link wikidata="Q270140" start="6472" end="6477" title="8.8 cm Pak 43" label="88 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q155756" start="7021" end="7032" title="Jagdpanther" label="Jagdpanther"/>
<link wikidata="Q151960" start="7316" end="7328" title="Panther tank" label="Panther tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q155752" start="7566" end="7575" title="Jagdtiger" label="Jagdtiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q151950" start="7737" end="7745" title="Tiger II" label="Tiger II"/>
<link wikidata="Q171641" start="7779" end="7792" title="12.8 cm Pak 44" label="128 mm PaK 44"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082335" start="9205" end="9223" title="Semovente da 75/18" label="Semovente da 75/18"/>
<link wikidata="Q696467" start="9238" end="9244" title="M13/40 tank" label="M13/40"/>
<link wikidata="Q196502" start="9552" end="9569" title="Armistice of Cassibile" label="Armistice of 1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q478521" start="9645" end="9664" title="Semovente da 105/25" label="Semovente da 105/25"/>
<link wikidata="Q29099" start="9743" end="9752" title="dachshund" label="dachshund"/>
<link wikidata="Q629884" start="9879" end="9897" title="Semovente da 75/46" label="Semovente da 75/46"/>
<link wikidata="Q117936" start="9992" end="10021" title="Sturmgeschütz III" label="&amp;quot;Sturmgeschütz&amp;quot; III"/>
<link wikidata="Q972022" start="10094" end="10097" title="Semovente da 47/32" label="L40"/>
<link wikidata="Q850205" start="10111" end="10116" title="L6/40 tank" label="L6/40"/>
<link wikidata="Q705359" start="10224" end="10238" title="Type 1 Ho-Ni I" label="Type 1 Ho-Ni I"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="10286" end="10308" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000908" start="10332" end="10356" title="self-propelled artillery" label="self-propelled artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q169534" start="10381" end="10399" title="Division (military)" label="armoured divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q621547" start="10571" end="10597" title="Type 97 Chi-Ha medium tank" label="Type 97 Chi-Ha medium tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="10636" end="10646" title="gun turret" label="gun turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q715595" start="10654" end="10677" title="Type 90 75 mm field gun" label="Type 90 75 mm field gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q89521" start="10697" end="10705" title="casemate" label="casemate"/>
<link wikidata="Q703962" start="10811" end="10826" title="Battle of Luzon" label="Battle of Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="10834" end="10845" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244504" start="10953" end="10976" title="Type 91 10 cm howitzer" label="Type 91 105 mm howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703618" start="11169" end="11185" title="Type 3 Ho-Ni III" label="Type 3 Ho-Ni III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860721" start="11203" end="11224" title="Type 3 75 mm tank gun" label="Type 3 75 mm tank gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q841337" start="11553" end="11574" title="Japanese home islands" label="Japanese home islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q300879" start="11626" end="11643" title="Operation Downfall" label="American invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="11679" end="11697" title="surrender of Japan" label="surrender of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533917" start="11704" end="11715" title="Type 2 Ho-I" label="Type 2 Ho-I"/>
<link wikidata="Q703375" start="11734" end="11759" title="Type 1 Chi-He medium tank" label="Type 1 Chi-He medium tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000908" start="11790" end="11813" title="self-propelled howitzer" label="self-propelled howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301167" start="12171" end="12183" title="Type 4 Ho-Ro" label="Type 4 Ho-Ro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860718" start="12265" end="12288" title="Type 38 15 cm howitzer" label="Type 38 150 mm howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60124" start="12350" end="12354" title="HEAT" label="HEAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096972" start="12617" end="12627" title="gun shield" label="gun shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q371573" start="12848" end="12868" title="Philippines Campaign (1944–45)" label="Philippines Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12889" end="12901" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="12936" end="12943" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q192660" start="12991" end="13008" title="Battle of Okinawa" label="Battle of Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13127" end="13133" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q328284" start="13512" end="13517" title="SU-85" label="SU-85"/>
<link wikidata="Q315671" start="13522" end="13528" title="SU-100" label="SU-100"/>
<link wikidata="Q172233" start="13582" end="13586" title="T-34" label="T-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066792" start="13644" end="13648" title="IS-2" label="IS-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632326" start="13716" end="13723" title="ISU-122" label="ISU-122"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420351" start="13735" end="13742" title="ISU-152" label="ISU-152"/>
<link wikidata="Q151221" start="13922" end="13928" title="Tiger I tank" label="Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q151960" start="13930" end="13938" title="Panther tank" label="Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q81661" start="13943" end="13950" title="Elefant" label="Elefant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435707" start="13992" end="13998" title="SU-152" label="SU-152"/>
<link wikidata="Q181130" start="14294" end="14298" title="T-70" label="T-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q645903" start="14332" end="14337" title="SU-76" label="SU-76"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="14528" end="14537" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="14646" end="14660" title="fall of France" label="fall of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="14701" end="14711" title="blitzkrieg" label="blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683500" start="14946" end="14976" title="Tank destroyer battalion (United States)" label="Tank Destroyer (TD) battalions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641620" start="15171" end="15176" title="601st Tank Destroyer Battalion" label="601st"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363492" start="15185" end="15205" title="Battle of El Guettar" label="Battle of El Guettar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500477" start="15365" end="15427" title="Shoot-and-scoot" label="a few shots were expected to be fired from any firing position"/>
<link wikidata="Q112481674" start="15545" end="15558" title="Flanking fire" label="Flanking fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q105664087" start="16168" end="16189" title="75 mm M1897 field gun" label="75 mm M1897 field gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q696879" start="16224" end="16237" title="M3 half-track" label="M3 half-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572444" start="16260" end="16287" title="M3 GMC" label="75 mm gun motor carriage M3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360866" start="16349" end="16370" title="M6 gun motor carriage" label="M6 gun motor carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793802" start="16657" end="16694" title="Armoured car regiment" label="armoured car reconnaissance regiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q697631" start="17010" end="17039" title="M10 tank destroyer" label="3-inch gun motor carriage M10"/>
<link wikidata="Q696537" start="17067" end="17095" title="M36 tank destroyer" label="90 mm gun motor carriage M36"/>
<link wikidata="Q191643" start="17114" end="17124" title="M4 Sherman" label="M4 Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q621874" start="17153" end="17191" title="M18 Hellcat" label="76 mm gun motor carriage M18 (Hellcat)"/>
<link wikidata="Q500301" start="17303" end="17314" title="M24 Chaffee" label="M24 Chaffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q270140" start="17543" end="17556" title="8.8 cm Pak 43" label="8.8 cm Pak 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785849" start="17605" end="17617" title="90 mm gun M1/M2/M3" label="90 mm M3 gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q81460" start="17891" end="17911" title="T28 super-heavy tank" label="T28 super-heavy tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q154504" start="18137" end="18151" title="Siegfried Line" label="Siegfried Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q745798" start="18616" end="18627" title="assault gun" label="assault gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456493" start="18711" end="18737" title="Independent tank battalion" label="Independent tank battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418029" start="18928" end="18941" title="combined arms" label="combined arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q542319" start="19328" end="19340" title="M56 Scorpion" label="M56 Scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881005" start="19345" end="19354" title="M50 Ontos" label="M50 Ontos"/>
<link wikidata="Q495189" start="19385" end="19398" title="M551 Sheridan" label="M551 Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267919" start="19503" end="19516" title="infantry tank" label="infantry tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q770487" start="19522" end="19534" title="cruiser tank" label="cruiser tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q431675" start="19577" end="19586" title="Matilda I (tank)" label="Matilda I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110438" start="19673" end="19694" title="Ordnance QF 2 pounder" label="Ordnance QF 2 pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q977910" start="19729" end="19750" title="Ordnance QF 6 pounder" label="Ordnance QF 6 pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479597" start="19880" end="19902" title="Ordnance QF 17 pounder" label="Ordnance QF 17 pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="20010" end="20025" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q291071" start="20119" end="20125" title="Deacon (artillery)" label="Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q632674" start="20174" end="20180" title="Archer (tank destroyer)" label="Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388246" start="20270" end="20290" title="Royal Armoured Corps" label="Royal Armoured Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q899078" start="20588" end="20602" title="Valentine tank" label="Valentine tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q632674" start="20646" end="20652" title="Archer (tank destroyer)" label="Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q159692" start="20701" end="20711" title="Marder III" label="Marder III"/>
<link wikidata="Q697631" start="20784" end="20802" title="M10 tank destroyer" label="M10 tank destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970802" start="20853" end="20870" title="17pdr SP Achilles" label="17pdr SP Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962070" start="20978" end="20990" title="QF 3-inch 20 cwt" label="3-inch 20cwt"/>
<link wikidata="Q502412" start="21041" end="21051" title="Matilda II" label="Matilda II"/>
<link wikidata="Q899078" start="21053" end="21062" title="Valentine tank" label="Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q696083" start="21064" end="21072" title="Crusader tank" label="Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291240" start="21077" end="21104" title="Cavalier tank" label="Cavalier (Cruiser Mark VII)"/>
<link wikidata="Q866327" start="21269" end="21275" title="Bishop (artillery)" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q853808" start="21495" end="21521" title="Cruiser Mk VIII Challenger" label="Cruiser Mk VIII Challenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q304303" start="21583" end="21604" title="Cromwell tank" label="Cromwell cruiser tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152505" start="21655" end="21670" title="Sherman Firefly" label="Sherman Firefly"/>
<link wikidata="Q844065" start="21874" end="21884" title="Comet tank" label="Comet tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q696182" start="22082" end="22096" title="Churchill tank" label="Churchill tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962070" start="22170" end="22194" title="QF 3-inch 20 cwt" label="3-inch anti-aircraft gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q844065" start="22434" end="22444" title="Comet tank" label="Comet tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q705339" start="22450" end="22458" title="Tortoise (tank)" label="Tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q191643" start="22674" end="22682" title="Sherman tank" label="Shermans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152505" start="22722" end="22739" title="Sherman Fireflies" label="Sherman Fireflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080137" start="22798" end="22803" title="troop" label="troop"/>
<link wikidata="Q191643" start="23144" end="23154" title="M4 Sherman" label="M4 Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q108602527" start="23349" end="23352" title="R-1 tank" label="R-1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23354" end="23357" title="Panzer 35(t)#Variants" label="R-2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23362" end="23365" title="Renault R35#Romania" label="R35"/>
<link wikidata="Q107556460" start="23577" end="23625" title="1942 medium tank (Romania)" label="a tank comparable in characteristics to the T-34"/>
<link wikidata="Q4283238" start="23735" end="23742" title="Mareșal tank destroyer" label="Mareșal"/>
<link wikidata="Q730347" start="23808" end="23821" title="Steven Zaloga" label="Steven Zaloga"/>
<link wikidata="Q156662" start="23894" end="23900" title="Hetzer" label="Hetzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643432" start="24095" end="24113" title="75 mm Reșița Model 1943" label="75 mm Reșița M1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q117936" start="24296" end="24306" title="Sturmgeschütz III" label="StuG III G"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661763" start="24676" end="24685" title="TACAM R-2" label="TACAM R-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577761" start="24690" end="24700" title="TACAM T-60" label="TACAM T-60"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24728" end="24731" title="Panzer 35(t)#Variants" label="R-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q462442" start="24736" end="24740" title="T-60" label="T-60"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488935" start="24845" end="24869" title="National Military Museum, Romania" label="National Military Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="24873" end="24882" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24911" end="24919" title="Renault R35#Romania" label="VDC R-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669169" start="25014" end="25023" title="TACAM R-1" label="TACAM R-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669171" start="25028" end="25038" title="TACAM T-38" label="TACAM T-38"/>
<link wikidata="Q592513" start="25079" end="25082" title="TKS" label="TKS"/>
<link wikidata="Q592513" start="25087" end="25091" title="TKS" label="TK-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="25178" end="25196" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q592513" start="25296" end="25301" title="TKS-D" label="TKS-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q592513" start="25344" end="25347" title="TKS" label="TKD"/>
<link wikidata="Q753130" start="25690" end="25701" title="Laffly S15" label="Laffly W15T"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114329" start="25846" end="25858" title="Lorraine 37L" label="Lorraine 37L"/>
<link wikidata="Q705444" start="26057" end="26074" title="Kanonenjagdpanzer" label="Kanonenjagdpanzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q389450" start="26401" end="26404" title="Euromissile HOT" label="HOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q747313" start="26408" end="26419" title="TOW missile" label="TOW missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q282472" start="26539" end="26556" title="anti-tank missile" label="anti-tank missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q920182" start="26730" end="26746" title="main battle tank" label="main battle tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q298080" start="26948" end="26954" title="ASU-85" label="ASU-85"/>
<link wikidata="Q542319" start="26956" end="26968" title="M56 Scorpion" label="M56 Scorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881005" start="26997" end="27002" title="Ontos" label="Ontos"/>
<link wikidata="Q15075100" start="27022" end="27035" title="Humber Hornet" label="Humber Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q495189" start="27055" end="27063" title="M551 Sheridan" label="Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785709" start="27133" end="27146" title="2S25" label="2S25 Sprut-SD"/>
<link wikidata="Q298605" start="27243" end="27253" title="9M119 Svir" label="9M119 Svir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626606" start="27276" end="27285" title="Pandur II" label="Pandur II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799545" start="27323" end="27338" title="Philippine Army" label="Philippine Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="27411" end="27436" title="infantry fighting vehicle" label="infantry fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q282472" start="27451" end="27468" title="anti-tank missile" label="anti-tank missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q753058" start="27501" end="27518" title="attack helicopter" label="attack helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q864306" start="27692" end="27700" title="Airborne forces" label="airborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="27775" end="27801" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q649062" start="27805" end="27816" title="armored car (military)" label="armored car"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516473" start="27852" end="27883" title="M901 ITV" label="M901 ITV (Improved TOW Vehicle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954700" start="27902" end="27907" title="NM142" label="NM142"/>
<link wikidata="Q462407" start="27920" end="27924" title="M113 armored personnel carrier" label="M113"/>
<link wikidata="Q43456" start="27942" end="27948" title="Soviet Army" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q47310468" start="27977" end="27981" title="BRDM" label="BRDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q265062" start="28014" end="28029" title="FV438 Swingfire" label="FV438 Swingfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q898179" start="28034" end="28047" title="FV102 Striker" label="FV102 Striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129051" start="28063" end="28080" title="Raketenjagdpanzer" label="Raketenjagdpanzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q315554" start="28116" end="28121" title="HS 30" label="HS 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q523029" start="28126" end="28132" title="Marder (IFV)" label="Marder"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="28138" end="28143" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497073" start="28196" end="28207" title="Nag Missile" label="Nag Missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q160357" start="28229" end="28234" title="BMP-2" label="BMP-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q202825" start="28235" end="28245" title="Infantry fighting vehicle" label="IFV&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497073" start="28253" end="28259" title="Nag (missile)" label="NAMICA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="28264" end="28271" title="United States Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q473430" start="28346" end="28358" title="M2 Bradley" label="Bradley IFVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="28634" end="28660" title="anti-tank missile carriers" label="anti-tank missile carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349190" start="28845" end="28850" title="Type 89 (Tank Destroyer)" label="PTZ89"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299034" start="28867" end="28872" title="PTL02" label="PTL02"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299034" start="29184" end="29189" title="WZ551" label="WZ551"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053528" start="29234" end="29245" title="B1 Centauro" label="B1 Centauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785709" start="29330" end="29343" title="2S25 Sprut-SD" label="2S25 Sprut-SD"/>
<link wikidata="Q111949259" start="29484" end="29501" title="Sabrah light tank" label="Sabrah light tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325369" start="29519" end="29532" title="Elbit Systems" label="Elbit Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799545" start="29551" end="29566" title="Philippine Army" label="Philippine Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q568312" start="29615" end="29631" title="Armoured warfare" label="Armoured warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428849" start="29634" end="29669" title="Self-propelled anti-aircraft weapon" label="Self-propelled anti-aircraft weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000908" start="29672" end="29696" title="Self-propelled artillery" label="Self-propelled artillery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2287" wikidata="Q649062" url="?curid=2287" title="Armored car (military)">
<text>A military armored (also spelled armoured) car is a wheeled armoured fighting vehicle, historically employed for reconnaissance, internal security, armed escort, and other subordinate battlefield tasks. With the gradual decline of mounted cavalry, armored cars were developed for carrying out duties formerly assigned to light cavalry. Following the invention of the tank, the armoured car remained popular due to its faster speed, comparatively simple maintenance and low production cost. It also found favor with several colonial armies as a cheaper weapon for use in underdeveloped regions. During World War II, most armoured cars were engineered for reconnaissance and passive observation, while others were devoted to communications tasks. Some equipped with heavier armament could even substitute for tracked combat vehicles in favorable conditions—such as pursuit or flanking maneuvers during the North African campaign.

Since World War II the traditional functions of the armored car have been occasionally combined with that of the armoured personnel carrier, resulting in such multipurpose designs as the BTR-40 or the Cadillac Gage Commando. Postwar advances in recoil control technology have also made it possible for a few armoured cars, including the B1 Centauro, the Panhard AML, the AMX-10 RC and EE-9 Cascavel, to carry a large cannon capable of threatening many tanks.

==History==

===Precursors===
During the Middle Ages, war wagons covered with steel plate, and crewed by men armed with primitive hand cannon, flails and muskets, were used by the Hussite rebels in Bohemia. These were deployed in formations where the horses and oxen were at the centre, and the surrounding wagons were chained together as protection from enemy cavalry. 
With the invention of the steam engine, Victorian inventors designed prototype self-propelled armored vehicles for use in sieges, although none were deployed in combat. H. G. Wells&#x27; short story &quot;The Land Ironclads&quot; provides a fictionalized account of their use.

===Armed car===

The Motor Scout was designed and built by British inventor F.R. Simms in 1898. It was the first armed petrol engine-powered vehicle ever built. The vehicle was a De Dion-Bouton quadricycle with a mounted Maxim machine gun on the front bar. An iron shield in front of the car protected the driver.

Another early armed car was invented by Royal Page Davidson at Northwestern Military and Naval Academy in 1898 with the Davidson-Duryea gun carriage and the later Davidson Automobile Battery armored car.

However, these were not &quot;armored cars&quot; as the term is understood today, as they provided little protection for their crews from enemy fire.

===First armoured cars===
At the beginning of the 20th century, the first military armored vehicles were manufactured by adding armor and weapons to existing vehicles.

The first armored car was the Simms&#x27; Motor War Car, designed by F.R. Simms and built by Vickers, Sons &amp; Maxim of Barrow on a special Coventry-built Daimler chassis with a German-built Daimler motor in 1899. and a single prototype was ordered in April 1899 The prototype was finished in 1902, too late to be used during the Boer War.

The vehicle had Vickers armor, thick, and was powered by a four-cylinder Cannstatt Daimler engine, giving it a maximum speed of around . The armament, consisting of two Maxim guns, was carried in two turrets with 360° traverse. It had a crew of four. Simms&#x27; Motor War Car was presented at the Crystal Palace, London, in April 1902.

Another early armored car of the period was the French Charron, Girardot et Voigt 1902, presented at the &quot;Salon de l&#x27;Automobile et du cycle&quot; in Brussels, on 8 March 1902. The vehicle was equipped with a Hotchkiss machine gun, and with armour for the gunner.

One of the first operational armored cars with four wheel (4x4) drive and partly enclosed rotating turret, was the Austro-Daimler Panzerwagen built by Austro-Daimler in 1904. It was armored with thick curved plates over the body (drive space and engine) and had a thick dome-shaped rotating turret that housed one or two machine-guns. It had a four-cylinder engine giving it average cross country performance. Both the driver and co-driver had adjustable seats enabling them to raise them to see out of the roof of the drive compartment as needed. 

The Spanish Schneider-Brillié was the first armored vehicle to be used in combat, being first used in the Kert Campaign. The vehicle was equipped with two machineguns and built from a bus chassis. 

An armored car known as the &quot;Death Special&quot; was built at the CFI plant in Pueblo and used by the Badlwin-Felts detective agency during the Colorado Coalfield War. 

=== World War I ===
A great variety of armored cars appeared on both sides during World War I and these were used in various ways. Generally, armored cars were used by more or less independent car commanders. However, sometimes they were used in larger units up to squadron size. The cars were primarily armed with light machine guns, but larger units usually employed a few cars with heavier guns. As air power became a factor, armored cars offered a mobile platform for antiaircraft guns.
The first effective use of an armored vehicle in combat was achieved by the Belgian Army in August–September 1914. They had placed Cockerill armour plating and a Hotchkiss machine gun on Minerva touring cars, creating the Minerva Armored Car. Their successes in the early days of the war convinced the Belgian GHQ to create a Corps of Armoured Cars, who would be sent to fight on the Eastern front once the western front immobilized after the Battle of the Yser.

The British Royal Naval Air Service dispatched aircraft to Dunkirk to defend the UK from Zeppelins. The officers&#x27; cars followed them and these began to be used to rescue downed reconnaissance pilots in the battle areas. They mounted machine guns on them and as these excursions became increasingly dangerous, they improvised boiler plate armoring on the vehicles provided by a local shipbuilder. In London Murray Sueter ordered &quot;fighting cars&quot; based on Rolls-Royce, Talbot and Wolseley chassis. By the time Rolls-Royce Armoured Cars arrived in December 1914, the mobile period on the Western Front was already over.

More tactically important was the development of formed units of armored cars, such as the Canadian Automobile Machine Gun Brigade, which was the first fully mechanized unit in the history. The brigade was established on September 2, 1914, in Ottawa, as Automobile Machine Gun Brigade No. 1 by Brigadier-General Raymond Brutinel. The brigade was originally equipped with eight Armoured Autocars mounting two machine guns. By 1918 Brutinel&#x27;s force consisted of two motor machine gun brigades (each of five gun batteries containing eight weapons apiece). The brigade, and its armored cars, provided yeoman service in many battles, notably at Amiens. The RNAS section became the Royal Naval Armoured Car Division reaching a strength of 20 squadrons before disbanded in 1915. and the armoured cars passing to the army as part of the Machine Gun Corps. Only NO.1 Squadron was retained; it was sent to Russia. As the Western Front turned to trench warfare unsuitable to wheeled vehicles, the armoured cars were moved to other areas.

The 2nd Duke of Westminster took No. 2 Squadron of the RNAS to France in March 1915 in time to make a noted contribution to the Second Battle of Ypres, and thereafter the cars with their master were sent to the Middle East to play a part in the British campaign in Palestine and elsewhere The Duke led a motorised convoy including nine armoured cars across the Western Desert in North Africa to rescue the survivors of the sinking of the SS Tara which had been kidnapped and taken to Bir Hakiem. 

In Africa, Rolls Royce armoured cars were active in German South West Africa and Lanchester Armoured Cars in British East Africa against German forces to the south.

Armored cars also saw action on the Eastern Front. From 18 February - 26 March 1915, the German army under General Max von Gallwitz attempted to break through the Russian lines in and around the town of Przasnysz, Poland, (about 110 km / 68 miles north of Warsaw) during the Battle of Przasnysz (Polish: &quot;Bitwa przasnyska&quot;). Near the end of the battle, the Russians used four Russo-Balt armored cars and a armored car to break through the Germans&#x27; lines and force the Germans to retreat.

=== World War II ===
The British Royal Air Force (RAF) in the Middle East was equipped with Rolls-Royce Armoured Cars and Morris tenders. Some of these vehicles were among the last of a consignment of ex-Royal Navy armored cars that had been serving in the Middle East since 1915. In September 1940 a section of the No. 2 Squadron RAF Regiment Company was detached to General Wavell&#x27;s ground forces during the first offensive against the Italians in Egypt. During the actions in the October of that year the company was employed on convoy escort tasks, airfield defense, fighting reconnaissance patrols and screening operations.

During the 1941 Anglo-Iraqi War, some of the units located in the British Mandate of Palestine were sent to Iraq and drove Fordson armored cars. &quot;Fordson&quot; armored cars were Rolls-Royce armored cars which received new chassis from a Fordson truck in Egypt.

By the start of the new war, the German army possessed some highly effective reconnaissance vehicles, such as the &quot;Schwerer Panzerspähwagen&quot;. The Soviet BA-64 was influenced by a captured &quot;Leichter Panzerspähwagen&quot; before it was first tested in January 1942.

In the second half of the war, the American M8 Greyhound and the British Daimler Armoured Cars featured turrets mounting light guns (40 mm or less). As with other wartime armored cars, their reconnaissance roles emphasized greater speed and stealth than a tracked vehicle could provide, so their limited armor, armament and off-road capabilities were seen as acceptable compromises.

==Military use==

A military armored car is a type of armored fighting vehicle having wheels (from four to ten large, off-road wheels) instead of tracks, and usually light armor. Armored cars are typically less expensive and on roads have better speed and range than tracked military vehicles. They do however have less mobility as they have less off-road capabilities because of the higher ground pressure. They also have less obstacle climbing capabilities than tracked vehicles. Wheels are more vulnerable to enemy fire than tracks, they have a higher signature and in most cases less armor than comparable tracked vehicles. As a result, they are not intended for heavy fighting; their normal use is for reconnaissance, command, control, and communications, or for use against lightly armed insurgents or rioters. Only some are intended to enter close combat, often accompanying convoys to protect soft-skinned vehicle.

Light armored cars, such as the British Ferret are armed with just a machine gun. Heavier vehicles are armed with autocannon or a large caliber gun. The heaviest armored cars, such as the German, World War II era Sd.Kfz. 234 or the modern, US M1128 mobile gun system, mount the same guns that arm medium tanks.

Armored cars are popular for peacekeeping or internal security duties. Their appearance is less confrontational and threatening than tanks, and their size and maneuverability is said to be more compatible with tight urban spaces designed for wheeled vehicles. However, they do have a larger turning radius compared to tracked vehicles which can turn on the spot and their tires are vulnerable and are less capable in climbing and crushing obstacles. Further, when there is true combat they are easily outgunned and lightly armored. The threatening appearance of a tank is often enough to keep an opponent from attacking, whereas a less threatening vehicle such as an armored car is more likely to be attacked.

Many modern forces now have their dedicated armored car designs, to exploit the advantages noted above. Examples would be the M1117 armored security vehicle of the USA or Alvis Saladin of the post-World War II era in the United Kingdom.

Alternatively, civilian vehicles may be modified into improvised armored cars in &quot;ad hoc&quot; fashion. Many militias and irregular forces adapt civilian vehicles into AFVs (armored fighting vehicles) and troop carriers, and in some regional conflicts these &quot;technicals&quot; are the only combat vehicles present. On occasion, even the soldiers of national militaries are forced to adapt their civilian-type vehicles for combat use, often using improvised armor and scrounged weapons.

=== Scout cars ===
In the 1930s, a new sub-class of armored car emerged in the United States, known as the &quot;scout car&quot;. This was a compact light armored car which was either unarmed or armed only with machine guns for self-defense. Scout cars were designed as purpose-built reconnaissance vehicles for passive observation and intelligence gathering. Armored cars which carried large caliber, turreted weapons systems were not considered scout cars. The concept gained popularity worldwide during World War II and was especially favored in nations where reconnaissance theory emphasized passive observation over combat.

Examples of armored cars also classified as scout cars include the Soviet BRDM series, the British Ferret, the Brazilian EE-3 Jararaca, the Hungarian D-442 FÚG, and the American Cadillac Gage Commando Scout.

== See also ==

*Armored bus
*Armored personnel carrier
*Armored car (valuables)
*Armored car (VIP)
*Armoring:
**Aramid
**Bulletproof glass
**Twaron
**Vehicle armor
*Gun truck
*SWAT vehicle
*Tankette
*Technical (vehicle)

==Notes==
==References==
*Crow, Duncan, and Icks, Robert J., &quot;Encyclopedia of Armored Cars&quot;, Chatwell Books, Secaucus, NJ, 1976. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q649062" start="11" end="18" title="Armored car (military)" label="armored"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378587" start="20" end="32" title="Commonwealth English" label="also spelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q649062" start="33" end="41" title="Armored car (military)" label="armoured"/>
<link wikidata="Q649062" start="43" end="46" title="Armored car (military)" label="car"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="60" end="85" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="armoured fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="113" end="127" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047930" start="129" end="146" title="internal security" label="internal security"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="239" end="246" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q912949" start="321" end="334" title="light cavalry" label="light cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="367" end="371" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4228418" start="523" end="538" title="Colonial troops" label="colonial armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="601" end="613" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="904" end="926" title="North African campaign" label="North African campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="1042" end="1068" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632274" start="1116" end="1122" title="BTR-40" label="BTR-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q715720" start="1130" end="1152" title="Cadillac Gage Commando" label="Cadillac Gage Commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053528" start="1266" end="1277" title="B1 Centauro" label="B1 Centauro"/>
<link wikidata="Q295358" start="1283" end="1294" title="Panhard AML" label="Panhard AML"/>
<link wikidata="Q295405" start="1300" end="1309" title="AMX-10 RC" label="AMX-10 RC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274425" start="1314" end="1327" title="EE-9 Cascavel" label="EE-9 Cascavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968749" start="1443" end="1452" title="war wagon" label="war wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430251" start="1519" end="1530" title="hand cannon" label="hand cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180656" start="1532" end="1537" title="Flail (weapon)" label="flail"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="1543" end="1549" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q131372" start="1569" end="1576" title="Hussite" label="Hussite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="1786" end="1798" title="steam engine" label="steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="1929" end="1940" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745355" start="1965" end="1983" title="The Land Ironclads" label="The Land Ironclads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918153" start="2059" end="2070" title="Motor Scout" label="Motor Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q563607" start="2114" end="2124" title="Frederick Richard Simms" label="F.R. Simms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179850" start="2217" end="2231" title="De Dion-Bouton" label="De Dion-Bouton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412591" start="2232" end="2243" title="quadricycle" label="quadricycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q282352" start="2259" end="2276" title="Maxim gun" label="Maxim machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060344" start="2416" end="2455" title="Northwestern Military and Naval Academy" label="Northwestern Military and Naval Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241627" start="2473" end="2501" title="Davidson-Duryea gun carriage" label="Davidson-Duryea gun carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241634" start="2516" end="2555" title="Davidson Automobile Battery armored car" label="Davidson Automobile Battery armored car"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918179" start="2908" end="2933" title="Motor War Car" label="Simms&amp;#x27; Motor War Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q563607" start="2947" end="2957" title="Frederick Richard Simms" label="F.R. Simms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2971" end="2996" title="Vickers#Vickers, Sons &amp;amp; Maxim" label="Vickers, Sons &amp;amp; Maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q671892" start="3000" end="3006" title="Barrow-in-Furness" label="Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="3020" end="3028" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q27539" start="3035" end="3042" title="Daimler Company" label="Daimler"/>
<link wikidata="Q699551" start="3058" end="3078" title="Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft" label="German-built Daimler"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="3210" end="3218" title="Boer War" label="Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q282352" start="3390" end="3399" title="Maxim gun" label="Maxim gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="3515" end="3533" title="the Crystal Palace" label="the Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3535" end="3541" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086669" start="3614" end="3645" title="Charron, Girardot et Voigt 1902" label="Charron, Girardot et Voigt 1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="3718" end="3726" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5911106" start="3777" end="3798" title="Hotchkiss machine gun" label="Hotchkiss machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q27091" start="3984" end="3998" title="Austro-Daimler" label="Austro-Daimler"/>
<link wikidata="Q117377298" start="4395" end="4412" title="Schneider-Brillié model 1909" label="Schneider-Brillié"/>
<link wikidata="Q20102483" start="4489" end="4502" title="Kert campaign" label="Kert Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q675576" start="4666" end="4672" title="Pueblo, Colorado" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148759" start="4731" end="4753" title="Colorado Coalfield War" label="Colorado Coalfield War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4839" end="4850" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q252280" start="5022" end="5030" title="Squadron (army)" label="squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257572" start="5324" end="5336" title="Belgian Army" label="Belgian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q744233" start="5379" end="5388" title="John Cockerill (company)" label="Cockerill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5911106" start="5410" end="5431" title="Hotchkiss machine gun" label="Hotchkiss machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814703" start="5435" end="5442" title="Minerva (automobile)" label="Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511930" start="5470" end="5489" title="Minerva Armored Car" label="Minerva Armored Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163555" start="5574" end="5596" title="Belgian Expeditionary Corps in Russia" label="Corps of Armoured Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653331" start="5691" end="5709" title="Battle of the Yser" label="Battle of the Yser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="5724" end="5747" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939481" start="6123" end="6136" title="Murray Sueter" label="Murray Sueter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137277" start="6193" end="6199" title="Clément-Talbot" label="Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q530099" start="6204" end="6212" title="Wolseley Motors" label="Wolseley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248116" start="6234" end="6258" title="Rolls-Royce Armoured Car" label="Rolls-Royce Armoured Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029746" start="6435" end="6474" title="Canadian Automobile Machine Gun Brigade" label="Canadian Automobile Machine Gun Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="6587" end="6593" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298623" start="6638" end="6672" title="Raymond Brutinel" label="Brigadier-General Raymond Brutinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25143889" start="6721" end="6737" title="Armoured Autocar" label="Armoured Autocar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="7025" end="7058" title="Royal Naval Armoured Car Division" label="Royal Naval Armoured Car Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384654" start="7381" end="7404" title="Hugh Grosvenor, 2nd Duke of Westminster" label="2nd Duke of Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q233219" start="7505" end="7527" title="Second Battle of Ypres" label="Second Battle of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q727536" start="7642" end="7651" title="Sinai and Palestine Campaign" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q153665" start="7927" end="7951" title="German South West Africa" label="German South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4254081" start="7956" end="7980" title="Lanchester armoured car" label="Lanchester Armoured Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q876185" start="7984" end="8003" title="East Africa Protectorate" label="British East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q62428" start="8156" end="8172" title="Max von Gallwitz" label="Max von Gallwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q672964" start="8244" end="8253" title="Przasnysz" label="Przasnysz"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8345" end="8373" title=":pl: Bitwa przasnyska" label="&amp;quot;Bitwa przasnyska&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177339" start="8427" end="8437" title="Russo-Balt" label="Russo-Balt"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="8578" end="8593" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="8607" end="8618" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248116" start="8637" end="8661" title="Rolls-Royce Armoured Car" label="Rolls-Royce Armoured Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="8749" end="8759" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="8802" end="8813" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q315540" start="8913" end="8934" title="Archibald Wavell, 1st Earl Wavell" label="General Wavell&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q696848" start="9196" end="9211" title="Anglo-Iraqi War" label="Anglo-Iraqi War"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="9246" end="9274" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British Mandate of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003307" start="9422" end="9429" title="Fordson" label="Fordson"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="9439" end="9444" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092789" start="9567" end="9591" title="Schwerer Panzerspähwagen" label="Schwerer Panzerspähwagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q618603" start="9610" end="9615" title="BA-64" label="BA-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q160871" start="9651" end="9675" title="Leichter Panzerspähwagen" label="Leichter Panzerspähwagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q475616" start="9771" end="9783" title="M8 Greyhound" label="M8 Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2209891" start="9800" end="9820" title="Daimler Armoured Car" label="Daimler Armoured Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="10165" end="10189" title="armored fighting vehicle" label="armored fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q446" start="10197" end="10202" title="wheel" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q940913" start="10257" end="10263" title="Caterpillar track" label="tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937453" start="10283" end="10288" title="vehicle armor" label="armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="10818" end="10832" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553816" start="11012" end="11032" title="soft-skinned vehicle" label="soft-skinned vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000754" start="11075" end="11081" title="Ferret armoured car" label="Ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="11149" end="11159" title="autocannon" label="autocannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q225222" start="11248" end="11259" title="Sd.Kfz. 234" label="Sd.Kfz. 234"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500737" start="11278" end="11301" title="M1128 mobile gun system" label="M1128 mobile gun system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816169" start="12184" end="12214" title="M1117 armored security vehicle" label="M1117 armored security vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q449403" start="12229" end="12242" title="Alvis Saladin" label="Alvis Saladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q569612" start="12559" end="12581" title="technical (fighting vehicle)" label="&amp;quot;technicals&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q495703" start="12700" end="12722" title="Gun truck" label="civilian-type vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007925" start="12751" end="12767" title="Improvised vehicle armour" label="improvised armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="13298" end="13310" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q47310468" start="13496" end="13507" title="BRDM" label="BRDM series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000754" start="13521" end="13527" title="Ferret armoured car" label="Ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274409" start="13543" end="13556" title="EE-3 Jararaca" label="EE-3 Jararaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507161" start="13572" end="13581" title="D-442 FÚG" label="D-442 FÚG"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016478" start="13600" end="13628" title="Cadillac Gage Commando Scout" label="Cadillac Gage Commando Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544467" start="13648" end="13659" title="Armored bus" label="Armored bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="13661" end="13686" title="Armoured personnel carrier" label="Armored personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030378" start="13688" end="13711" title="Armored car (valuables)" label="Armored car (valuables)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760567" start="13713" end="13730" title="Armored car (VIP)" label="Armored car (VIP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q422054" start="13744" end="13750" title="Aramid" label="Aramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133376" start="13753" end="13770" title="Bulletproof glass" label="Bulletproof glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115062" start="13773" end="13779" title="Twaron" label="Twaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937453" start="13782" end="13795" title="Vehicle armour" label="Vehicle armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q495703" start="13797" end="13806" title="Gun truck" label="Gun truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q878047" start="13808" end="13820" title="SWAT vehicle" label="SWAT vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q474079" start="13822" end="13830" title="Tankette" label="Tankette"/>
<link wikidata="Q569612" start="13832" end="13851" title="Technical (vehicle)" label="Technical (vehicle)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2288" wikidata="Q1428849" url="?curid=2288" title="Self-propelled anti-aircraft weapon">
<text>An anti-aircraft vehicle, also known as a self-propelled anti-aircraft gun (SPAAG) or self-propelled air defense system (SPAD), is a mobile vehicle with a dedicated anti-aircraft capability.

Specific weapon systems used include machine guns, autocannons, larger guns, or surface-to-air missiles, and some mount both guns and longer-ranged missiles (e.g. the Pantsir missile system). Platforms used include both trucks and heavier combat vehicles such as armoured personnel carriers and tanks, which add protection from aircraft, artillery, and small arms fire for front line deployment.

Anti-aircraft guns are usually mounted in a quickly-traversing turret with a high rate of elevation, for tracking fast-moving aircraft. They are often in dual or quadruple mounts, allowing a high rate of fire. In addition, most anti-aircraft guns can be used in a direct-fire role against surface targets to great effect. Today, surface-to-air missiles (generally mounted on similar turrets) have largely supplanted anti-aircraft guns, but they may return as a cheap way to counter unmanned aerial systems (drones), cruise missiles, and ultralight aircraft.

==History==

===World War I===

Anti-aircraft machine guns have long been mounted on trucks, and these were quite common during World War I. A predecessor of the WWII German &quot;88&quot; anti-aircraft gun, the WWI German 77 mm anti-aircraft gun, was truck-mounted and used to great effect against British tanks.

The British QF 3 inch 20 cwt was mounted on trucks for use on the Western Front. The British also had a first dedicated anti aircraft weapon, the QF 1-pounder pom-pom. Mounted on an armoured truck titled the Pierce-Arrow armoured AA lorry, which was produced in limited numbers and only seeing service throughout 1915. Towards the end of the war Germany produced three prototype SPAAGs with AA guns mounted on A7V chassis known as the A7V Flakpanzer.

===Inter-war period===

Between the two World Wars, the United Kingdom developed the Birch gun, a general-purpose artillery piece on an armoured tracked chassis capable of maintaining formation with their current tanks over terrain. The gun could be elevated for anti-aircraft use.
The first tracked SPAAG-design to be manufactured in series was most likely the British/Siamese Vickers Armstrong &quot;Type 76&quot; (per Buddhist year 2476 = 1933 CE), as named by the Royal Siamese Army, a SPAAG based on the chassis of the Dragon, Medium, Mark IV artillery tractor (Vickers Mk.E 6-ton light tank derivative), mounting a revolving Vickers 40 mm QF 2 pounder pom-pom autocannon in an open fighting compartment. About 26 were sold to Siam in 1932 and saw action as infantry support guns and AA guns during the Franco-Thai war (1940–1941) along with 30 Vickers Mk.E Type B 6-ton tanks. Despite being the first tracked SPAAG en masse, the open-top design of the Vickers Type 76 made it outdated even by the early 1930s.
The first modern SPAAG to be produced was most likely the Swedish Landsverk L-62 Anti in 1936, featuring a tracked armoured body with a revolving turret, a so-called &quot;anti-aircraft tank&quot;. It was based on a widened chassis of the Landsverk L-60 light tank and was armed with a Bofors 40 mm Automatic Gun L/60 in an open-top revolving turret. The design was bought by Hungary just prior to the war and Finland ordered a refined model in 1941, known as the Anti II.

By the late 1930s, the British had developed a version of the Mk.VI Light Tank armed with four machine guns that were known as Light Tank AA Mk.I, and also a twin 15 mm version based on the Light Tank Mk.V was built. Among early pre-war pioneers of self-propelled AA guns were the Germans. By the time of the war, they fielded the Sd.Kfz. 10/4 and Sd.Kfz. 6/2, cargo half-tracks mounting single 20 mm or 37 mm AA guns (respectively). Later in the war similar German half-tracks mounted quadruple 20 mm weapons.

===World War II===

Larger guns followed on larger trucks, but these mountings generally required off-truck setup in order to unlimber the stabilizing legs these guns needed. One exception to this rule was the Italian Cannone da 90/53 which was highly effective when mounted on trucks, a fit known as the &quot;autocannoni da 90/53&quot;. The 90/53 was a feared weapon, notably in the anti-tank role, but only a few hundred had been produced by the time of the armistice in 1943.

Other nations tended to work on truck chassis. Starting in 1941, the British developed the &quot;en portee&quot; method of mounting an anti-tank gun (initially a 2 pounder) on a truck. This was to prevent the weapon from being damaged by long-distance towing across rough, stony deserts, and it was intended only to be a carrying method, with the gun unloaded for firing. However, crews tended to fire their weapons from their vehicles for the mobility this method provided, with consequent casualties. This undoubtedly inspired their Morris C9/B (officially the &quot;Carrier, SP, 4x4, 40 mm AA&quot;), a Bofors 40 mm AA gun mounted on a chassis derived from the Morris &quot;Quad&quot; Field Artillery Tractor truck. Similar types, based on 3-ton lorries, were produced in Britain, Canada and Australia, and together formed the most numerous self-propelled AA guns in British service.

The U.S. Army brought truck-towed Bofors 40 mm AA guns along with truck-mounted units fitted with mechanized turrets when they sailed, first for Great Britain and then onto France. The turrets carried four .50 inch (12.7 mm) machine guns, which were designed to be adjusted to converge at the single point where enemy aircraft were expected to appear at low altitude in conduction of strafing runs directed at large infantry and field artillery units.

Interest in mobile AA turned to heavier vehicles with the mass and stability needed to easily train weapons of all sizes. Probably the desire, particularly in German service, for anti-aircraft vehicles to be armoured for their own protection also assisted this trend.
The concept of using armored SPAAG (anti-aircraft tanks) en masse was pioneered by Hungary during World War II with the production of the 40M Nimrod, a license-produced version of the previously mentioned late 1930s Landsverk L-62 Anti I SPAAG. Germany followed later with their &quot;Flakpanzer&quot; series. German World War II SPAAGs include the Möbelwagen, Wirbelwind, Ostwind and Kugelblitz. Other forces followed with designs of their own, notably the American M16 created by mounting quadruple M2HB Browning machine guns on a M3 Half-track.

The British developed their own SPAAGs throughout the war mounting multiple machine guns and light cannon on various tank and armoured car chassis and by 1943, the Crusader AA tanks, which mounted the Bofors 40 mm gun or two-three Oerlikon 20 mm cannon. Although used during the Normandy landings, by that point German aircraft were contained by the Allies own air forces and they were largely unneeded.

===Cold War and later===
The introduction of jet engines and the subsequent rough doubling of aircraft speeds greatly reduced the effectiveness of the SPAAG against attack aircraft. A typical SPAAG round might have a muzzle velocity on the order of and might take as long as two to three seconds to reach a target at its maximum range. An aircraft flying at is moving at a rate of about . This means the aircraft will have moved hundreds of meters during the flight time of the shells, greatly complicating the aiming problem to the point where close passes were essentially impossible to aim using manual gunsights. This speed also allowed the aircraft to rapidly fly out of range of the guns; even if the aircraft passes directly over the SPAAG, it would be within its firing radius for under 30 seconds.

SPAAG development continued through the early 1950s with ever-larger guns, improving the range and allowing the engagement to take place at longer distances where the crossing angle was smaller and aiming was easier. Examples including the 40 mm U.S. M42 Duster and the 57 mm Soviet ZSU-57-2. However, both were essentially obsolete before they entered service, and found employment solely in the ground-support role. The M42 was introduced to the Vietnam War to counter an expected North Vietnamese air offensive, but when this failed to materialize it was used as an effective direct-fire weapon. The ZSU-57 found similar use in the Yugoslav Wars, where its high-angle fire was useful in the mountainous terrain.

By the late 1950s, the US Army had given up on the SPAAG concept, considering all gun-based weapons to be useless against modern aircraft. This belief was generally held by many forces, and the anti-aircraft role turned almost exclusively to missile systems. The Soviet Union remained an outlier, beginning the development of a new SPAAG in 1957, which emerged as the ZSU-23-4 in 1965. This system included search-and-track radars, fire control, and automatic gun-laying, greatly increasing its effectiveness against modern targets. The ZSU-23 proved very effective when used in concert with SAMs; the presence of SAMs forced aircraft to fly low to avoid their radars, placing them within range of the ZSUs.

The success of the ZSU-23 led to a resurgence of SPAAG development. This was also prompted by the introduction of attack helicopters in the 1970s, which could hide behind terrain and then &quot;pop up&quot; for an attack lasting only a few tens of seconds; missiles were ineffective at low altitudes, while the helicopters would often be within range of the guns for a rapid counterattack. Notable among these later systems is the German Gepard, the first western SPAAG to offer performance equal to or better than the ZSU. This system was widely copied in various NATO forces.

SPAAG development continues, with many modern examples often combining both guns and short-range missiles. Examples include the Soviet/Russian Tunguska-M1, which supplanted the ZSU-23 in service, the newer versions of the Gepard, the Chinese Type 95 SPAAA, and the British Marksman turret, which can be used on a wide variety of platforms. Some forces, like the US Army and USMC have mostly forgone self-propelled guns in favor of systems with short-range infrared-guided surface-to-air missiles in the AN/TWQ-1 Avenger and M6 Linebacker, which do not require radar to be accurate and are generally more reliable and cost-effective to field, though their ability to provide ground support is more limited. The U.S. Army did use the M163 VADS and developed the prototype design of the M247 Sergeant York.

=== Present day ===
Modern SPAAGs usually have short-range missiles for longer range engagement. The Pantsir system from Russia is primarily a missile battery, although it does have twin cannons as secondary armament.

Some examples of modern SPAAG:
==See also==
* 4M (artillery)
* Assault gun
* Flakpanzer, a collective term for German anti-aircraft tanks, particularly those used in World War II.
* List of anti-aircraft guns
* Man-portable air-defense system
* Self-propelled artillery
* Tank destroyer

== Footnotes ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1428849" start="3" end="24" title="Self-propelled anti-aircraft weapon" label="anti-aircraft vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428849" start="42" end="74" title="Self-propelled anti-aircraft weapon" label="self-propelled anti-aircraft gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428849" start="76" end="81" title="Self-propelled anti-aircraft weapon" label="SPAAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428849" start="86" end="119" title="Self-propelled anti-aircraft weapon" label="self-propelled air defense system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428849" start="121" end="125" title="Self-propelled anti-aircraft weapon" label="SPAD"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="165" end="189" title="anti-aircraft warfare" label="anti-aircraft capability"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="229" end="240" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="243" end="253" title="autocannon" label="autocannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="272" end="294" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424781" start="359" end="381" title="Pantsir missile system" label="Pantsir missile system"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="412" end="417" title="truck" label="truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4009273" start="431" end="445" title="combat vehicle" label="combat vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407246" start="455" end="481" title="armoured personnel carrier" label="armoured personnel carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="487" end="491" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="652" end="658" title="gun turret" label="turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="918" end="940" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1276" end="1287" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962070" start="1475" end="1491" title="QF 3 inch 20 cwt" label="QF 3 inch 20 cwt"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="1529" end="1542" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958882" start="1609" end="1629" title="QF 1-pounder pom-pom" label="QF 1-pounder pom-pom"/>
<link wikidata="Q79174879" start="1671" end="1701" title="Pierce-Arrow armoured AA lorry" label="Pierce-Arrow armoured AA lorry"/>
<link wikidata="Q239364" start="1873" end="1876" title="A7V" label="A7V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640292" start="2000" end="2009" title="Birch gun" label="Birch gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148868" start="2336" end="2354" title="Thai calendar" label="Buddhist year 2476"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749588" start="2383" end="2401" title="Royal Siamese Army" label="Royal Siamese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q96413911" start="2439" end="2480" title="Vickers Medium Dragon" label="Dragon, Medium, Mark IV artillery tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q839209" start="2482" end="2500" title="Vickers 6-ton" label="Vickers Mk.E 6-ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297890" start="2560" end="2580" title="QF 2 pounder pom-pom" label="QF 2 pounder pom-pom"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="2647" end="2651" title="Siam" label="Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q780845" start="2723" end="2738" title="Franco-Thai war" label="Franco-Thai war"/>
<link wikidata="Q232168" start="2997" end="3016" title="40M Nimród" label="Landsverk L-62 Anti"/>
<link wikidata="Q924417" start="3170" end="3184" title="Landsverk L-60" label="Landsverk L-60"/>
<link wikidata="Q115472839" start="3217" end="3248" title="Bofors 40 mm Automatic Gun L/60" label="Bofors 40 mm Automatic Gun L/60"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266430" start="3395" end="3402" title="Landsverk L-62 Anti II" label="Anti II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422969" start="3467" end="3483" title="Light Tank Mark VI" label="Mk.VI Light Tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q689379" start="3736" end="3748" title="Sd.Kfz. 10" label="Sd.Kfz. 10/4"/>
<link wikidata="Q697146" start="3753" end="3764" title="Sd.Kfz. 6" label="Sd.Kfz. 6/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q56191128" start="3891" end="3914" title="Flakvierling" label="quadruple 20 mm weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q781114" start="4135" end="4151" title="Cannone da 90/53" label="Cannone da 90/53"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231554" start="4498" end="4504" title="portee" label="portee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596969" start="4560" end="4569" title="2 pounder" label="2 pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q115472839" start="5004" end="5023" title="Bofors 40 mm L/60 gun" label="Bofors 40 mm AA gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785066" start="5062" end="5085" title="Morris C8" label="Morris &amp;quot;Quad&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="6090" end="6097" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6105" end="6117" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q232168" start="6145" end="6155" title="40M Nimrod" label="40M Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q698280" start="6356" end="6366" title="Möbelwagen" label="Möbelwagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q697634" start="6368" end="6378" title="Wirbelwind" label="Wirbelwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q697664" start="6380" end="6387" title="Ostwind" label="Ostwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q698318" start="6392" end="6402" title="Kugelblitz (armoured fighting vehicle)" label="Kugelblitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q423027" start="6498" end="6534" title="M45 Quadmount" label="quadruple M2HB Browning machine guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q696879" start="6540" end="6553" title="M3 Half-track" label="M3 Half-track"/>
<link wikidata="Q696083" start="6720" end="6737" title="Crusader tank" label="Crusader AA tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q115472839" start="6757" end="6769" title="Bofors 40 mm Automatic Gun L/60" label="Bofors 40 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q210670" start="6787" end="6808" title="Oerlikon 20 mm cannon" label="Oerlikon 20 mm cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="7006" end="7016" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q685851" start="8020" end="8030" title="M42 Duster" label="M42 Duster"/>
<link wikidata="Q136463" start="8052" end="8060" title="ZSU-57-2" label="ZSU-57-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="8217" end="8228" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="8404" end="8417" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="Yugoslav Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q136457" start="8853" end="8861" title="ZSU-23-4" label="ZSU-23-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q753058" start="9308" end="9325" title="attack helicopter" label="attack helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q695759" start="9632" end="9638" title="Flugabwehrkanonenpanzer Gepard" label="Gepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="9759" end="9763" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q402395" start="9916" end="9927" title="Tunguska-M1" label="Tunguska-M1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806928" start="10015" end="10028" title="Type 95 SPAAA" label="Type 95 SPAAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q788137" start="10046" end="10061" title="Marksman anti-aircraft system" label="Marksman turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="10135" end="10142" title="United States Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="10147" end="10151" title="United States Marine Corps" label="USMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q589281" start="10276" end="10292" title="AN/TWQ-1 Avenger" label="AN/TWQ-1 Avenger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10297" end="10310" title="Bradley Fighting Vehicle#M6 Linebacker" label="M6 Linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888570" start="10505" end="10514" title="M163 VADS" label="M163 VADS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553273" start="10557" end="10575" title="M247 Sergeant York" label="M247 Sergeant York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424781" start="10679" end="10686" title="Pantsir" label="Pantsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q113134082" start="10843" end="10857" title="4M (artillery)" label="4M (artillery)"/>
<link wikidata="Q745798" start="10860" end="10871" title="Assault gun" label="Assault gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457089" start="10874" end="10884" title="Flakpanzer" label="Flakpanzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653433" start="10979" end="11005" title="List of anti-aircraft guns" label="List of anti-aircraft guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465101" start="11008" end="11039" title="Man-portable air-defense system" label="Man-portable air-defense system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000908" start="11042" end="11066" title="Self-propelled artillery" label="Self-propelled artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q161161" start="11069" end="11083" title="Tank destroyer" label="Tank destroyer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2289" wikidata="Q191264" url="?curid=2289" title="AZ Alkmaar">
<text>Alkmaar Zaanstreek (), better known internationally as AZ Alkmaar, or simply and most commonly as AZ () in the Netherlands, is a Dutch professional football club from Alkmaar and the Zaan district. The club plays in the Eredivisie, the highest professional football league in the Netherlands.

AZ won the Eredivisie in 1980–81 and 2008–09. In the same season as their first league title, they also reached the UEFA Cup Final, which they lost to Ipswich Town. The team has won the KNVB Cup on four occasions, and one Johan Cruyff Shield.

==History==

===1910–1972: Foundation and first years===
AZ was founded on 10 May 1967 as AZ &#x27;67, the result of a merger of Alkmaar &#x27;54 and FC Zaanstreek. Alkmaar &#x27;54 was founded as a professional team in April 1954 to play in the 10-team NBVB league, created because the Royal Dutch Football Association (KNVB) refused to organize a professional league (the KNVB took over in 1955). Alkmaar &#x27;54, and by extension AZ, played the first professional match in the Netherlands: on 14 August 1954, they won 3–0 at home against Venlo &#x27;54, with Klaas Smit scoring the first and third goal. After winning the in 1960–61, it played one year in the Eredivisie.

FC Zaanstreek had been playing since 1910 as the Kooger Football Club (KFC). KFC had nearly become national champion in 1934 through a narrow loss to Ajax in the finals. The team became professional in 1955. In 1964 the professional part of KFC was renamed FC Zaanstreek, while the amateurs played on as KFC.

Also in 1964, the brothers Cees and Klaas Molenaar, former players and trainers for KFC and owners of a growing appliance store chain, sought to create a powerful football team in Zaanstreek by merging the two local professional teams: KFC and Zaanlandsche Football Club. After the ZFC leadership thwarted this attempt, the Molenaars successfully merged FC Zaanstreek with Alkmaar &#x27;54 in 1967. FC Zaanstreek had finished 7th and Alkmaar &#x27;54 12th in 1966–67 Eerste Divisie. The team would be based in Alkmaar, though the second team originally trained and played in Koog aan de Zaan.

===1972–1985: Molenaar years===
Partially through the hiring of expensive foreign players, the new club soon acquired large debts. In 1972, the Molenaar brothers bailed it out and invested heavily in the club, to the point that AZ &#x27;67 were successful in the late 1970s and early &#x27;80s, regularly playing European football from 1977 to 1982 while also winning three KNVB Cups over that period.

After four close league campaigns, AZ finally became Dutch champions in 1981, becoming the only team other than the &quot;big three&quot; of Ajax, and PSV to do so in a 44-year period spanning from 1965 to 2009 (when AZ once again won the league title). They won the title with overwhelming power, winning 27 of 34 matches and only losing once, while scoring a club record 101 goals and conceding just 30. That same season, AZ reached the final of the UEFA Cup, losing 5–4 on aggregate to Ipswich Town. The next year, in the European Cup, they lost in the second round 3–2 on aggregate to Liverpool.

Georg Keßler was AZ&#x27;s manager over most of these years (1978–82), while star players included: Kees Kist, the club&#x27;s highest ever goalscorer with 212 goals and the first ever Dutchman to win the European Golden Boot in 1979 when he scored 34 goals in a season; Jan Peters, who played 120 matches for AZ during this period scoring 30 goals from midfield; and Hugo Hovenkamp, who played 239 matches in defence for AZ from 1975 to 1983, as well as receiving 31 caps for the Netherlands national team from 1977 to 1983 and playing each match in UEFA Euro 1980 while an AZ player. Additional stars included John Metgod, who spent six years at AZ playing 195 matches as a defender, scoring 26 goals including a goal against Ipswich Town in the final of the UEFA Cup. Like Hovenkamp, Metgod was also included in the Dutch squad for Euro 1980. Meanwhile, Danish forward Kristen Nygaard spent ten years at AZ, scoring 104 goals in 363 matches between 1972 and 1982.

===1985–1993: Interim years===

Co-owner Cees Molenaar died in 1979. AZ&#x27;s fortunes deteriorated after his brother, Klaas Molenaar, left the club in 1985. After several mid-table finishes in previous seasons, AZ was relegated in 1988 from the Eredivisie, ending the season on 28 points from 34 matches and falling to the due to the superior goal difference of Roda JC. This relegation was significant since it occurred just seven years after the club&#x27;s historic domestic double and marked the end of AZ&#x27;s first period of success in Dutch football. Following this, AZ spent much of the next decade in the second tier, struggling to find a return to the top flight.

===1993–2009: Scheringa years===
The involvement of businessman Dirk Scheringa in the mid-1990s marked the revival of the club as AZ returned to the Eredivisie, winning the 1997-98 Eerste Divisie title. The club achieved consecutive finishes around the middle positions in the league until ending up in third place in the 2004-05 Eredivisie season, AZ&#x27;s highest position for 23 years. In the summer of 2006, the club moved to a new 17,000 capacity stadium, AZ Stadion.

Despite playing strongly for the majority of the 2006–07 season, AZ&#x27;s season ended in disappointment. First, entering the last matchday of the 2006–07 Eredivisie season, AZ led PSV and Ajax on goal difference at the top of the league table, but ended up third after losing their last match against 16th placed team Excelsior, AZ played with ten men for 80 minutes. Additionally, AZ then lost the KNVB Cup final to Ajax 8–7 after a penalty shoot-out, while also falling to Ajax over two play-off matches for participation in the Champions League. After the season, key players like Tim de Cler, Danny Koevermans and Shota Arveladze left the team.
A remarkable run ended in the 2007–08 season: after AZ lost a group stage match against Everton (3–2) in the UEFA Cup, the club&#x27;s unbeaten run of 32 home matches in European competitions – lasting from 1977 to 2007 – ended. AZ had a poor season, suffering elimination in the first round of the KNVB Cup and the group stage of the UEFA Cup, as well as finishing the 2007–08 Eredivisie in a disappointing 11th place. Towards the latter stages of the season, in March 2008, AZ manager Louis van Gaal had initially tendered his resignation, but after protests the players and directors, he rescinded his resignation.

The 2008–09 season had an unpromising start after two opening defeats against NAC Breda and ADO Den Haag. However, starting with a 1–0 victory over defending league champions PSV, AZ did not lose a match in its next 28 matches, including a run of 11-straight matches where AZ did not concede an opposition goal. Three weeks before the end of the season, AZ became Eredivisie champions, edging nearest title rivals Twente and Ajax comfortably. This was a historic achievement for the club as this was the first title-winning season for 28 years, and it also meant a return to the UEFA Champions League.

Being league champions, AZ qualified for the Champions League for only the second time. It was drawn into a group alongside Arsenal FC, Standard Liège and Olympiacos but only took four points from six matches and finished bottom of their group.

===2009–2014: Advocaat–Verbeek years ===
For the 2009–10 season, Ronald Koeman succeeded Louis van Gaal, who had departed to manage Bayern Munich after leading AZ to the championship. Koeman was officially hired on 17 May 2009, but on 5 December, AZ announced he was no longer in charge of the club after losing 7 of his first 16 matches. Former Rangers and Zenit Saint Petersburg manager Dick Advocaat took over for the remainder of the season. Under Advocaat, AZ achieved solid results and secured European football for the next season.

For the 2010–11 season, AZ appointed Gertjan Verbeek as its new manager. They finished the 2010–11 Eredivisie in fourth place, thus securing Europa League football for the next season, while in the KNVB Cup, AZ reached the last eight, where they were beaten by rivals Ajax by a 1–0 scoreline. AZ also finished third in their Europa League group, thus failing to qualifying for the competition&#x27;s knockout round.

In the 2011–12 season, AZ finished fourth in the Eredivisie, though performed significantly better in cup competitions, reaching the semi-finals in the KNVB Cup (losing to Heracles after extra time) and the quarter-finals in the Europa League. In the latter, the club ultimately lost to Valencia after having defeated Udinese, Anderlecht, Malmö FF, Austria Wien, Metalist Kharkiv, Aalesund and Baumit Jablonec to reach that stage.

On 21 December 2011, during the quarter-finals of the 2011–12 KNVB Cup, a 19-year-old Ajax fan invaded the Amsterdam Arena pitch in the 36th minute with Ajax winning 1–0, attacking AZ goalkeeper Esteban Alvarado. The fan slipped and Alvarado kicked the fan twice, prompting the referee to issue the goalkeeper a red card. Following this, AZ manager Gertjan Verbeek ordered his players to leave the pitch for the dressing room in protest. The match was later played on 19 January 2012, with Alvarado&#x27;s red card rescinded; AZ won 3–2.

The 2012–13 season started in the Europa League with a qualifying play-off round against Guus Hiddink&#x27;s Anzhi Makhachkala. AZ was hammered 6–0 on aggregate. Disappointingly, AZ finished tenth in the 2012–13 Eredivisie, although the club won the 2012–13 KNVB Cup after defeating PSV 2–1 in the final. As cup winners, AZ automatically qualified for the 2013–14 Europa League.

In September 2013, just one day after emphatically beating PSV, at the time the league leaders, Verbeek was dismissed as first team manager by the club due to &quot;a lack of chemistry&quot; between management and players. He was replaced by Dick Advocaat for the remainder of the season until a permanent replacement could be found. Advocaat took AZ to the semi-finals of the KNVB Cup, the quarter-finals of the Europa League and eighth in the league, ultimately losing to Groningen in the Europa League play-off final round (their 58th match of the season, a club record).

=== 2014–2019: Van den Brom years ===
The 2014–15 season began with a new manager, former Heerenveen manager and Ajax great Marco van Basten. However, after just three matches into the season, Van Basten resigned as manager to become assistant manager under Alex Pastoor, citing heavy stress as the main reason. Pastoor was the interim manager during two matches under Van Basten&#x27;s absence and received the official title on 16 September, but contract negotiations failed and he left the club just two days later. A week later, John van den Brom was appointed manager. Under Van den Brom, AZ quickly rose up to the sub-top, eventually finished the season in third place, surpassing Feyenoord on the final season&#x27;s matchday and qualifying for the 2015–16 Europa League.

The 2015–16 Eredivisie started with AZ selling most of its first-team players from the previous season during the summer transfer period. As a response, AZ bought players from other Dutch clubs, notably Vincent Janssen from Almere City, Alireza Jahanbakhsh from NEC and Ben Rienstra from PEC Zwolle. In December, it was announced free agent Ron Vlaar signed a contract until the end of the season after training with the club for a few weeks prior. Vlaar quickly became team captain and helped lift AZ from tenth place to a fourth-place finish in the league. Along this rise, new signing Vincent Janssen scored 27 goals for the club, earning him the Eredivisie top goalscorer title. In the 2015–16 KNVB Cup, AZ made it to the semi-finals, losing 3–1 to Feyenoord. AZ won the first two qualification rounds to qualify for the 2015–16 Europa League group stage, but finished last in their group.

At the start of the 2016–17 Eredivisie, AZ sold last season&#x27;s performer Vincent Janssen to Tottenham Hotspur and long-time midfielder Markus Henriksen to Hull City. In the 2016–17 Europa League, AZ finished second in Group D, surviving the group stage for the third time in five seasons.

=== Since 2019: Slot–Jansen years ===
After an excellent 2019/20 season in which AZ beat league leaders Ajax home and away, aided by consistent performances from youth academy talents such as Teun Koopmeiners, Myron Boadu, Calvin Stengs and Owen Wijndal, the season was forced to end early due to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Joint on points with Ajax at the top of the table, AZ were given second place on goal difference, and subsequently earned Qualification to the Champions League second qualifying round.

A poor start to their 2020/21 Eredivisie campaign saw AZ draw five games in a row, before eventually picking up a victory against RKC Waalwijk on 1 November 2020.

AZ also struggled in European competitions this season. Despite a strong start, with a 3–1 extra time come back against Viktoria Plzen in the Champions League qualifiers, the club lost 2–0 to Dynamo Kyiv several weeks later, seeing them fall back into the Europa League. After victory against Napoli and Rijeka early in the pool stages, AZ was on track to advance, though lost to Real Sociedad away, obtained a 0–0 draw in the reverse fixture, and also drew 1–1 with Napoli. Following these results, AZ needed to defeat Rijeka away to advance. However, the departure the week before the game of manager Arne Slot saw an unorganised team lose 2–1 to Rijeka, ending their European dream.

In 2022–2023, AZ stepped up their performance in Europa Conference League play, winning five out of six Group E matches against SC Dnipro-1, Apollon Limassol and Vaduz, then beating Lazio 4–2 on aggregate. However, their run was ended by defeats to West Ham United, with AZ&#x27;s home leg marred by supporter violence.

==Coaching staff==
&quot;Statistic from January 2024&quot;
==Players==

=== Current squad ===












===Out on loan===



===Jong AZ===

Participating in the Eerste Divisie, the reserve squad of AZ trains and plays their home games in Zaanstad.

==Former players==
===National team players===
&quot;The following players were called up to represent their national teams in international football and received caps during their tenure with AZ Alkmaar:

*;Argentina
** Sergio Romero (2007–2011)
*;Australia
** James Holland (2009–2012)
** Brett Holman (2008–2012)
** Mathew Ryan (2023–2024)
*;Austria
** Kurt Welzl (1978–1981)
*;Belgium
** Stein Huysegems (2003–2006)
** Maarten Martens (2006–2014)
** Sébastien Pocognoli (2007–2010)
** Gill Swerts (2008–2011)
*;Cameroon
** Willie Overtoom (2013–2014)
*;Costa Rica
** Esteban Alvarado (2010–2015)
*;Denmark
** Henrik Eigenbrod (1982–1984)
** Kristen Nygaard (1972–1982)
** Kenneth Perez (2000–2006)
** Simon Poulsen (2008–2012; 2014–2015)
*;Estonia
** Ragnar Klavan (2009–2012)
*;Finland
** Niki Mäenpää (2011–2012)
** Niklas Moisander (2008–2012)
** Juha Reini (2002–2006)
*;Georgia
** Shota Arveladze (2005–2007)
*;Ghana
** Kamal Sowah (2022)
*;Greece
** Pantelis Chatzidiakos (2015–2023)
** Vangelis Pavlidis (2021–2024)
*;Hungary
** Milos Kerkez (2022–2023)
*;Iceland
** Joey Guðjónsson (2006–2007)
** Albert Guðmundsson (2018–2022)
** Jóhann Berg Guðmundsson (2009–2014)
** Kolbeinn Sigþórsson (2010–2011)
** Grétar Steinsson (2006–2008)
*;Iran
** Alireza Jahanbakhsh (2015–2018)

*;Japan
** Yukinari Sugawara (2020–2024)
*;Mexico
** Héctor Moreno (2008–2011)
*;Morocco
** Zakaria Aboukhlal (2019–2022)
** Nourdin Boukhari (2007)
** Ali Elkhattabi (2001–2006)
** Abdelkrim El Hadrioui (1998–2002)
** Mounir El Hamdaoui (2007–2010; 2015–2016)
** Oussama Idrissi (2018–2020)
** Adil Ramzi (2004–2006)
** Tarik Sektioui (2004–2006)
*;Netherlands
** Peter Arntz (1976–1985)
** Roy Beerens (2011–2014)
** Marco Bizot (2017–2021)
** Myron Boadu (2017–2021)
** Dries Boussatta (1998–2002)
** Tim de Cler (2002–2007)
** Barry van Galen (1997–2006)
** Willem van Hanegem (1976–1979)
** Hugo Hovenkamp (1975–1983)
** Kew Jaliens (2004–2011)
** Vincent Janssen (2015–2016)
** Jos Jonker (1980–1983)
** Danny Koevermans (2005–2007)
** Kees Kist (1972–1982; 1984–1985)
** Teun Koopmeiners (2017–2021)
** Jan Kromkamp (2000–2005)
** Denny Landzaat (2003–2006)
** Adam Maher (2010–2013; 2018–2019)
** Dirk Marcellis (2010–2015)
** Bruno Martins Indi (2020–present)
** Joris Mathijsen (2004–2006)
** Martijn Meerdink (2002–2007)
** David Mendes da Silva (2006–2010)
** John Metgod (1976–1982)
** Oscar Moens (1996–2003)
** Barry Opdam (1996–2008)
** Jan Peters (1977–1982)
** Henk van Rijnsoever (1974–1982)
** Stijn Schaars (2005–2011)
** Ronald Spelbos (1974–1982)
** Calvin Stengs (2017–2021)
** Guus Til (2016–2019)
** Henk Timmer (2000–2006)
** Pier Tol (1978–1988)

*Netherlands (&quot;continued&quot;)
** Nick Viergever (2010–2014)
** Ron Vlaar (2004–2006; 2015–2021)
** Bobby Vosmaer (1974–1978)
** Wout Weghorst (2016–2018)
** Owen Wijndal (2017–2022)
** Demy de Zeeuw (2005–2009)
*;Norway
** Håkon Evjen (2020–2023)
** Markus Henriksen (2012–2017)
** Bjørn Maars Johnsen (2018–2020)
** Fredrik Midtsjø (2017–2022)
** Jonas Svensson (2017–2021)
** David Møller Wolfe (2023–present)
*;Paraguay
** Celso Ortiz (2010–2016)
*;Republic of Ireland
** Troy Parrott (2024–present)
*;Romania
** Dorin Rotariu (2018–2019)
*;Serbia
** Kristijan Belić (2024–present)
** Nemanja Gudelj (2013–2015)
*;Suriname
** Ramon Leeuwin (2020–2021)
*;Sweden
** Rasmus Elm (2009–2012)
** Mattias Johansson (2012–2017)
** Jesper Karlsson (2020–2023)
** Muamer Tanković (2014–2017)
** Pontus Wernbloom (2009–2012)
*;Trinidad &amp; Tobago
** Levi García (2015–2018)
*;United States
** Jozy Altidore (2011–2013)
** Aron Jóhannsson (2013–2015)
** Djordje Mihailovic (2023–2024)

* &quot;Players in bold actively play for AZ Alkmaar and for their respective national teams. Years in brackets indicate careerspan with AZ.&quot;

=== National team players by Confederation ===
Member associations are listed in order of most to least amount of current and former AZ players represented Internationally
==Players in international tournaments==
The following is a list of AZ players who have competed in international tournaments, including the FIFA World Cup, UEFA European Championship, AFC Asian Cup, Africa Cup of Nations, CONCACAF Gold Cup and the Copa América. To this date no AZ players have participated in the FIFA Confederations Cup or the OFC Nations Cup while playing for AZ Alkmaar.

==Stadium and sponsor==

===Stadium===


AZ play its home matches at the AFAS Stadion, located in the southern part of the city of Alkmaar. The stadium, which is directly owned by the club, was opened in 2006 and replaced the old Alkmaarderhout venue as the DSB Stadion. The stadium currently has a capacity of 17,023. During its design stages, the name Victorie Stadion was frequently used, referring to the Dutch War of Independence, the phrase &quot;&quot;In Alkmaar begint de victorie&quot; (Victory begins in Alkmaar)&quot; in particular. Until now, this name has not been officially in use, the board instead opting for sponsorship deals because of financial motives. However, to this day, the name maintains a good share of support among the fans.

To further increase revenue, AZ&#x27;s board of directors decided to expand the capacity of the new stadium to at least 30,000 somewhere in the future. The extension will be realised by constructing a second tier to three of the four stands. The main stand with all technical areas, VIP and sponsor and media facilities will remain in place. These plans, however, were put on hold after the DSB bankruptcy and there are no current plans to increase the capacity.

In October 2009, sponsor DSB Bank was declared bankrupt. The stadium name temporarily changed from DSB Stadion to AZ Stadion, as it was considered undesirable that the stadium was linked with a non-existent bank. In February 2010, a new main sponsor was found in construction works service provider BUKO, based in Beverwijk.

A year later, in the 2010–11 season, took over as official stadium sponsor. The current external name of the ground is the AFAS Stadion.

On 10 August 2019, the roof of the stadium partially collapsed. No people were injured during the incident. As the result AZ spent the rest of the year playing home matches at the Cars Jeans Stadion in The Hague whilst the damaged roof was being removed, before returning to the stadium on 15 December 2019, beating Ajax 1–0 in their first match back. AZ played the rest of the 2019/20 season, until the COVID-19 pandemic cut it short, without a roof. During the 2020/21 season, a new roof was installed, held up by 20 crane-like arms on three sides and a so-called &quot;mega truss&quot; on the main stand. The renewed stadium, which also included a capacity upgrade of nearly 2,500 seats for a new total capacity of 19,500, was officially opened on 11 September 2021, before the home game against PSV.

===Kit suppliers and shirt sponsors===
==Honours==

==European record==
===Matches===
===UEFA coefficient ranking===

==Domestic results==
Below is a table with AZ&#x27;s domestic results since the introduction of professional football in 1956.

==Coaches==

===Alkmaar &#x27;54===
* (1954–1956)
* Kick Smit (1956–1958)
* (1 July 1958 – 30 June 1960)
* Piet de Wolf (1960–1961)
* (1961–1962)
* Arie Rentenaar (1962–1963)
* (1 July 1963 – 30 June 1965)
* Barry Hughes (1 July 1965 – 30 June 1967)

===KFC / FC Zaanstreek===
* Bob Kelly (1955–1956)
* (1956–1958)
* (1958–1960)
* (1960–1963)
* (1963–1964)
* Piet de Wolf (1964–1965)
* (1965–1966)

===AZ &#x27;67===
* Lesley Talbot (1 July 1967 – 30 June 1968)
* (1968–1969)
* Robert Heinz (1969–1971)
* Cor van der Hart (1 July 1971 – 30 June 1973)
* Joop Brand (1 July 1973 – 30 June 1976)
* Hans Kraay Sr. (1 July 1976 – 30 June 1977)
* Jan Notermans (1977)
* Cor van der Hart (1 July 1977 – 30 June 1978)
* Georg Keßler (1 July 1978 – 30 June 1982)
* Hans Eijkenbroek (1 July 1982 – 30 June 1983)
* Piet de Visser (1 July 1983 – 30 June 1985)
* Joop Brand (1 July 1985 – 30 June 1986)
* Han Berger (1 July 1986 – 31 December 1986)

===AZ===
* Hans Eijkenbroek (1987 – 30 June 1989)
* Hans van Doorneveld (1 July 1989 – 30 June 1990)
* Henk Wullems (1 July 1990 – 30 June 1993)
* Piet Schrijvers (1 July 1993 – 30 June 1994)
* Theo Vonk (1 July 1994 – 28 February 1997)
* Hans de Koning &quot;(interim)&quot; (28 February 1997 – 30 June 1997)
* Willem van Hanegem (1 July 1997 – 30 June 1999)
* Gerard van der Lem (1 July 1999 – 30 March 2000)
* Henk van Stee (31 March 2000 – 30 October 2002)
* Co Adriaanse (30 October 2002 – 30 June 2005)
* Louis van Gaal (1 July 2005 – 30 June 2009)
* Ronald Koeman (1 July 2009 – 5 December 2009)
* Martin Haar &quot;(interim)&quot; (5 December 2009 – 10 December 2009)
* Dick Advocaat (10 December 2009 – 30 June 2010)
* Gertjan Verbeek (1 July 2010 – 29 September 2013)
* Martin Haar &quot;(interim)&quot; (29 September 2013 – 15 October 2013)
* Dick Advocaat (15 October 2013 – 30 June 2014)
* Marco van Basten (30 June 2014 – 16 September 2014)
* John van den Brom (29 September 2014 – 30 June 2019)
* Arne Slot (1 July 2019  – 5 December 2020)
* Pascal Jansen (5 December 2020 – 17 January 2024)
* Maarten Martens (17 January 2024 – present)
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191264" start="0" end="18" title="AZ Alkmaar" label="Alkmaar Zaanstreek"/>
<link wikidata="Q191264" start="55" end="65" title="AZ Alkmaar" label="AZ Alkmaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q191264" start="98" end="100" title="AZ Alkmaar" label="AZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="148" end="156" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q972" start="167" end="174" title="Alkmaar" label="Alkmaar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="183" end="196" title="Zaan#The Zaan district" label="Zaan district"/>
<link wikidata="Q167541" start="220" end="230" title="Eredivisie" label="Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349791" start="319" end="326" title="1980–81 Eredivisie" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q592761" start="331" end="338" title="2008–09 Eredivisie" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q840257" start="410" end="424" title="1981 UEFA Cup Final" label="UEFA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="445" end="457" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q216858" start="480" end="488" title="KNVB Cup" label="KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q591412" start="516" end="535" title="Johan Cruyff Shield" label="Johan Cruyff Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q213116" start="825" end="857" title="Royal Dutch Football Association" label="Royal Dutch Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744172" start="1101" end="1111" title="Klaas Smit" label="Klaas Smit"/>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="1365" end="1369" title="AFC Ajax" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130756" start="1984" end="2006" title="1966–67 Eerste Divisie" label="1966–67 Eerste Divisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260299" start="2100" end="2116" title="Koog aan de Zaan" label="Koog aan de Zaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q216858" start="2493" end="2501" title="KNVB Cup" label="KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q167541" start="2575" end="2590" title="Eredivisie" label="Dutch champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349791" start="2594" end="2598" title="1980–81 Eredivisie" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q11938" start="2673" end="2676" title="PSV Eindhoven" label="PSV"/>
<link wikidata="Q840257" start="2961" end="2982" title="1981 UEFA Cup Final" label="final of the UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="3011" end="3023" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q642743" start="3047" end="3059" title="1981–82 European Cup" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="3111" end="3120" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q464040" start="3123" end="3135" title="Georg Keßler" label="Georg Keßler"/>
<link wikidata="Q440417" start="3223" end="3232" title="Kees Kist" label="Kees Kist"/>
<link wikidata="Q233454" start="3328" end="3348" title="European Golden Shoe" label="European Golden Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q919764" start="3394" end="3404" title="Jan Peters (footballer, born 1954)" label="Jan Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336885" start="3491" end="3505" title="Hugo Hovenkamp" label="Hugo Hovenkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="3604" end="3629" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q182196" start="3674" end="3688" title="UEFA Euro 1980" label="UEFA Euro 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332295" start="3735" end="3746" title="John Metgod" label="John Metgod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336551" start="3995" end="4010" title="Kristen Nygaard (footballer)" label="Kristen Nygaard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4132" end="4145" title="Cees Molenaar" label="Cees Molenaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q167541" start="4338" end="4348" title="Eredivisie" label="Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q24719" start="4455" end="4462" title="Roda JC" label="Roda JC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924875" start="4943" end="4965" title="1997-98 Eerste Divisie" label="1997-98 Eerste Divisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349917" start="5092" end="5110" title="2004-05 Eredivisie" label="2004-05 Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q291590" start="5232" end="5242" title="AZ Stadion" label="AZ Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070937" start="5393" end="5411" title="2006–07 Eredivisie" label="2006–07 Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q370712" start="5565" end="5574" title="S.B.V. Excelsior" label="Excelsior"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5646" end="5660" title="2006–07 KNVB Cup#Final" label="KNVB Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q186489" start="5778" end="5794" title="2007–08 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q334405" start="5831" end="5842" title="Tim de Cler" label="Tim de Cler"/>
<link wikidata="Q359255" start="5844" end="5860" title="Danny Koevermans" label="Danny Koevermans"/>
<link wikidata="Q314365" start="5865" end="5880" title="Shota Arveladze" label="Shota Arveladze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="5984" end="5991" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q476048" start="6005" end="6013" title="2007–08 UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070918" start="6266" end="6284" title="2007–08 Eredivisie" label="2007–08 Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q207431" start="6383" end="6397" title="Louis van Gaal" label="Louis van Gaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q592761" start="6519" end="6533" title="2008–09 Eredivisie" label="2008–09 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q332642" start="6593" end="6602" title="NAC Breda" label="NAC Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q24904" start="6607" end="6619" title="ADO Den Haag" label="ADO Den Haag"/>
<link wikidata="Q19603" start="6929" end="6935" title="FC Twente" label="Twente"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="7094" end="7115" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q184182" start="7163" end="7179" title="2009–10 UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="7242" end="7252" title="Arsenal FC" label="Arsenal FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q190561" start="7254" end="7268" title="Standard Liège" label="Standard Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q12396315" start="7273" end="7283" title="Olympiacos" label="Olympiacos"/>
<link wikidata="Q192635" start="7429" end="7442" title="Ronald Koeman" label="Ronald Koeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="7496" end="7509" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="7710" end="7717" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q29108" start="7722" end="7744" title="FC Zenit Saint Petersburg" label="Zenit Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11949" start="7753" end="7766" title="Dick Advocaat" label="Dick Advocaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094306" start="7941" end="7956" title="Gertjan Verbeek" label="Gertjan Verbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q266928" start="7995" end="8013" title="2010–11 Eredivisie" label="2010–11 Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q211915" start="8045" end="8067" title="2011–12 UEFA Europa League" label="Europa League football"/>
<link wikidata="Q787092" start="8102" end="8110" title="2010–11 KNVB Cup" label="KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q206657" start="8229" end="8242" title="2010–11 UEFA Europa League" label="Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q670444" start="8370" end="8380" title="2011–12 Eredivisie" label="Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718861" start="8473" end="8481" title="2011–12 KNVB Cup" label="KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11961" start="8493" end="8501" title="Heracles Almelo" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q10333" start="8608" end="8616" title="Valencia CF" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798" start="8639" end="8646" title="Udinese Calcio" label="Udinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q187528" start="8648" end="8658" title="R.S.C. Anderlecht" label="Anderlecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q204881" start="8660" end="8668" title="Malmö FF" label="Malmö FF"/>
<link wikidata="Q131209" start="8670" end="8682" title="FK Austria Wien" label="Austria Wien"/>
<link wikidata="Q207462" start="8684" end="8700" title="FC Metalist Kharkiv" label="Metalist Kharkiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q214992" start="8702" end="8710" title="Aalesunds FK" label="Aalesund"/>
<link wikidata="Q425599" start="8715" end="8730" title="FK Baumit Jablonec" label="Baumit Jablonec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718861" start="8807" end="8823" title="2011–12 KNVB Cup" label="2011–12 KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q207109" start="8860" end="8875" title="Amsterdam Arena" label="Amsterdam Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q152791" start="8948" end="8964" title="Esteban Alvarado" label="Esteban Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093853" start="9326" end="9339" title="2012–13 UEFA Europa League qualifying phase and play-off round" label="Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q484534" start="9381" end="9393" title="Guus Hiddink" label="Guus Hiddink"/>
<link wikidata="Q19353" start="9401" end="9418" title="FC Anzhi Makhachkala" label="Anzhi Makhachkala"/>
<link wikidata="Q976911" start="9496" end="9514" title="2012–13 Eredivisie" label="2012–13 Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824283" start="9542" end="9558" title="2012–13 KNVB Cup" label="2012–13 KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9590" end="9595" title="2012–13 KNVB Cup#Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q534168" start="9648" end="9669" title="2013–14 UEFA Europa League" label="2013–14 Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q10937006" start="9752" end="9766" title="2013–14 Eredivisie" label="league leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q13740380" start="10049" end="10057" title="2013–14 KNVB Cup" label="KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q534168" start="10085" end="10098" title="2013–14 UEFA Europa League" label="Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q24711" start="10146" end="10155" title="FC Groningen" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068831" start="10290" end="10304" title="2014–15 Eredivisie" label="2014–15 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q200321" start="10338" end="10348" title="SC Heerenveen" label="Heerenveen"/>
<link wikidata="Q483629" start="10372" end="10388" title="Marco van Basten" label="Marco van Basten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094263" start="10506" end="10518" title="Alex Pastoor" label="Alex Pastoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q733609" start="10781" end="10798" title="John van den Brom" label="John van den Brom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15699191" start="11004" end="11025" title="2015–16 UEFA Europa League" label="2015–16 Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19797368" start="11032" end="11050" title="2015–16 Eredivisie" label="2015–16 Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q14856634" start="11231" end="11246" title="Vincent Janssen" label="Vincent Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q653119" start="11252" end="11263" title="Almere City FC" label="Almere City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406552" start="11265" end="11284" title="Alireza Jahanbakhsh" label="Alireza Jahanbakhsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q318348" start="11290" end="11293" title="N.E.C. (football club)" label="NEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q349775" start="11298" end="11310" title="Ben Rienstra" label="Ben Rienstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q269151" start="11316" end="11326" title="PEC Zwolle" label="PEC Zwolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212617" start="11369" end="11378" title="Ron Vlaar" label="Ron Vlaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q20528214" start="11718" end="11734" title="2015–16 KNVB Cup" label="2015–16 KNVB Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q23978449" start="11943" end="11961" title="2016–17 Eredivisie" label="2016–17 Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="12019" end="12036" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q182044" start="12062" end="12078" title="Markus Henriksen" label="Markus Henriksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19477" start="12082" end="12091" title="Hull City A.F.C." label="Hull City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18740965" start="12100" end="12121" title="2016–17 UEFA Europa League" label="2016–17 Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q63987256" start="12274" end="12288" title="2019–20 Eredivisie" label="2019/20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="12321" end="12325" title="AFC Ajax" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q39498277" start="12409" end="12425" title="Teun Koopmeiners" label="Teun Koopmeiners"/>
<link wikidata="Q38223926" start="12427" end="12438" title="Myron Boadu" label="Myron Boadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q28849190" start="12440" end="12453" title="Calvin Stengs" label="Calvin Stengs"/>
<link wikidata="Q28753836" start="12458" end="12470" title="Owen Wijndal" label="Owen Wijndal"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="12533" end="12541" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12695" end="12735" title="2020–21 UEFA Champions League#Second qualifying round" label="Champions League second qualifying round"/>
<link wikidata="Q92455639" start="12760" end="12778" title="2020–21 Eredivisie" label="2020/21 Eredivisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q24699" start="12868" end="12880" title="RKC Waalwijk" label="RKC Waalwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q206838" start="13022" end="13036" title="FC Viktoria Plzeň" label="Viktoria Plzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q179075" start="13094" end="13105" title="FC Dynamo Kyiv" label="Dynamo Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="13158" end="13171" title="UEFA Europa League" label="Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641" start="13195" end="13201" title="S.S.C. Napoli" label="Napoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q318969" start="13206" end="13212" title="HNK Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q10315" start="13282" end="13295" title="Real Sociedad" label="Real Sociedad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641" start="13369" end="13375" title="S.S.C. Napoli" label="Napoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q318969" start="13422" end="13428" title="HNK Rijeka" label="Rijeka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029223" start="13505" end="13514" title="Arne Slot" label="Arne Slot"/>
<link wikidata="Q30964198" start="13717" end="13728" title="SC Dnipro-1" label="SC Dnipro-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q428047" start="13730" end="13746" title="Apollon Limassol FC" label="Apollon Limassol"/>
<link wikidata="Q216773" start="13751" end="13756" title="FC Vaduz" label="Vaduz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609" start="13771" end="13776" title="S.S. Lazio" label="Lazio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="13838" end="13853" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q610823" start="14073" end="14087" title="Eerste Divisie" label="Eerste Divisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9978" start="14150" end="14158" title="Zaanstad" label="Zaanstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q831533" start="14270" end="14284" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s national association football teams" label="national teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="14288" end="14310" title="FIFA" label="international football"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="14324" end="14328" title="Cap (sport)" label="caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q215463" start="14382" end="14395" title="Sergio Romero" label="Sergio Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q544059" start="14423" end="14436" title="James Holland (soccer)" label="James Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q135610" start="14452" end="14464" title="Brett Holman" label="Brett Holman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587689" start="14480" end="14491" title="Mathew Ryan" label="Mathew Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q699032" start="14517" end="14527" title="Kurt Welzl" label="Kurt Welzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q607995" start="14553" end="14568" title="Stein Huysegems" label="Stein Huysegems"/>
<link wikidata="Q170080" start="14584" end="14599" title="Maarten Martens" label="Maarten Martens"/>
<link wikidata="Q468114" start="14615" end="14634" title="Sébastien Pocognoli" label="Sébastien Pocognoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368606" start="14650" end="14661" title="Gill Swerts" label="Gill Swerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q193960" start="14688" end="14703" title="Willie Overtoom" label="Willie Overtoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q152791" start="14732" end="14748" title="Esteban Alvarado" label="Esteban Alvarado"/>
<link wikidata="Q16187057" start="14774" end="14790" title="Henrik Eigenbrod" label="Henrik Eigenbrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336551" start="14806" end="14821" title="Kristen Nygaard (footballer)" label="Kristen Nygaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q525400" start="14837" end="14850" title="Kenneth Perez" label="Kenneth Perez"/>
<link wikidata="Q298470" start="14866" end="14879" title="Simon Poulsen" label="Simon Poulsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q458302" start="14916" end="14929" title="Ragnar Klavan" label="Ragnar Klavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q862756" start="14955" end="14967" title="Niki Mäenpää" label="Niki Mäenpää"/>
<link wikidata="Q128920" start="14983" end="14999" title="Niklas Moisander" label="Niklas Moisander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370702" start="15015" end="15025" title="Juha Reini" label="Juha Reini"/>
<link wikidata="Q314365" start="15051" end="15066" title="Shota Arveladze" label="Shota Arveladze"/>
<link wikidata="Q51880162" start="15090" end="15101" title="Kamal Sowah" label="Kamal Sowah"/>
<link wikidata="Q21725506" start="15121" end="15142" title="Pantelis Chatzidiakos" label="Pantelis Chatzidiakos"/>
<link wikidata="Q24231840" start="15158" end="15175" title="Vangelis Pavlidis" label="Vangelis Pavlidis"/>
<link wikidata="Q110874376" start="15201" end="15213" title="Milos Kerkez" label="Milos Kerkez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102763" start="15239" end="15254" title="Joey Guðjónsson" label="Joey Guðjónsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21171299" start="15270" end="15288" title="Albert Guðmundsson (footballer, born 1997)" label="Albert Guðmundsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170038" start="15304" end="15327" title="Jóhann Berg Guðmundsson" label="Jóhann Berg Guðmundsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q128936" start="15343" end="15362" title="Kolbeinn Sigþórsson" label="Kolbeinn Sigþórsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q316635" start="15378" end="15394" title="Grétar Steinsson" label="Grétar Steinsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4406552" start="15417" end="15436" title="Alireza Jahanbakhsh" label="Alireza Jahanbakhsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q50073536" start="15461" end="15478" title="Yukinari Sugawara" label="Yukinari Sugawara"/>
<link wikidata="Q313158" start="15503" end="15516" title="Héctor Moreno" label="Héctor Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q56257819" start="15542" end="15559" title="Zakaria Aboukhlal" label="Zakaria Aboukhlal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143833" start="15575" end="15591" title="Nourdin Boukhari" label="Nourdin Boukhari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111299" start="15602" end="15616" title="Ali Elkhattabi" label="Ali Elkhattabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q539964" start="15632" end="15653" title="Abdelkrim El Hadrioui" label="Abdelkrim El Hadrioui"/>
<link wikidata="Q62869" start="15669" end="15687" title="Mounir El Hamdaoui" label="Mounir El Hamdaoui"/>
<link wikidata="Q23007827" start="15714" end="15729" title="Oussama Idrissi" label="Oussama Idrissi"/>
<link wikidata="Q795467" start="15745" end="15755" title="Adil Ramzi" label="Adil Ramzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q710207" start="15771" end="15785" title="Tarik Sektioui" label="Tarik Sektioui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539927" start="15815" end="15826" title="Peter Arntz" label="Peter Arntz"/>
<link wikidata="Q182315" start="15842" end="15853" title="Roy Beerens" label="Roy Beerens"/>
<link wikidata="Q218937" start="15869" end="15880" title="Marco Bizot" label="Marco Bizot"/>
<link wikidata="Q38223926" start="15896" end="15907" title="Myron Boadu" label="Myron Boadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028415" start="15923" end="15938" title="Dries Boussatta" label="Dries Boussatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q334405" start="15954" end="15965" title="Tim de Cler" label="Tim de Cler"/>
<link wikidata="Q809119" start="15981" end="15996" title="Barry van Galen" label="Barry van Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q353017" start="16012" end="16030" title="Willem van Hanegem" label="Willem van Hanegem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336885" start="16046" end="16060" title="Hugo Hovenkamp" label="Hugo Hovenkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q316989" start="16076" end="16087" title="Kew Jaliens" label="Kew Jaliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q14856634" start="16103" end="16118" title="Vincent Janssen" label="Vincent Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2752331" start="16134" end="16144" title="Jos Jonker" label="Jos Jonker"/>
<link wikidata="Q359255" start="16160" end="16176" title="Danny Koevermans" label="Danny Koevermans"/>
<link wikidata="Q440417" start="16192" end="16201" title="Kees Kist" label="Kees Kist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39498277" start="16228" end="16244" title="Teun Koopmeiners" label="Teun Koopmeiners"/>
<link wikidata="Q313054" start="16260" end="16272" title="Jan Kromkamp" label="Jan Kromkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q313206" start="16288" end="16302" title="Denny Landzaat" label="Denny Landzaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q170077" start="16318" end="16328" title="Adam Maher" label="Adam Maher"/>
<link wikidata="Q152823" start="16355" end="16369" title="Dirk Marcellis" label="Dirk Marcellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q198064" start="16385" end="16403" title="Bruno Martins Indi" label="Bruno Martins Indi"/>
<link wikidata="Q126461" start="16422" end="16437" title="Joris Mathijsen" label="Joris Mathijsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956527" start="16453" end="16469" title="Martijn Meerdink" label="Martijn Meerdink"/>
<link wikidata="Q696440" start="16485" end="16506" title="David Mendes da Silva" label="David Mendes da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332295" start="16522" end="16533" title="John Metgod" label="John Metgod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379836" start="16549" end="16560" title="Oscar Moens" label="Oscar Moens"/>
<link wikidata="Q522756" start="16576" end="16587" title="Barry Opdam" label="Barry Opdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q919764" start="16603" end="16613" title="Jan Peters (footballer, born 1954)" label="Jan Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499136" start="16629" end="16648" title="Henk van Rijnsoever" label="Henk van Rijnsoever"/>
<link wikidata="Q210937" start="16664" end="16677" title="Stijn Schaars" label="Stijn Schaars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945371" start="16693" end="16707" title="Ronald Spelbos" label="Ronald Spelbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q28849190" start="16723" end="16736" title="Calvin Stengs" label="Calvin Stengs"/>
<link wikidata="Q26385193" start="16752" end="16760" title="Guus Til" label="Guus Til"/>
<link wikidata="Q334341" start="16776" end="16787" title="Henk Timmer" label="Henk Timmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269396" start="16803" end="16811" title="Pier Tol" label="Pier Tol"/>
<link wikidata="Q152801" start="16865" end="16879" title="Nick Viergever" label="Nick Viergever"/>
<link wikidata="Q212617" start="16895" end="16904" title="Ron Vlaar" label="Ron Vlaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301536" start="16931" end="16944" title="Bobby Vosmaer" label="Bobby Vosmaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210473" start="16960" end="16973" title="Wout Weghorst" label="Wout Weghorst"/>
<link wikidata="Q28753836" start="16989" end="17001" title="Owen Wijndal" label="Owen Wijndal"/>
<link wikidata="Q214453" start="17017" end="17030" title="Demy de Zeeuw" label="Demy de Zeeuw"/>
<link wikidata="Q53079519" start="17055" end="17066" title="Håkon Evjen" label="Håkon Evjen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182044" start="17082" end="17098" title="Markus Henriksen" label="Markus Henriksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17627787" start="17114" end="17133" title="Bjørn Maars Johnsen" label="Bjørn Maars Johnsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379641" start="17149" end="17164" title="Fredrik Midtsjø" label="Fredrik Midtsjø"/>
<link wikidata="Q530518" start="17180" end="17194" title="Jonas Svensson (footballer)" label="Jonas Svensson"/>
<link wikidata="Q101095985" start="17210" end="17228" title="David Møller Wolfe" label="David Møller Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q182308" start="17258" end="17269" title="Celso Ortiz" label="Celso Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q67243168" start="17307" end="17319" title="Troy Parrott" label="Troy Parrott"/>
<link wikidata="Q10555294" start="17348" end="17361" title="Dorin Rotariu" label="Dorin Rotariu"/>
<link wikidata="Q94581487" start="17386" end="17401" title="Kristijan Belić" label="Kristijan Belić"/>
<link wikidata="Q644989" start="17420" end="17434" title="Nemanja Gudelj" label="Nemanja Gudelj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053209" start="17461" end="17474" title="Ramon Leeuwin" label="Ramon Leeuwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q310665" start="17499" end="17509" title="Rasmus Elm" label="Rasmus Elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q152804" start="17525" end="17542" title="Mattias Johansson" label="Mattias Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q24701050" start="17558" end="17573" title="Jesper Karlsson" label="Jesper Karlsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15718503" start="17589" end="17604" title="Muamer Tanković" label="Muamer Tanković"/>
<link wikidata="Q313037" start="17620" end="17636" title="Pontus Wernbloom" label="Pontus Wernbloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22004457" start="17676" end="17687" title="Levi García" label="Levi García"/>
<link wikidata="Q208619" start="17719" end="17732" title="Jozy Altidore" label="Jozy Altidore"/>
<link wikidata="Q48554" start="17748" end="17763" title="Aron Jóhannsson" label="Aron Jóhannsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q28800388" start="17779" end="17797" title="Djordje Mihailovic" label="Djordje Mihailovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="18272" end="18286" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="18288" end="18314" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q157894" start="18316" end="18329" title="AFC Asian Cup" label="AFC Asian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q83145" start="18331" end="18352" title="Africa Cup of Nations" label="Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q189327" start="18354" end="18371" title="CONCACAF Gold Cup" label="CONCACAF Gold Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q178750" start="18380" end="18392" title="Copa América" label="Copa América"/>
<link wikidata="Q171789" start="18446" end="18469" title="FIFA Confederations Cup" label="FIFA Confederations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q213070" start="18477" end="18492" title="OFC Nations Cup" label="OFC Nations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q291590" start="18597" end="18609" title="AFAS Stadion" label="AFAS Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q99887389" start="18754" end="18768" title="Alkmaarderhout" label="Alkmaarderhout"/>
<link wikidata="Q376105" start="18782" end="18793" title="DSB Bank" label="DSB Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="18933" end="18958" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Dutch War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350145" start="18983" end="19012" title="Siege of Alkmaar" label="In Alkmaar begint de victorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q376105" start="19769" end="19777" title="DSB Bank" label="DSB Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q9905" start="20058" end="20067" title="Beverwijk" label="Beverwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q720978" start="20388" end="20406" title="Cars Jeans Stadion" label="Cars Jeans Stadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="20410" end="20419" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375222" start="21311" end="21320" title="Kick Smit" label="Kick Smit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217880" start="21366" end="21378" title="Piet de Wolf" label="Piet de Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21407" end="21421" title="Arie Rentenaar" label="Arie Rentenaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354151" start="21467" end="21479" title="Barry Hughes" label="Barry Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179669" start="21538" end="21547" title="Bob Kelly (footballer)" label="Bob Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217880" start="21618" end="21630" title="Piet de Wolf" label="Piet de Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q628299" start="21678" end="21691" title="Lesley Talbot" label="Lesley Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q13104823" start="21737" end="21749" title="Robert Heinz" label="Robert Heinz"/>
<link wikidata="Q718029" start="21764" end="21780" title="Cor van der Hart" label="Cor van der Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6276064" start="21812" end="21822" title="Joop Brand" label="Joop Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091537" start="21854" end="21868" title="Hans Kraay Sr." label="Hans Kraay Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2005735" start="21900" end="21913" title="Jan Notermans" label="Jan Notermans"/>
<link wikidata="Q718029" start="21923" end="21939" title="Cor van der Hart" label="Cor van der Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q464040" start="21971" end="21983" title="Georg Keßler" label="Georg Keßler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026354" start="22015" end="22031" title="Hans Eijkenbroek" label="Hans Eijkenbroek"/>
<link wikidata="Q971409" start="22063" end="22077" title="Piet de Visser (football manager)" label="Piet de Visser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6276064" start="22109" end="22119" title="Joop Brand" label="Joop Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q440293" start="22151" end="22161" title="Han Berger" label="Han Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026354" start="22207" end="22223" title="Hans Eijkenbroek" label="Hans Eijkenbroek"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22248" end="22267" title=":nl:Hans van Doorneveld" label="Hans van Doorneveld"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016606" start="22299" end="22311" title="Henk Wullems" label="Henk Wullems"/>
<link wikidata="Q370636" start="22343" end="22358" title="Piet Schrijvers" label="Piet Schrijvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280571" start="22390" end="22399" title="Theo Vonk" label="Theo Vonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065388" start="22435" end="22449" title="Hans de Koning" label="Hans de Koning"/>
<link wikidata="Q353017" start="22508" end="22526" title="Willem van Hanegem" label="Willem van Hanegem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586988" start="22558" end="22576" title="Gerard van der Lem" label="Gerard van der Lem"/>
<link wikidata="Q932236" start="22609" end="22622" title="Henk van Stee" label="Henk van Stee"/>
<link wikidata="Q469750" start="22659" end="22671" title="Co Adriaanse" label="Co Adriaanse"/>
<link wikidata="Q207431" start="22707" end="22721" title="Louis van Gaal" label="Louis van Gaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192635" start="22753" end="22766" title="Ronald Koeman" label="Ronald Koeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q787484" start="22801" end="22812" title="Martin Haar" label="Martin Haar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11949" start="22874" end="22887" title="Dick Advocaat" label="Dick Advocaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094306" start="22924" end="22939" title="Gertjan Verbeek" label="Gertjan Verbeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q787484" start="22976" end="22987" title="Martin Haar" label="Martin Haar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11949" start="23050" end="23063" title="Dick Advocaat" label="Dick Advocaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q483629" start="23099" end="23115" title="Marco van Basten" label="Marco van Basten"/>
<link wikidata="Q733609" start="23153" end="23170" title="John van den Brom" label="John van den Brom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029223" start="23208" end="23217" title="Arne Slot" label="Arne Slot"/>
<link wikidata="Q20978395" start="23253" end="23266" title="Pascal Jansen" label="Pascal Jansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170080" start="23305" end="23320" title="Maarten Martens" label="Maarten Martens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2296" wikidata="Q712294" url="?curid=2296" title="Adrenal gland">
<text>The adrenal glands (also known as suprarenal glands) are endocrine glands that produce a variety of hormones including adrenaline and the steroids aldosterone and cortisol. They are found above the kidneys. Each gland has an outer cortex which produces steroid hormones and an inner medulla. The adrenal cortex itself is divided into three main zones: the zona glomerulosa, the zona fasciculata and the zona reticularis.

The adrenal cortex produces three main types of steroid hormones: mineralocorticoids, glucocorticoids, and androgens. Mineralocorticoids (such as aldosterone) produced in the zona glomerulosa help in the regulation of blood pressure and electrolyte balance. The glucocorticoids cortisol and cortisone are synthesized in the zona fasciculata; their functions include the regulation of metabolism and immune system suppression. The innermost layer of the cortex, the zona reticularis, produces androgens that are converted to fully functional sex hormones in the gonads and other target organs. The production of steroid hormones is called steroidogenesis, and involves a number of reactions and processes that take place in cortical cells. The medulla produces the catecholamines, which function to produce a rapid response throughout the body in stress situations.

A number of endocrine diseases involve dysfunctions of the adrenal gland. Overproduction of cortisol leads to Cushing&#x27;s syndrome, whereas insufficient production is associated with Addison&#x27;s disease. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is a genetic disease produced by dysregulation of endocrine control mechanisms. A variety of tumors can arise from adrenal tissue and are commonly found in medical imaging when searching for other diseases.
==Structure==

The adrenal glands are located on both sides of the body in the retroperitoneum, above and slightly medial to the kidneys. In humans, the right adrenal gland is pyramidal in shape, whereas the left is semilunar or crescent shaped and somewhat larger. The adrenal glands measure approximately 5 cm in length, 3 cm in width, and up to 1 cm in thickness. Their combined weight in an adult human ranges from 7 to 10 grams. The glands are yellowish in colour.

The adrenal glands are surrounded by a fatty capsule and lie within the renal fascia, which also surrounds the kidneys. A weak septum (wall) of connective tissue separates the glands from the kidneys. The adrenal glands are directly below the diaphragm, and are attached to the crura of the diaphragm by the renal fascia.

Each adrenal gland has two distinct parts, each with a unique function, the outer adrenal cortex and the inner medulla, both of which produce hormones.

===Adrenal cortex===
The adrenal cortex is the outer region and also the largest part of an adrenal gland. It is divided into three separate zones: zona glomerulosa, zona fasciculata and zona reticularis. Each zone is responsible for producing specific hormones.
The adrenal cortex is the outermost layer of the adrenal gland. Within the cortex are three layers, called &quot;zones&quot;. When viewed under a microscope each layer has a distinct appearance, and each has a different function. The adrenal cortex is devoted to production of hormones, namely aldosterone, cortisol, and androgens.

====Zona glomerulosa====
The outermost zone of the adrenal cortex is the zona glomerulosa. It lies immediately under the fibrous capsule of the gland. Cells in this layer form oval groups, separated by thin strands of connective tissue from the fibrous capsule of the gland and carry wide capillaries.

This layer is the main site for production of aldosterone, a mineralocorticoid, by the action of the enzyme aldosterone synthase. Aldosterone plays an important role in the long-term regulation of blood pressure.

====Zona fasciculata====
The zona fasciculata is situated between the zona glomerulosa and zona reticularis. Cells in this layer are responsible for producing glucocorticoids such as cortisol. It is the largest of the three layers, accounting for nearly 80% of the volume of the cortex. In the zona fasciculata, cells are arranged in columns radially oriented towards the medulla. Cells contain numerous lipid droplets, abundant mitochondria and a complex smooth endoplasmic reticulum.

====Zona reticularis====
The innermost cortical layer, the zona reticularis, lies directly adjacent to the medulla. It produces androgens, mainly dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), DHEA sulfate (DHEA-S), and androstenedione (the precursor to testosterone) in humans. Its small cells form irregular cords and clusters, separated by capillaries and connective tissue. The cells contain relatively small quantities of cytoplasm and lipid droplets, and sometimes display brown lipofuscin pigment.

===Medulla===

The adrenal medulla is at the centre of each adrenal gland, and is surrounded by the adrenal cortex. The chromaffin cells of the medulla are the body&#x27;s main source of the catecholamines, such as adrenaline and noradrenaline, released by the medulla. Approximately 20% noradrenaline (norepinephrine) and 80% adrenaline (epinephrine) are secreted here.

The adrenal medulla is driven by the sympathetic nervous system via preganglionic fibers originating in the thoracic spinal cord, from vertebrae T5–T11. Because it is innervated by preganglionic nerve fibers, the adrenal medulla can be considered as a specialized sympathetic ganglion. Unlike other sympathetic ganglia, however, the adrenal medulla lacks distinct synapses and releases its secretions directly into the blood.

===Blood supply===
The adrenal glands have one of the greatest blood supply rates per gram of tissue of any organ: up to 60 small arteries may enter each gland. Three arteries usually supply each adrenal gland:
* The superior suprarenal artery, a branch of the inferior phrenic artery
* The middle suprarenal artery, a direct branch of the abdominal aorta
* The inferior suprarenal artery, a branch of the renal artery
These blood vessels supply a network of small arteries within the capsule of the adrenal glands. Thin strands of the capsule enter the glands, carrying blood to them.

Venous blood is drained from the glands by the suprarenal veins, usually one for each gland:
* The right suprarenal vein drains into the inferior vena cava.
* The left suprarenal vein drains into the left renal vein or the left inferior phrenic vein.

The central adrenomedullary vein, in the adrenal medulla, is an unusual type of blood vessel. Its structure is different from the other veins in that the smooth muscle in its tunica media (the middle layer of the vessel) is arranged in conspicuous, longitudinally oriented bundles.

===Variability===
The adrenal glands may not develop at all, or may be fused in the midline behind the aorta. These are associated with other congenital abnormalities, such as failure of the kidneys to develop, or fused kidneys. The gland may develop with a partial or complete absence of the cortex, or may develop in an unusual location.

==Function==
The adrenal gland secretes a number of different hormones which are metabolised by enzymes either within the gland or in other parts of the body. These hormones are involved in a number of essential biological functions.

===Corticosteroids===
Corticosteroids are a group of steroid hormones produced from the cortex of the adrenal gland, from which they are named.
* Mineralocorticoids such as aldosterone regulate salt (&quot;mineral&quot;) balance and blood pressure
* Glucocorticoids such as cortisol influence metabolism rates of proteins, fats and sugars (&quot;glucose&quot;).
* Androgens such as dehydroepiandrosterone.

;Mineralocorticoids
The adrenal gland produces aldosterone, a mineralocorticoid, which is important in the regulation of salt (&quot;mineral&quot;) balance and blood volume. In the kidneys, aldosterone acts on the distal convoluted tubules and the collecting ducts by increasing the reabsorption of sodium and the excretion of both potassium and hydrogen ions. Aldosterone is responsible for the reabsorption of about 2% of filtered glomerular filtrate. Sodium retention is also a response of the distal colon and sweat glands to aldosterone receptor stimulation. Angiotensin II and extracellular potassium are the two main regulators of aldosterone production. The amount of sodium present in the body affects the extracellular volume, which in turn influences blood pressure. Therefore, the effects of aldosterone in sodium retention are important for the regulation of blood pressure.

;Glucocorticoids
Cortisol is the main glucocorticoid in humans. In species that do not create cortisol, this role is played by corticosterone instead. Glucocorticoids have many effects on metabolism. As their name suggests, they increase the circulating level of glucose. This is the result of an increase in the mobilization of amino acids from protein and the stimulation of synthesis of glucose from these amino acids in the liver. In addition, they increase the levels of free fatty acids, which cells can use as an alternative to glucose to obtain energy. Glucocorticoids also have effects unrelated to the regulation of blood sugar levels, including the suppression of the immune system and a potent anti-inflammatory effect. Cortisol reduces the capacity of osteoblasts to produce new bone tissue and decreases the absorption of calcium in the gastrointestinal tract.

The adrenal gland secretes a basal level of cortisol but can also produce bursts of the hormone in response to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the anterior pituitary. Cortisol is not evenly released during the day – its concentrations in the blood are highest in the early morning and lowest in the evening as a result of the circadian rhythm of ACTH secretion. Cortisone is an inactive product of the action of the enzyme 11β-HSD on cortisol. The reaction catalyzed by 11β-HSD is reversible, which means that it can turn administered cortisone into cortisol, the biologically active hormone.

;Formation

All corticosteroid hormones share cholesterol as a common precursor. Therefore, the first step in steroidogenesis is cholesterol uptake or synthesis. Cells that produce steroid hormones can acquire cholesterol through two paths. The main source is through dietary cholesterol transported via the blood as cholesterol esters within low density lipoproteins (LDL). LDL enters the cells through receptor-mediated endocytosis. The other source of cholesterol is synthesis in the cell&#x27;s endoplasmic reticulum. Synthesis can compensate when LDL levels are abnormally low. In the lysosome, cholesterol esters are converted to free cholesterol, which is then used for steroidogenesis or stored in the cell.

The initial part of conversion of cholesterol into steroid hormones involves a number of enzymes of the cytochrome P450 family that are located in the inner membrane of mitochondria. Transport of cholesterol from the outer to the inner membrane is facilitated by steroidogenic acute regulatory protein and is the rate-limiting step of steroid synthesis.

The layers of the adrenal gland differ by function, with each layer having distinct enzymes that produce different hormones from a common precursor. The first enzymatic step in the production of all steroid hormones is cleavage of the cholesterol side chain, a reaction that forms pregnenolone as a product and is catalyzed by the enzyme P450scc, also known as &quot;cholesterol desmolase&quot;. After the production of pregnenolone, specific enzymes of each cortical layer further modify it. Enzymes involved in this process include both mitochondrial and microsomal P450s and hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases. Usually a number of intermediate steps in which pregnenolone is modified several times are required to form the functional hormones. Enzymes that catalyze reactions in these metabolic pathways are involved in a number of endocrine diseases. For example, the most common form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia develops as a result of deficiency of 21-hydroxylase, an enzyme involved in an intermediate step of cortisol production.

;Regulation

Glucocorticoids are under the regulatory influence of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis (HPA) axis. Glucocorticoid synthesis is stimulated by adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), a hormone released into the bloodstream by the anterior pituitary. In turn, production of ACTH is stimulated by the presence of corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), which is released by neurons of the hypothalamus. ACTH acts on the adrenal cells first by increasing the levels of StAR within the cells, and then of all steroidogenic P450 enzymes. The HPA axis is an example of a negative feedback system, in which cortisol itself acts as a direct inhibitor of both CRH and ACTH synthesis. The HPA axis also interacts with the immune system through increased secretion of ACTH at the presence of certain molecules of the inflammatory response.

Mineralocorticoid secretion is regulated mainly by the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system (RAAS), the concentration of potassium, and to a lesser extent the concentration of ACTH. Sensors of blood pressure in the juxtaglomerular apparatus of the kidneys release the enzyme renin into the blood, which starts a cascade of reactions that lead to formation of angiotensin II. Angiotensin receptors in cells of the zona glomerulosa recognize the substance, and upon binding they stimulate the release of aldosterone.

===Androgens===
Cells in zona reticularis of the adrenal glands produce male sex hormones, or androgens, the most important of which is DHEA. In general, these hormones do not have an overall effect in the male body, and are converted to more potent androgens such as testosterone and DHT or to estrogens (female sex hormones) in the gonads, acting in this way as a metabolic intermediate.

===Catecholamines===
Primarily referred to in the United States as epinephrine and norepinephrine, adrenaline and noradrenaline are catecholamines, water-soluble compounds that have a structure made of a catechol group and an amine group. The adrenal glands are responsible for most of the adrenaline that circulates in the body, but only for a small amount of circulating noradrenaline. These hormones are released by the adrenal medulla, which contains a dense network of blood vessels. Adrenaline and noradrenaline act by interacting with adrenoreceptors throughout the body, with effects that include an increase in blood pressure and heart rate. Actions of adrenaline and noradrenaline are responsible for the fight or flight response, characterised by a quickening of breathing and heart rate, an increase in blood pressure, and constriction of blood vessels in many parts of the body.

;Formation
Catecholamines are produced in chromaffin cells in the medulla of the adrenal gland, from tyrosine, a non-essential amino acid derived from food or produced from phenylalanine in the liver. The enzyme tyrosine hydroxylase converts tyrosine to L-DOPA in the first step of catecholamine synthesis. L-DOPA is then converted to dopamine before it can be turned into noradrenaline. In the cytosol, noradrenaline is converted to epinephrine by the enzyme phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT) and stored in granules. Glucocorticoids produced in the adrenal cortex stimulate the synthesis of catecholamines by increasing the levels of tyrosine hydroxylase and PNMT.

Catecholamine release is stimulated by the activation of the sympathetic nervous system. Splanchnic nerves of the sympathetic nervous system innervate the medulla of the adrenal gland. When activated, it evokes the release of catecholamines from the storage granules by stimulating the opening of calcium channels in the cell membrane.

==Gene and protein expression==

The human genome includes approximately 20,000 protein coding genes and 70% of these genes are expressed in the normal adult adrenal glands. Only some 250 genes are more specifically expressed in the adrenal glands compared to other organs and tissues. The adrenal-gland-specific genes with the highest level of expression include members of the cytochrome P450 superfamily of enzymes. Corresponding proteins are expressed in the different compartments of the adrenal gland, such as CYP11A1, HSD3B2 and FDX1 involved in steroid hormone synthesis and expressed in cortical cell layers, and PNMT and DBH involved in noradrenaline and adrenaline synthesis and expressed in the medulla.

==Development==
The adrenal glands are composed of two heterogenous types of tissue. In the center is the adrenal medulla, which produces adrenaline and noradrenaline and releases them into the bloodstream, as part of the sympathetic nervous system. Surrounding the medulla is the cortex, which produces a variety of steroid hormones. These tissues come from different embryological precursors and have distinct prenatal development paths. The cortex of the adrenal gland is derived from mesoderm, whereas the medulla is derived from the neural crest, which is of ectodermal origin.

The adrenal glands in a newborn baby are much larger as a proportion of the body size than in an adult. For example, at age three months the glands are four times the size of the kidneys. The size of the glands decreases relatively after birth, mainly because of shrinkage of the cortex. The cortex, which almost completely disappears by age 1, develops again from age 4–5. The glands weigh about at birth and develop to an adult weight of about each. In a fetus the glands are first detectable after the sixth week of development.

===Cortex===
Adrenal cortex tissue is derived from the intermediate mesoderm. It first appears 33 days after fertilisation, shows steroid hormone production capabilities by the eighth week and undergoes rapid growth during the first trimester of pregnancy. The fetal adrenal cortex is different from its adult counterpart, as it is composed of two distinct zones: the inner &quot;fetal&quot; zone, which carries most of the hormone-producing activity, and the outer &quot;definitive&quot; zone, which is in a proliferative phase. The fetal zone produces large amounts of adrenal androgens (male sex hormones) that are used by the placenta for estrogen biosynthesis. Cortical development of the adrenal gland is regulated mostly by ACTH, a hormone produced by the pituitary gland that stimulates cortisol synthesis. During midgestation, the fetal zone occupies most of the cortical volume and produces 100–200 mg/day of DHEA-S, an androgen and precursor of both androgens and estrogens (female sex hormones). Adrenal hormones, especially glucocorticoids such as cortisol, are essential for prenatal development of organs, particularly for the maturation of the lungs. The adrenal gland decreases in size after birth because of the rapid disappearance of the fetal zone, with a corresponding decrease in androgen secretion.

====Adrenarche====

During early childhood androgen synthesis and secretion remain low, but several years before puberty (from 6–8 years of age) changes occur in both anatomical and functional aspects of cortical androgen production that lead to increased secretion of the steroids DHEA and DHEA-S. These changes are part of a process called adrenarche, which has only been described in humans and some other primates. Adrenarche is independent of ACTH or gonadotropins and correlates with a progressive thickening of the zona reticularis layer of the cortex. Functionally, adrenarche provides a source of androgens for the development of axillary and pubic hair before the beginning of puberty.

===Medulla===
The adrenal medulla is derived from neural crest cells, which come from the ectoderm layer of the embryo. These cells migrate from their initial position and aggregate in the vicinity of the dorsal aorta, a primitive blood vessel, which activates the differentiation of these cells through the release of proteins known as BMPs. These cells then undergo a second migration from the dorsal aorta to form the adrenal medulla and other organs of the sympathetic nervous system. Cells of the adrenal medulla are called chromaffin cells because they contain granules that stain with chromium salts, a characteristic not present in all sympathetic organs. Glucocorticoids produced in the adrenal cortex were once thought to be responsible for the differentiation of chromaffin cells. More recent research suggests that BMP-4 secreted in adrenal tissue is the main responsible for this, and that glucocorticoids only play a role in the subsequent development of the cells.

==Clinical significance==
The normal function of the adrenal gland may be impaired by conditions such as infections, tumors, genetic disorders and autoimmune diseases, or as a side effect of medical therapy. These disorders affect the gland either directly (as with infections or autoimmune diseases) or as a result of the dysregulation of hormone production (as in some types of Cushing&#x27;s syndrome) leading to an excess or insufficiency of adrenal hormones and the related symptoms.

===Corticosteroid overproduction===
====Cushing&#x27;s syndrome====
Cushing&#x27;s syndrome is the manifestation of glucocorticoid excess. It can be the result of a prolonged treatment with glucocorticoids or be caused by an underlying disease which produces alterations in the HPA axis or the production of cortisol. Causes can be further classified into ACTH-dependent or ACTH-independent. The most common cause of endogenous Cushing&#x27;s syndrome is a pituitary adenoma which causes an excessive production of ACTH. The disease produces a wide variety of signs and symptoms which include obesity, diabetes, increased blood pressure, excessive body hair (hirsutism), osteoporosis, depression, and most distinctively, stretch marks in the skin, caused by its progressive thinning.

====Primary aldosteronism====
When the zona glomerulosa produces excess aldosterone, the result is primary aldosteronism. Causes for this condition are bilateral hyperplasia (excessive tissue growth) of the glands, or aldosterone-producing adenomas (a condition called Conn&#x27;s syndrome). Primary aldosteronism produces hypertension and electrolyte imbalance, increasing potassium depletion sodium retention.

===Adrenal insufficiency===
Adrenal insufficiency (the deficiency of glucocorticoids) occurs in about 5 in 10,000 in the general population. Diseases classified as &quot;primary adrenal insufficiency&quot; (including Addison&#x27;s disease and genetic causes) directly affect the adrenal cortex. If a problem that affects the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis arises outside the gland, it is a &quot;secondary adrenal insufficiency&quot;.

====Addison&#x27;s disease====

Addison&#x27;s disease refers to primary hypoadrenalism, which is a deficiency in glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid production by the adrenal gland. In the Western world, Addison&#x27;s disease is most commonly an autoimmune condition, in which the body produces antibodies against cells of the adrenal cortex. Worldwide, the disease is more frequently caused by infection, especially from tuberculosis. A distinctive feature of Addison&#x27;s disease is hyperpigmentation of the skin, which presents with other nonspecific symptoms such as fatigue.

A complication seen in untreated Addison&#x27;s disease and other types of primary adrenal insufficiency is the adrenal crisis, a medical emergency in which low glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid levels result in hypovolemic shock and symptoms such as vomiting and fever. An adrenal crisis can progressively lead to stupor and coma. The management of adrenal crises includes the application of hydrocortisone injections.

====Secondary adrenal insufficiency====
In secondary adrenal insufficiency, a dysfunction of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis leads to decreased stimulation of the adrenal cortex. Apart from suppression of the axis by glucocorticoid therapy, the most common cause of secondary adrenal insufficiency are tumors that affect the production of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) by the pituitary gland. This type of adrenal insufficiency usually does not affect the production of mineralocorticoids, which are under regulation of the renin–angiotensin system instead.

====Congenital adrenal hyperplasia====
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is a family of congenital diseases in which mutations of enzymes that produce steroid hormones result in a glucocorticoid deficiency and malfunction of the negative feedback loop of the HPA axis. In the HPA axis, cortisol (a glucocorticoid) inhibits the release of CRH and ACTH, hormones that in turn stimulate corticosteroid synthesis. As cortisol cannot be synthesized, these hormones are released in high quantities and stimulate production of other adrenal steroids instead. The most common form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia is due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency. 21-hydroxylase is necessary for production of both mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids, but not androgens. Therefore, ACTH stimulation of the adrenal cortex induces the release of excessive amounts of adrenal androgens, which can lead to the development of ambiguous genitalia and secondary sex characteristics.

===Adrenal tumors===
Adrenal tumors are commonly found as incidentalomas, unexpected asymptomatic tumors found during medical imaging. They are seen in around 3.4% of CT scans, and in most cases they are benign adenomas. Adrenal carcinomas are very rare, with an incidence of 1 case per million per year.

Pheochromocytomas are tumors of the adrenal medulla that arise from chromaffin cells. They can produce a variety of nonspecific symptoms, which include headaches, sweating, anxiety and palpitations. Common signs include hypertension and tachycardia. Surgery, especially adrenal laparoscopy, is the most common treatment for small pheochromocytomas.

==History==
Bartolomeo Eustachi, an Italian anatomist, is credited with the first description of the adrenal glands in 1563–4. However, these publications were part of the papal library and did not receive public attention, which was first received with Caspar Bartholin the Elder&#x27;s illustrations in 1611.

The adrenal glands are named for their location relative to the kidneys. The term &quot;adrenal&quot; comes from Latin &quot;&quot;, &quot;near&quot;, and &quot;ren&quot;, &quot;kidney&quot;. Similarly, &quot;suprarenal&quot;, as termed by Jean Riolan the Younger in 1629, is derived from the Latin &quot;supra&quot;, &quot;above&quot;, and &quot;ren&quot;, &quot;kidney&quot;, as well. The suprarenal nature of the glands was not truly accepted until the 19th century, as anatomists clarified the ductless nature of the glands and their likely secretory role – prior to this, there was some debate as to whether the glands were indeed suprarenal or part of the kidney.

One of the most recognized works on the adrenal glands came in 1855 with the publication of &quot;On the Constitutional and Local Effects of Disease of the Suprarenal Capsule&quot;, by the English physician Thomas Addison. In his monography, Addison described what the French physician George Trousseau would later name Addison&#x27;s disease, an eponym still used today for a condition of adrenal insufficiency and its related clinical manifestations. In 1894, English physiologists George Oliver and Edward Schafer studied the action of adrenal extracts and observed their pressor effects. In the following decades several physicians experimented with extracts from the adrenal cortex to treat Addison&#x27;s disease. Edward Calvin Kendall, Philip Hench and Tadeusz Reichstein were then awarded the 1950 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their discoveries on the structure and effects of the adrenal hormones.

==See also==
* Adrenopause
* Adrenochrome
* List of distinct cell types in the adult human body
* Adrenal insufficiency
* Adrenal gland disorder

==References==
==External links==

* Adrenal gland at the Human Protein Atlas
* Adrenal gland histology
* – &quot;Adrenal Gland&quot;
* – &quot;Posterior Abdominal Wall: The Retroperitoneal Fat and Suprarenal Glands&quot;
* Adrenal Gland, from Colorado State University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q712294" start="4" end="18" title="Adrenal gland" label="adrenal glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q712294" start="34" end="51" title="Adrenal gland" label="suprarenal glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q324663" start="57" end="72" title="endocrine gland" label="endocrine gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="119" end="129" title="adrenaline" label="adrenaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="147" end="158" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="163" end="171" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="198" end="205" title="kidneys" label="kidneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="231" end="237" title="adrenal cortex" label="cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q422137" start="253" end="268" title="steroid hormone" label="steroid hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q934888" start="283" end="290" title="Adrenal medulla" label="medulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="296" end="310" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551060" start="356" end="372" title="zona glomerulosa" label="zona glomerulosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301573" start="378" end="394" title="zona fasciculata" label="zona fasciculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549771" start="403" end="419" title="zona reticularis" label="zona reticularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q422137" start="470" end="485" title="steroid hormone" label="steroid hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q422519" start="488" end="505" title="mineralocorticoid" label="mineralocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="508" end="522" title="glucocorticoid" label="glucocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="529" end="537" title="androgen" label="androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="568" end="579" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q909456" start="659" end="678" title="osmoregulation" label="electrolyte balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="700" end="708" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q423185" start="713" end="722" title="cortisone" label="cortisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="806" end="816" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="821" end="834" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q213456" start="983" end="988" title="gonad" label="gonad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1060" end="1075" title="Steroid#Steroidogenesis" label="steroidogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q271663" start="1186" end="1199" title="catecholamine" label="catecholamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640582" start="1230" end="1244" title="Fight-or-flight response (in humans)" label="rapid response"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="1268" end="1274" title="Stress (biology)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661443" start="1300" end="1317" title="endocrine disease" label="endocrine disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q219102" start="1398" end="1421" title="Cushing&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Cushing&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8282" start="1474" end="1496" title="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q366868" start="1498" end="1528" title="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia" label="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="1622" end="1628" title="neoplasm" label="tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="1685" end="1700" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q577238" start="1815" end="1830" title="retroperitoneum" label="retroperitoneum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1851" end="1857" title="Anatomical terms of location#medial and lateral" label="medial"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="1865" end="1871" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q577238" start="2246" end="2259" title="adipose capsule of kidney" label="fatty capsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469966" start="2279" end="2291" title="renal fascia" label="renal fascia"/>
<link wikidata="Q346579" start="2334" end="2340" title="septum" label="septum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25615" start="2351" end="2368" title="connective tissue" label="connective tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9654" start="2450" end="2459" title="thoracic diaphragm" label="diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190131" start="2485" end="2507" title="crura of the diaphragm" label="crura of the diaphragm"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="2612" end="2626" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q934888" start="2641" end="2648" title="adrenal medulla" label="medulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168" start="3077" end="3102" title="Histology" label="viewed under a microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="3180" end="3194" title="adrenal cortex" label="adrenal cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q11364" start="3223" end="3230" title="hormone" label="hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="3240" end="3251" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="3253" end="3261" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="3267" end="3275" title="androgen" label="androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551060" start="3352" end="3368" title="zona glomerulosa" label="zona glomerulosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671642" start="3481" end="3493" title="trabeculae" label="thin strands"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="3568" end="3579" title="capillary" label="capillaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="3628" end="3639" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q422519" start="3643" end="3660" title="mineralocorticoid" label="mineralocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q14904983" start="3690" end="3710" title="aldosterone synthase" label="aldosterone synthase"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="3765" end="3793" title="regulation of blood pressure" label="regulation of blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301573" start="3825" end="3841" title="zona fasciculata" label="zona fasciculata"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="3955" end="3969" title="glucocorticoid" label="glucocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="3979" end="3987" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="4225" end="4237" title="Mitochondrion" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4252" end="4280" title="endoplasmic reticulum#smooth endoplasmic reticulum" label="smooth endoplasmic reticulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549771" start="4342" end="4358" title="zona reticularis" label="zona reticularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="4411" end="4419" title="androgen" label="androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q408376" start="4429" end="4451" title="dehydroepiandrosterone" label="dehydroepiandrosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505402" start="4460" end="4472" title="DHEA sulfate" label="DHEA sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q411064" start="4487" end="4502" title="androstenedione" label="androstenedione"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="4521" end="4533" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q217740" start="4752" end="4762" title="lipofuscin" label="lipofuscin"/>
<link wikidata="Q934888" start="4792" end="4807" title="adrenal medulla" label="adrenal medulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q919689" start="4893" end="4908" title="chromaffin cell" label="chromaffin cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q271663" start="4964" end="4977" title="catecholamine" label="catecholamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187215" start="5182" end="5208" title="sympathetic nervous system" label="sympathetic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756509" start="5213" end="5232" title="preganglionic fiber" label="preganglionic fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q937076" start="5253" end="5273" title="thoracic spinal cord" label="thoracic spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756509" start="5326" end="5352" title="preganglionic nerve fibers" label="preganglionic nerve fibers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554908" start="5409" end="5429" title="sympathetic ganglion" label="sympathetic ganglion"/>
<link wikidata="Q501908" start="5696" end="5710" title="arteriole" label="small arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290350" start="5789" end="5815" title="superior suprarenal artery" label="superior suprarenal artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491693" start="5833" end="5856" title="inferior phrenic arteries" label="inferior phrenic artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507797" start="5863" end="5887" title="middle suprarenal artery" label="middle suprarenal artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264329" start="5912" end="5927" title="abdominal aorta" label="abdominal aorta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865999" start="5934" end="5960" title="inferior suprarenal artery" label="inferior suprarenal artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q707540" start="5978" end="5990" title="renal artery" label="renal artery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="6159" end="6171" title="Vein" label="Venous blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644746" start="6206" end="6222" title="suprarenal veins" label="suprarenal veins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644746" start="6258" end="6279" title="right suprarenal vein" label="right suprarenal vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q745438" start="6296" end="6314" title="inferior vena cava" label="inferior vena cava"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644746" start="6322" end="6342" title="left suprarenal vein" label="left suprarenal vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q132318" start="6364" end="6374" title="renal vein" label="renal vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q605523" start="6387" end="6408" title="inferior phrenic vein" label="inferior phrenic vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q208453" start="6565" end="6578" title="smooth muscle" label="smooth muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740954" start="6586" end="6598" title="tunica media" label="tunica media"/>
<link wikidata="Q101004" start="6797" end="6802" title="aorta" label="aorta"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="6836" end="6860" title="congenital abnormality" label="congenital abnormalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="7131" end="7137" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="7292" end="7306" title="Corticosteroid" label="Corticosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="7443" end="7454" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="7544" end="7552" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q408376" start="7652" end="7674" title="dehydroepiandrosterone" label="dehydroepiandrosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="7724" end="7735" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q422519" start="7739" end="7756" title="mineralocorticoid" label="mineralocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896673" start="7837" end="7849" title="blood volume" label="blood volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914731" start="7891" end="7915" title="distal convoluted tubule" label="distal convoluted tubule"/>
<link wikidata="Q452419" start="7925" end="7941" title="Collecting duct system" label="collecting ducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337048" start="7976" end="7982" title="Sodium in biology" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880534" start="8110" end="8129" title="glomerular filtrate" label="glomerular filtrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q65963433" start="8241" end="8255" title="Angiotensin II" label="Angiotensin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="8274" end="8283" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="8439" end="8453" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="8583" end="8591" title="Cortisol" label="Cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="8604" end="8618" title="glucocorticoid" label="glucocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q422543" start="8693" end="8707" title="corticosterone" label="corticosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="8754" end="8764" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="8829" end="8836" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="8895" end="8906" title="amino acids" label="amino acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q191835" start="8943" end="8963" title="Gluconeogenesis" label="synthesis of glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="9042" end="9058" title="free fatty acids" label="free fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q581996" start="9272" end="9289" title="anti-inflammatory" label="anti-inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q917177" start="9331" end="9341" title="osteoblast" label="osteoblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="9417" end="9439" title="Human gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="9553" end="9580" title="adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="adrenocorticotropic hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q356002" start="9597" end="9615" title="anterior pituitary" label="anterior pituitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q208353" start="9776" end="9792" title="circadian rhythm" label="circadian rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q423185" start="9812" end="9821" title="Cortisone" label="Cortisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145920" start="9873" end="9880" title="11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase" label="11β-HSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q210420" start="10060" end="10074" title="corticosteroid" label="corticosteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43656" start="10090" end="10101" title="cholesterol" label="cholesterol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10154" end="10169" title="Steroid#Steroidogenesis" label="steroidogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q415555" start="10361" end="10379" title="cholesterol esters" label="cholesterol esters"/>
<link wikidata="Q28749" start="10387" end="10410" title="low density lipoprotein" label="low density lipoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135604" start="10448" end="10477" title="receptor-mediated endocytosis" label="receptor-mediated endocytosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79927" start="10543" end="10564" title="endoplasmic reticulum" label="endoplasmic reticulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q83330" start="10634" end="10642" title="lysosome" label="lysosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q407693" start="10865" end="10880" title="cytochrome P450" label="cytochrome P450"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="10930" end="10942" title="mitochondrion" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q24727595" start="11024" end="11062" title="steroidogenic acute regulatory protein" label="steroidogenic acute regulatory protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q412158" start="11397" end="11409" title="pregnenolone" label="pregnenolone"/>
<link wikidata="Q412483" start="11454" end="11461" title="P450scc" label="P450scc"/>
<link wikidata="Q547502" start="11673" end="11683" title="Microsome" label="microsomal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5955660" start="11694" end="11722" title="hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase" label="hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q366868" start="12003" end="12033" title="congenital adrenal hyperplasia" label="congenital adrenal hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21110736" start="12072" end="12086" title="21-hydroxylase" label="21-hydroxylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369123" start="12227" end="12273" title="hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis" label="hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis (HPA) axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="12317" end="12344" title="adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="adrenocorticotropic hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q356002" start="12400" end="12418" title="anterior pituitary" label="anterior pituitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q386664" start="12481" end="12512" title="corticotropin-releasing hormone" label="corticotropin-releasing hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="12556" end="12568" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="12743" end="12751" title="feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="12975" end="12996" title="inflammatory response" label="inflammatory response"/>
<link wikidata="Q898218" start="13054" end="13090" title="renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system" label="renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="13120" end="13129" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358572" start="13214" end="13239" title="juxtaglomerular apparatus" label="juxtaglomerular apparatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q258915" start="13274" end="13279" title="renin" label="renin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65963433" start="13358" end="13372" title="angiotensin II" label="angiotensin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q24778533" start="13374" end="13394" title="Angiotensin receptor" label="Angiotensin receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="13501" end="13512" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549771" start="13540" end="13556" title="zona reticularis" label="zona reticularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="13609" end="13617" title="androgen" label="androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q408376" start="13651" end="13655" title="Dehydroepiandrosterone" label="DHEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318776" start="13783" end="13795" title="testosterone" label="testosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q411054" start="13800" end="13803" title="Dihydrotestosterone" label="DHT"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="13810" end="13818" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q213456" start="13849" end="13854" title="gonad" label="gonad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864654" start="13881" end="13903" title="metabolic intermediate" label="metabolic intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="13973" end="13984" title="epinephrine" label="epinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="13989" end="14003" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="14005" end="14015" title="adrenaline" label="adrenaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="14020" end="14033" title="noradrenaline" label="noradrenaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q271663" start="14038" end="14051" title="catecholamine" label="catecholamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="14068" end="14077" title="organic compound" label="compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q282440" start="14110" end="14118" title="catechol" label="catechol"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="14132" end="14143" title="amine group" label="amine group"/>
<link wikidata="Q410568" start="14448" end="14462" title="adrenoreceptor" label="adrenoreceptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640582" start="14621" end="14645" title="fight or flight response" label="fight or flight response"/>
<link wikidata="Q188017" start="14900" end="14908" title="tyrosine" label="tyrosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170545" start="14972" end="14985" title="phenylalanine" label="phenylalanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q420766" start="15011" end="15031" title="tyrosine hydroxylase" label="tyrosine hydroxylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q300989" start="15053" end="15059" title="L-DOPA" label="L-DOPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="15134" end="15142" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q220599" start="15194" end="15201" title="cytosol" label="cytosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q411541" start="15259" end="15297" title="phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase" label="phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q187215" start="15539" end="15565" title="sympathetic nervous system" label="sympathetic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795262" start="15567" end="15584" title="Splanchnic nerves" label="Splanchnic nerves"/>
<link wikidata="Q187215" start="15592" end="15618" title="sympathetic nervous system" label="sympathetic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q15322916" start="15775" end="15790" title="calcium channel" label="calcium channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q720988" start="15852" end="15864" title="human genome" label="human genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="15933" end="15952" title="Gene expression" label="genes are expressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q407693" start="16194" end="16209" title="cytochrome P450" label="cytochrome P450"/>
<link wikidata="Q412483" start="16331" end="16338" title="CYP11A1" label="CYP11A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027309" start="16340" end="16346" title="HSD3B2" label="HSD3B2"/>
<link wikidata="Q9141217" start="16351" end="16355" title="FDX1" label="FDX1"/>
<link wikidata="Q422137" start="16368" end="16383" title="steroid hormone" label="steroid hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q411541" start="16437" end="16441" title="Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase" label="PNMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q415762" start="16446" end="16449" title="Dopamine beta-hydroxylase" label="DBH"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="16462" end="16475" title="Norepinephrine" label="noradrenaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="16480" end="16490" title="Epinephrine" label="adrenaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q934888" start="16638" end="16653" title="adrenal medulla" label="adrenal medulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q132621" start="16670" end="16680" title="adrenaline" label="adrenaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="16685" end="16698" title="noradrenaline" label="noradrenaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q187215" start="16754" end="16780" title="sympathetic nervous system" label="sympathetic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q19065" start="16813" end="16819" title="adrenal cortex" label="cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q422137" start="16849" end="16864" title="steroid hormone" label="steroid hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q964797" start="16901" end="16914" title="Human embryogenesis" label="embryological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297155" start="16944" end="16964" title="prenatal development" label="prenatal development"/>
<link wikidata="Q323438" start="17020" end="17028" title="mesoderm" label="mesoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348455" start="17070" end="17082" title="neural crest" label="neural crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q272474" start="17096" end="17104" title="ectoderm" label="ectoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047369" start="17704" end="17725" title="intermediate mesoderm" label="intermediate mesoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="17758" end="17771" title="fertilisation" label="fertilisation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17779" end="17805" title="Steroid#Steroidogenesis" label="steroid hormone production"/>
<link wikidata="Q189101" start="18158" end="18171" title="cell proliferation" label="proliferative"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="18228" end="18236" title="androgen" label="androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212935" start="18279" end="18287" title="placenta" label="placenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="18292" end="18300" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="18380" end="18384" title="Adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="ACTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="18412" end="18427" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q190875" start="18444" end="18452" title="cortisol" label="cortisol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505402" start="18568" end="18574" title="DHEA-S" label="DHEA-S"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="18579" end="18587" title="androgen" label="androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q277954" start="18624" end="18632" title="estrogen" label="estrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="18686" end="18700" title="glucocorticoid" label="glucocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="18809" end="18813" title="lung" label="lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q408376" start="19254" end="19258" title="dehydroepiandrosterone" label="DHEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505402" start="19263" end="19269" title="dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate" label="DHEA-S"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774177" start="19314" end="19324" title="adrenarche" label="adrenarche"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="19420" end="19424" title="Adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="ACTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q409770" start="19428" end="19440" title="gonadotropin" label="gonadotropin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549771" start="19494" end="19510" title="zona reticularis" label="zona reticularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348455" start="19719" end="19737" title="neural crest" label="neural crest cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q272474" start="19759" end="19767" title="ectoderm" label="ectoderm"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="19781" end="19787" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189092" start="19801" end="19808" title="cell migration" label="migrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298763" start="19874" end="19886" title="dorsal aorta" label="dorsal aorta"/>
<link wikidata="Q425383" start="20006" end="20009" title="Bone morphogenetic protein" label="BMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q187215" start="20130" end="20156" title="sympathetic nervous system" label="sympathetic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q919689" start="20198" end="20214" title="chromaffin cells" label="chromaffin cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="20261" end="20269" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="20333" end="20347" title="Glucocorticoid" label="Glucocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q14903397" start="20496" end="20501" title="Bone morphogenetic protein 4" label="BMP-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084905" start="20797" end="20815" title="autoimmune disease" label="autoimmune disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269441" start="20826" end="20837" title="side effect" label="side effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q219102" start="21030" end="21053" title="Cushing&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Cushing&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q219102" start="21208" end="21231" title="Cushing&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Cushing&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369123" start="21418" end="21426" title="HPA axis" label="HPA axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="21496" end="21500" title="Adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="ACTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q285982" start="21557" end="21567" title="endogeny" label="endogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q864296" start="21597" end="21614" title="pituitary adenoma" label="pituitary adenoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620594" start="21799" end="21808" title="hirsutism" label="hirsutism"/>
<link wikidata="Q165328" start="21811" end="21823" title="osteoporosis" label="osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q596942" start="21861" end="21874" title="striae" label="stretch marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q184564" start="21997" end="22008" title="aldosterone" label="aldosterone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482922" start="22024" end="22045" title="primary aldosteronism" label="primary aldosteronism"/>
<link wikidata="Q835051" start="22087" end="22098" title="hyperplasia" label="hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q272741" start="22165" end="22172" title="adenoma" label="adenoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482922" start="22194" end="22214" title="Conn&amp;#x27;s syndrome" label="Conn&amp;#x27;s syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="22265" end="22276" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="22299" end="22308" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="22407" end="22421" title="glucocorticoid" label="glucocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8282" start="22555" end="22577" title="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369123" start="22664" end="22699" title="hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis" label="hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192360" start="23029" end="23039" title="autoimmunity" label="autoimmune"/>
<link wikidata="Q79460" start="23078" end="23088" title="Antibody" label="antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="23205" end="23217" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641068" start="23270" end="23287" title="hyperpigmentation" label="hyperpigmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057453" start="23478" end="23492" title="adrenal crisis" label="adrenal crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751242" start="23496" end="23513" title="medical emergency" label="medical emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959670" start="23581" end="23598" title="hypovolemic shock" label="hypovolemic shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q268594" start="23684" end="23690" title="stupor" label="stupor"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="23695" end="23699" title="coma" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q26981430" start="23762" end="23776" title="hydrocortisone" label="hydrocortisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369123" start="23887" end="23922" title="hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis" label="hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="24137" end="24164" title="adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="adrenocorticotropic hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q156871" start="24179" end="24194" title="pituitary gland" label="pituitary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q422519" start="24273" end="24290" title="mineralocorticoid" label="mineralocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q898218" start="24327" end="24351" title="renin–angiotensin system" label="renin–angiotensin system"/>
<link wikidata="Q366868" start="24401" end="24431" title="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia" label="Congenital adrenal hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="24447" end="24466" title="congenital diseases" label="congenital diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="24476" end="24484" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q124741931" start="24539" end="24564" title="glucocorticoid deficiency" label="glucocorticoid deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369123" start="24618" end="24626" title="HPA axis" label="HPA axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q386664" start="24697" end="24700" title="corticotropin-releasing hormone" label="CRH"/>
<link wikidata="Q185690" start="24705" end="24709" title="Adrenocorticotropic hormone" label="ACTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q21110736" start="24976" end="24990" title="21-hydroxylase" label="21-hydroxylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q62614" start="25102" end="25110" title="androgen" label="androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314564" start="25207" end="25223" title="adrenal androgen" label="adrenal androgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620674" start="25273" end="25282" title="genitalia" label="genitalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784017" start="25287" end="25315" title="secondary sex characteristic" label="secondary sex characteristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293395" start="25377" end="25390" title="incidentaloma" label="incidentaloma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707292" start="25404" end="25416" title="asymptomatic" label="asymptomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q228172" start="25424" end="25429" title="incidental findings" label="found"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="25437" end="25452" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="25486" end="25494" title="X-ray computed tomography" label="CT scans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684749" start="25530" end="25537" title="Adrenocortical adenoma" label="adenoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q918285" start="25540" end="25557" title="Adrenal carcinoma" label="Adrenal carcinoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q217690" start="25582" end="25591" title="incidence (epidemiology)" label="incidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q536269" start="25625" end="25642" title="Pheochromocytomas" label="Pheochromocytomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q919689" start="25693" end="25708" title="chromaffin cell" label="chromaffin cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123260" start="25810" end="25821" title="palpitation" label="palpitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="25845" end="25857" title="hypertension" label="hypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="25862" end="25873" title="tachycardia" label="tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q675754" start="25903" end="25914" title="laparoscopy" label="laparoscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q364278" start="25987" end="26006" title="Bartolomeo Eustachi" label="Bartolomeo Eustachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q213678" start="26147" end="26160" title="papal library" label="papal library"/>
<link wikidata="Q264593" start="26229" end="26255" title="Caspar Bartholin the Elder" label="Caspar Bartholin the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="26400" end="26405" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26448" end="26451" title=":wikt:ren" label="ren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174345" start="26527" end="26550" title="Jean Riolan the Younger" label="Jean Riolan the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="26580" end="26585" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26592" end="26597" title=":wikt:supra-" label="supra"/>
<link wikidata="Q436039" start="27165" end="27179" title="Thomas Addison" label="Thomas Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546870" start="27244" end="27260" title="Georges Phillipe Trousseau" label="George Trousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q8282" start="27278" end="27300" title="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Addison&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507454" start="27348" end="27369" title="adrenal insufficiency" label="adrenal insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508004" start="27442" end="27455" title="George Oliver (physician)" label="George Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117138" start="27460" end="27474" title="Edward Albert Sharpey-Schafer" label="Edward Schafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511166" start="27533" end="27540" title="antihypotensive agent" label="pressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q110101" start="27678" end="27699" title="Edward Calvin Kendall" label="Edward Calvin Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q235651" start="27701" end="27713" title="Philip Hench" label="Philip Hench"/>
<link wikidata="Q115490" start="27718" end="27736" title="Tadeusz Reichstein" label="Tadeusz Reichstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="27764" end="27801" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788356" start="27894" end="27905" title="Adrenopause" label="Adrenopause"/>
<link wikidata="Q366835" start="27908" end="27920" title="Adrenochrome" label="Adrenochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662727" start="27923" end="27974" title="List of distinct cell types in the adult human body" label="List of distinct cell types in the adult human body"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507454" start="27977" end="27998" title="Adrenal insufficiency" label="Adrenal insufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684717" start="28001" end="28023" title="Adrenal gland disorder" label="Adrenal gland disorder"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2299" wikidata="Q465666" url="?curid=2299" title="A360media">
<text>A360 Media, LLC (branded a360media), formerly American Media, Inc. (AMI), was an American publisher of magazines, supermarket tabloids, and books based in New York City. Originally affiliated with only the &quot;National Enquirer&quot;, the media company&#x27;s holdings expanded considerably in the 1990s and 2000s. In November 2010, American Media filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection due to debts of nearly $1 billion, but has continued to buy and sell magazine brands since then.

AMI had been in the news affiliated with accusations of catch and kill operations. On December 12, 2018, the U.S. Attorney&#x27;s Office reported that AMI admitted to paying $150,000 to Karen McDougal in concert with Donald Trump&#x27;s presidential campaign for the sole purpose of preventing damaging allegations prior to the 2016 US presidential election.

According to its September 2018 non-prosecution agreement with Southern District of New York federal prosecutors, AMI &quot;shall commit no crimes whatsoever&quot; for three years, otherwise &quot;A.M.I. shall thereafter be subject to prosecution for any federal criminal violation of which this office has knowledge.&quot;

On April 10, 2019, Chatham Asset Management, which controls 80 percent of AMI&#x27;s stock, forced AMI to sell the &quot;National Enquirer&quot;. This came after Chatham owner Anthony Melchiorre, who AMI has also relied on for survival, expressed dismay over the tabloid magazine&#x27;s recent scandals involving hush money assistance to U.S. president Donald Trump&#x27;s 2016 campaign and blackmail of Jeff Bezos. On April 18, 2019, AMI agreed to sell not only the &quot;National Enquirer&quot;, but two of its other publications, &quot;Globe&quot; and &quot;National Examiner&quot;, to Hudson News Distributors.

In August 2020, Chatham Asset Management, AMI&#x27;s owning holding company, announced it would merge AMI with Accelerate 360, a wholesale distribution company it also owned. As part of the merger, AMI was officially renamed A360 on October 1.

In February 2023, A360media agreed to sell the &quot;National Enquirer&quot; to VVIP Ventures, a joint venture of the digital media company Vinco Ventures and a new company set up for the purchase, Icon Publishing. As of July 7th, 2023 the deal has collapsed as reported by &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;.

==History==
The modern American Media came into being after Generoso Pope Jr., longtime owner of the &quot;National Enquirer&quot;, died in 1988, and his tabloids came under new ownership. American tabloids began consolidating in 1990, when American Media bought &quot;Star&quot; from Rupert Murdoch. The purchase of Globe Communications (owner of the &quot;Globe&quot; and the &quot;National Examiner&quot;) followed nine years later. Roger Altman, through Evercore Partners, bought a controlling stake in American Media in 1999.

American Media is not to be confused with American Media Distribution, the international news coverage firm. American Media&#x27;s former corporate headquarters in Boca Raton, Florida, figured prominently in news headlines in late 2001, after an anthrax attack was perpetrated on the company and other media outlets. Since then the corporate headquarters have moved to New York City at 1 Park Avenue in Manhattan, before moving to the Financial District to the former JP Morgan Chase headquarters at 4 New York Plaza. That building was severely damaged by Hurricane Sandy but reopened in February 2013.

AMI continued to expand after it bought Joe Weider&#x27;s Weider Publications in 2002. Joe Weider continued to manage control of his magazines under AMI&#x27;s Weider Publications subsidiary until his death in March 2013.

American Media also owns Distribution Services, an in-store magazine merchandising company. In fall 2002, it launched the book-publishing imprint, AMI Books.

=== 2010s: Bankruptcy and continued acquisitions ===
In 2009, American Media was taken over by its bondholders to keep it out of bankruptcy.

In November 2010, American Media filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection due to nearly $1 billion in debt, and assets of less than $50,000. Its subsidiary, American Media Operations Inc., listed assets of $100 to $500 million and debt of over $1 billion. It exited in December.

In May 2014, American Media announced a decision to shift the headquarters of the &quot;National Enquirer&quot; from Florida, where it had been located since 1971, back to New York City, where it originally began as &quot;The New York Enquirer&quot; in 1926. In August 2014, American Media was acquired by Chatham Asset Management and Omega Charitable Partnership.

In 2015, American Media sold &quot;Shape&quot;, &quot;Natural Health&quot;, and &quot;Fit Pregnancy&quot; to Meredith.

In 2016, Pecker revealed to the Toronto Star that AMI now relied on support from Chatham Asset Management and its owner Anthony Melchiorre. The $4 billion hedge fund owns 80 percent of AMI&#x27;s stock.

In March 2017, American Media acquired &quot;Us Weekly&quot; from Wenner Media for a reported $100 million. Three months later, in June 2017, American Media also acquired &quot;Men&#x27;s Journal&quot; from Wenner Media.

In June 2018, American Media acquired 13 brands from Bauer Media Group including &quot;In Touch Weekly&quot;, &quot;Life &amp; Style&quot; and &quot;Closer&quot; to add to their celebrity portfolio. They also acquired Bauer Media&#x27;s kids group including &quot;J-14&quot; and &quot;Girl&#x27;s World&quot;.

In February 2019, American Media acquired TEN&#x27;s adventure sports properties.

In April 2019, the &quot;National Enquirer&quot; was reported to be up for sale and likely to be sold within days. The company stated that it had shifted its emphasis away from tabloids to its &quot;glossy&quot; magazines such as &quot;Us Weekly&quot; and &quot;Men&#x27;s Journal&quot;. This came following pressure from Chatham owner Anthony Melchiorre, who expressed disapproval of the Enquirer&#x27;s style of journalism. On April 18, 2019, AMI accepted an offer from Hudson News Distributors head James Cohen and agreed to sell not only the &quot;National Enquirer&quot;, but also &quot;Globe&quot; and &quot;The Examiner&quot; to Hudson News Distributors for $100 million. At the time the sales were announced, AMI was approximately $355 million in debt.

In 2022, A360 acquired single issue magazine publisher Centennial Media. Also in 2022, A360 sold &quot;Men&#x27;s Journal&quot; and the Adventure Sports Network properties to The Arena Group.

In December 2024, A360media merged with McClatchy. Prior to the merger its tabloids including the &quot;National Enquirer&quot; and &quot;the Globe&quot; were sold to an undisclosed buyer.

==Checkbook journalism controversy==
On April 22, 2024, Pecker acknowledged that the &quot;National Enquirer&quot; engaged in a practice of checkbook journalism which involved paying sources for stories, and that he &quot;gave a number to the editors that they could not spend more than $10,000&quot; and he had final say over celebrity stories. He also acknowledged that &quot;checkbook journalism&quot; served as part of the editorial philosophy he followed when ran American Media Inc. Pecker stated that he believed that “The only thing that is important is the cover of a magazine.”

== &quot;Catch-and-kill&quot; scandals related to Donald Trump ==
=== Allegation about Trump Tower maid ===

In late 2015, AMI paid $30,000 to Dino Sajudin, a doorman at Trump Tower, to obtain the rights to his story in which he alleged Donald Trump had an affair in the 1980s that resulted in the birth of a child. Sajudin in April 2018 identified the woman as Trump&#x27;s former housekeeper. AMI reporters were given the names of the woman and the alleged child, while Sajudin passed a lie detector test when testifying that he had heard the story from others. Shortly after the payment was made, Pecker ordered the reporters to drop the story. In April 2018, AMI chief content officer Dylan Howard denied the story was &quot;spiked&quot; in a so-called &quot;catch and kill&quot; operation, insisting that AMI did not run the story because Sajudin&#x27;s story lacked credibility. On August 24, 2018, after AMI had released Sajudin from the contract, CNN obtained a copy of it and published excerpts. The contract instructed Sajudin to provide &quot;information regarding Donald Trump&#x27;s illegitimate child,&quot; but did not contain further specifics of Sajudin&#x27;s story. 

In April 2024, Pecker testified in Trump&#x27;s New York criminal trial how the story was his first &quot;catch-and-kill&quot; target during Trump&#x27;s campaign, with Sajudin also attempting to claim that the child was a girl. A National Enquirer editor who discovered the allegation originally did not know Sajudin&#x27;s name, but just as a doorman who had worked at Trump. Cohen was the one who discovered the names of the doorman and the alleged maid. Though Cohen at first claimed the story was not true, the &quot;National Enquirer&quot; acquired the story for $30,000, which was noticeably higher than the usual $10,000 they paid for stories.

=== Karen McDougal ===
In 2016, AMI paid &quot;Playboy&quot; model Karen McDougal $150,000 for exclusive rights to her allegations of a ten-month affair with Donald Trump—which she claimed happened in 2006–2007, when he was already married to Melania—but AMI never published the story. AMI publicly acknowledged having made the payment after &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; revealed it days before the 2016 presidential election, but AMI denied that its purpose had been to &quot;kill damaging stories about&quot; Trump; instead, AMI claimed it had paid only for &quot;exclusive life rights to any relationship [McDougal] has had with a then-married man&quot; and &quot;two years&#x27; worth of her fitness columns and magazine covers.&quot; In March 2018, McDougal filed a lawsuit to invalidate the non-disclosure agreement she had with AMI. A month later, AMI settled with McDougal, allowing her to speak about the alleged affair. In August 2018, it was reported that AMI CEO/chairman David Pecker and AMI chief content officer Dylan Howard were granted witness immunity in exchange for their testimony regarding hush money payments made by Donald Trump&#x27;s then-personal lawyer, Michael Cohen, in an attempt to influence the 2016 presidential election.

On December 12, 2018, the U.S. Attorney&#x27;s office announced its agreement with AMI. &quot;AMI admitted that it made the $150,000 payment in concert with a candidate&#x27;s presidential campaign,&quot; the press release said, so that Karen McDougal wouldn&#x27;t &quot;publicize damaging allegations about the candidate before the 2016 presidential election. AMI further admitted that its principal purpose in making the payment was to suppress the woman&#x27;s story so as to prevent it from influencing the election.&quot; As a result of this agreement, AMI did not face prosecution and agreed to provide extensive assistance to prosecutors about the involvement of Trump and other politicians with the company. The same press release also revealed that Michael Cohen had been sentenced to three years in prison for various crimes, including the $150,000 campaign finance violation—the facilitation of the payment to McDougal—to which he pled guilty on August 21, 2018. AMI agreed to pay the Federal Election Commission a $187,500 fine in June 2021.

In April 2024, Pecker testified how he, Howard and Cohen conspired to get the &quot;National Enquirer&quot; to acquire McDougal&#x27;s story. Pecker stated that after Howard found out about McDougal&#x27;s allegation, he sent Howard to California to interview her. During the time Howard met with McDougal, he conversed with Cohen about the situation. Ultimately, McDougal agreed to sell her story to the &quot;National Enquirer&quot; for $150,000.

== Jeff Bezos blackmail ==

In January 2019, the &quot;National Enquirer&quot; broke a story about the extramarital affair of Amazon founder and &quot;Washington Post&quot; owner Jeff Bezos with Lauren Sánchez. Bezos began investigating how and why the information had been leaked to the &quot;National Enquirer.&quot; President Trump has long expressed displeasure with Bezos, and Trump&#x27;s irritation may have increased due to the &quot;Washington Post&#x27;s&quot; critical coverage of the murder (and the subsequent cover-up) of one of its reporters, Jamal Khashoggi. This, Bezos suspects, may have been the political motivation for someone to leak his affair to the tabloid.

On February 7, 2019, Bezos shared emails that he had received the previous day in which AMI sought a public statement from him and his lawyer &quot;affirming that they have no knowledge or basis for suggesting that AM&#x27;s coverage [of the sexual affair] was politically motivated or influenced by political forces, and an agreement that they will cease referring to such a possibility.&quot; AMI chief content officer Dylan Howard and his lawyer Jon Fine threatened Bezos, saying that if Bezos did not promptly meet their demands, AMI would publish selfies and sexts sent between Bezos and his girlfriend. Bezos wrote that he would refuse to make this &quot;specific lie&quot; or to otherwise participate in this blackmail bargain that &quot;no real journalists [would] ever propose.&quot; &quot;Of course I don&#x27;t want personal photos published,&quot; Bezos added, but he said he chooses to &quot;stand up, roll this log over, and see what crawls out.&quot;

That same day, &quot;The Washington Post&quot; published an article on the matter, quoting a former federal prosecutor who speculated that this news could undermine AMI&#x27;s recent deal with the government. If prosecutors decide they must file new criminal charges against AMI, the government may not be able &quot;to continue to use them [AMI] to assist other ongoing investigations,&quot; said Robert Mintz.

Lauren Sanchez&#x27;s brother, Michael Sanchez, an ardent Trump supporter, stated he was told by multiple AMI employees that the Enquirer set out to do &quot;a takedown to make Trump happy&quot; and &quot;The Daily Beast&quot; reported seeing documents showing that Sanchez believed the Bezos story was run with &quot;President Trump&#x27;s knowledge and appreciation.&quot;

==Publications==
===Current===
* &quot;Animal Tales&quot;
* &quot;Closer&quot;
* &quot;First for Women&quot;
* &quot;Girls&#x27; World&quot;
* &quot;In Touch&quot;
* &quot;J-14&quot;
* &quot;Life &amp; Style&quot;
* &quot;Muscle &amp; Fitness&quot;
* &quot;Muscle &amp; Fitness Hers&quot;
* &quot;OK!&quot; (US)
* &quot;Puzzle Fun&quot;
* &quot;Quizfest&quot; 
* &quot;RadarOnline.com&quot;
* &quot;Star&quot;
* &quot;Us Weekly&quot;
* &quot;Woman&#x27;s World&quot;
===Former===
* &quot;Autoworld Weekly&quot;
* &quot;Bike&quot;
* &quot;Country Music&quot;
* &quot;Fit Pregnancy&quot;
* &quot;Flex&quot;
* &quot;Globe&quot;
* &quot;Men&#x27;s Fitness&quot;
* &quot;Men&#x27;s Journal&quot;
* &quot;Nash Country Weekly&quot;
* &quot;National Enquirer&quot;
* &quot;National Examiner&quot;
* &quot;Natural Health&quot;
* &quot;Pixie&quot;
* &quot;Powder&quot;
* &quot;Shape&quot;
* &quot;Snowboarder Magazine&quot;
* &quot;Soap Opera Digest&quot;
* &quot;Soaps in Depth&quot;
* &quot;Soap Opera Weekly&quot;
* &quot;Stallone&quot;
* &quot;Sun&quot;
* &quot;Surfer&quot;
* &quot;Teen Boss&quot;
* &quot;Transworld Skateboarding&quot;
* &quot;Weekly World News&quot;
==Divisions==
* AMI Books
* AMI Entertainment Group
* Distribution Services, Inc.
* Dew Tour

==See also==
*2017–18 United States political sexual scandals
*Stormy Daniels–Donald Trump scandal
*Death of Robert Stevens

==References==
==External links==
* Tabloid Company, Aiding Trump Campaign, May Have Crossed Line Into Politics</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q465666" start="0" end="15" title="A360media" label="A360 Media, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q465666" start="25" end="34" title="A360media" label="a360media"/>
<link wikidata="Q465666" start="46" end="66" title="A360media" label="American Media, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q465666" start="68" end="71" title="A360media" label="AMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q895089" start="114" end="133" title="supermarket tabloid" label="supermarket tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814777" start="212" end="229" title="National Enquirer" label="National Enquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062835" start="360" end="381" title="Chapter 11 bankruptcy" label="Chapter 11 bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276678" start="547" end="561" title="catch and kill" label="catch and kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="600" end="627" title="United States Attorney" label="U.S. Attorney&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q261402" start="677" end="691" title="Karen McDougal" label="Karen McDougal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="708" end="720" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="819" end="848" title="2016 US presidential election" label="2016 US presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q49669" start="914" end="943" title="United States District Court for the Southern District of New York" label="Southern District of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q312556" start="1580" end="1590" title="Jeff Bezos" label="Jeff Bezos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570970" start="1715" end="1720" title="Globe (tabloid)" label="Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972509" start="1737" end="1754" title="National Examiner" label="National Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q108672420" start="1765" end="1789" title="Hudson News Distributors" label="Hudson News Distributors"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="2317" end="2340" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532690" start="2409" end="2426" title="Generoso Pope Jr." label="Generoso Pope Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1814777" start="2456" end="2473" title="National Enquirer" label="National Enquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496935" start="2618" end="2622" title="Star (magazine)" label="Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570970" start="2707" end="2712" title="Globe (tabloid)" label="Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972509" start="2733" end="2750" title="National Examiner" label="National Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438646" start="2785" end="2797" title="Roger Altman" label="Roger Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416929" start="2807" end="2824" title="Evercore Partners" label="Evercore Partners"/>
<link wikidata="Q29422" start="3045" end="3064" title="Boca Raton, Florida" label="Boca Raton, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q574341" start="3127" end="3141" title="2001 anthrax attacks" label="anthrax attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="3284" end="3293" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244996" start="3316" end="3334" title="Financial District" label="Financial District"/>
<link wikidata="Q192314" start="3349" end="3364" title="JP Morgan Chase" label="JP Morgan Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q121900738" start="3381" end="3397" title="25 Water Street" label="4 New York Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="3437" end="3452" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q719348" start="3525" end="3535" title="Joe Weider" label="Joe Weider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608849" start="3846" end="3853" title="Imprint (trade name)" label="imprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062835" start="4052" end="4073" title="Chapter 11, Title 11, United States Code" label="Chapter 11 bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197594" start="4626" end="4654" title="Leon G. Cooperman" label="Omega Charitable Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q327416" start="4692" end="4697" title="Shape (magazine)" label="Shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455384" start="4743" end="4756" title="Fit Pregnancy" label="Fit Pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921579" start="4766" end="4774" title="Meredith Corporation" label="Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q549578" start="5026" end="5035" title="Us Weekly" label="Us Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q519143" start="5047" end="5059" title="Wenner Media" label="Wenner Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816008" start="5158" end="5176" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Journal" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q554198" start="5256" end="5273" title="Bauer Media Group" label="Bauer Media Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q265172" start="5290" end="5305" title="In Touch Weekly" label="In Touch Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544648" start="5319" end="5335" title="Life &amp;amp; Style (magazine)" label="Life &amp;amp; Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q947770" start="5352" end="5358" title="Closer (magazine)" label="Closer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11715013" start="5467" end="5471" title="J-14 (magazine)" label="J-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565129" start="5556" end="5559" title="Motor Trend Group" label="TEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q549578" start="5833" end="5842" title="Us Weekly" label="Us Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816008" start="5859" end="5877" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Journal" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816008" start="6462" end="6480" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Journal" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660027" start="6592" end="6601" title="McClatchy" label="McClatchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5091766" start="6882" end="6902" title="checkbook journalism" label="checkbook journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q868772" start="7501" end="7512" title="Trump Tower" label="Trump Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318724" start="8020" end="8032" title="Dylan Howard" label="Dylan Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276678" start="8094" end="8108" title="catch and kill" label="catch and kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q117864800" start="8566" end="8589" title="Prosecution of Donald Trump" label="New York criminal trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q150820" start="9218" end="9225" title="Playboy" label="Playboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q261402" start="9238" end="9252" title="Karen McDougal" label="Karen McDougal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="9329" end="9341" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q432473" start="9414" end="9421" title="Melania Trump" label="Melania"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="9519" end="9542" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276678" start="9649" end="9682" title="Catch and kill" label="&amp;quot;kill damaging stories about"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235479" start="10162" end="10174" title="David Pecker" label="David Pecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318724" start="10205" end="10217" title="Dylan Howard" label="Dylan Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9680961" start="10231" end="10247" title="witness immunity" label="witness immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277395" start="10360" end="10373" title="Michael Cohen (lawyer)" label="Michael Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705072" start="11432" end="11459" title="Federal Election Commission" label="Federal Election Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="12067" end="12073" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="12092" end="12107" title="The Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q312556" start="12120" end="12130" title="Jeff Bezos" label="Jeff Bezos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4407963" start="12136" end="12150" title="Lauren Sánchez" label="Lauren Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262052" start="12499" end="12514" title="Jamal Khashoggi" label="Jamal Khashoggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318724" start="13046" end="13058" title="Dylan Howard" label="Dylan Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12068677" start="13177" end="13183" title="selfie" label="selfie"/>
<link wikidata="Q510866" start="13189" end="13194" title="Sexting" label="sexts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308139" start="14210" end="14225" title="The Daily Beast" label="The Daily Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q947770" start="14447" end="14453" title="Closer (magazine)" label="Closer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454163" start="14468" end="14483" title="First for Women" label="First for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q265172" start="14530" end="14538" title="In Touch Weekly" label="In Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11715013" start="14553" end="14557" title="J-14 (magazine)" label="J-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544648" start="14572" end="14588" title="Life &amp;amp; Style (magazine)" label="Life &amp;amp; Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559290" start="14603" end="14623" title="Muscle &amp;amp; Fitness" label="Muscle &amp;amp; Fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q675364" start="14678" end="14681" title="OK!" label="OK!"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955182" start="14726" end="14734" title="Quizfest" label="Quizfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279976" start="14750" end="14765" title="RadarOnline.com" label="RadarOnline.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496935" start="14780" end="14784" title="Star (magazine)" label="Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q549578" start="14799" end="14808" title="Us Weekly" label="Us Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030662" start="14823" end="14841" title="Woman&amp;#x27;s World" label="Woman&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177361" start="14919" end="14932" title="Country Music (magazine)" label="Country Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455384" start="14947" end="14960" title="Fit Pregnancy" label="Fit Pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073683" start="14975" end="14979" title="Flex (magazine)" label="Flex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570970" start="14994" end="14999" title="Globe (tabloid)" label="Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779863" start="15014" end="15032" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Fitness" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816008" start="15047" end="15065" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Journal" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036617" start="15080" end="15099" title="Nash Country Weekly" label="Nash Country Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814777" start="15114" end="15131" title="National Enquirer" label="National Enquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972509" start="15146" end="15163" title="National Examiner" label="National Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q327416" start="15248" end="15253" title="Shape (magazine)" label="Shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q22097069" start="15268" end="15288" title="Snowboarder Magazine" label="Snowboarder Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549799" start="15303" end="15320" title="Soap Opera Digest" label="Soap Opera Digest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549829" start="15335" end="15349" title="Soaps in Depth" label="Soaps in Depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846465" start="15364" end="15381" title="Soap Opera Weekly" label="Soap Opera Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7638183" start="15419" end="15422" title="Sun (supermarket tabloid)" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q44525" start="15437" end="15443" title="Surfer (magazine)" label="Surfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q120972906" start="15458" end="15467" title="Teen Boss" label="Teen Boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052967" start="15482" end="15506" title="Transworld Skateboarding" label="Transworld Skateboarding"/>
<link wikidata="Q498096" start="15521" end="15538" title="Weekly World News" label="Weekly World News"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835164" start="15629" end="15637" title="Dew Tour" label="Dew Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q48802033" start="15653" end="15700" title="2017–18 United States political sexual scandals" label="2017–18 United States political sexual scandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q51025585" start="15702" end="15737" title="Stormy Daniels–Donald Trump scandal" label="Stormy Daniels–Donald Trump scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q100271070" start="15739" end="15762" title="Death of Robert Stevens" label="Death of Robert Stevens"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2303" wikidata="Q28602" url="?curid=2303" title="Aramaic">
<text>Aramaic ( ; ) is a Northwest Semitic language that originated in the ancient region of Syria and quickly spread to Mesopotamia, the southern Levant, southeastern Anatolia, Eastern Arabia and the Sinai Peninsula, where it has been continually written and spoken in different varieties for over three thousand years.

Aramaic served as a language of public life and administration of ancient kingdoms and empires, particularly the Neo-Assyrian Empire, Neo-Babylonian Empire and Achaemenid Empire, and also as a language of divine worship and religious study within Judaism, Christianity and Gnosticism. Several modern varieties of Aramaic are still spoken. The modern eastern branch is spoken by Assyrians, Mandeans and Mizrahi Jews. Western Aramaic is still spoken by the Muslim and Christian Arameans (Syriacs) in the towns of Maaloula and nearby Jubb&#x27;adin in Syria. Classical varieties are used as liturgical and literary languages in several West Asian churches, as well as in Judaism, Samaritanism, and Mandaeism.

Aramaic belongs to the Northwest group of the Semitic language family, which also includes the mutually intelligible Canaanite languages such as Hebrew, Edomite, Moabite, Ekronite, Sutean, and Phoenician, as well as Amorite and Ugaritic. Aramaic languages are written in the Aramaic alphabet, a descendant of the Phoenician alphabet, and the most prominent alphabet variant is the Syriac alphabet founded in Assyria. The Aramaic alphabet also became a base for the creation and adaptation of specific writing systems in some other Semitic languages of West Asia, such as the Hebrew alphabet and the Arabic alphabet.

The Aramaic languages are now considered endangered, with several varieties used mainly by the older generations. Researchers are working to record and analyze all of the remaining varieties of Neo-Aramaic languages before or in case they become extinct. Aramaic dialects today form the mother tongues of the Arameans (Syriacs) in the Qalamoun mountains, Assyrians of Iraq, Syria, Turkey and Iran and Mandaeans, as well as some Mizrahi Jews.

Early Aramaic inscriptions date from 11th century BC, placing it among the earliest languages to be written down. Aramaicist notes, &quot;The linguistic history of Aramaic prior to the appearance of the first textual sources in the ninth century BC remains unknown.&quot; Aramaic is also believed by most historians and scholars to have been the primary language spoken by Jesus of Nazareth both for preaching and in everyday life.

== History ==

Historically and originally, Aramaic was the language of the Arameans, a Semitic-speaking people of the region between the northern Levant and the northern Tigris valley. By around 1000 BC, the Arameans had a string of kingdoms in what is now part of Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, and the fringes of southern Mesopotamia (Iraq). Aramaic rose to prominence under the Neo-Assyrian Empire (911–605 BC), under whose influence Aramaic became a prestige language after being adopted as a lingua franca of the empire by Assyrian kings, and its use was spread throughout Mesopotamia, the Levant and parts of Asia Minor, Arabian Peninsula, and Ancient Iran under Assyrian rule. At its height, Aramaic was spoken in what is now Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Israel, Palestine, Jordan, Kuwait, parts of southeast and south central Turkey, northern parts of the Arabian Peninsula and parts of northwest Iran, as well as the southern Caucasus, having gradually replaced several other related Semitic languages.

According to the Babylonian Talmud (Sanhedrin 38b), the language spoken by Adamthe Bible&#x27;s first humanwas Aramaic.

Aramaic was the language of Jesus, who spoke the Galilean dialect during his public ministry, as well as the language of several sections of the Hebrew Bible, including parts of the books of Daniel and Ezra, and also the language of the Targum, the Aramaic translation of the Hebrew Bible. It is also the language of the Jerusalem Talmud, Babylonian Talmud, and Zohar.

The scribes of the Neo-Assyrian bureaucracy also used Aramaic, and this practice was subsequently inherited by the succeeding Neo-Babylonian Empire (605–539 BC) and later by the Achaemenid Empire (539–330 BC). Mediated by scribes that had been trained in the language, highly standardized written Aramaic, named by scholars Imperial Aramaic, progressively also became the lingua franca of public life, trade and commerce throughout Achaemenid territories. Wide use of written Aramaic subsequently led to the adoption of the Aramaic alphabet and, as logograms, some Aramaic vocabulary in the Pahlavi scripts, which were used by several Middle Iranian languages, including Parthian, Middle Persian, Sogdian, and Khwarezmian.

Some variants of Aramaic are also retained as sacred languages by certain religious communities. Most notable among them is Classical Syriac, the liturgical language of Syriac Christianity. It is used by several communities, including the Assyrian Church of the East, the Ancient Church of the East, the Chaldean Catholic Church, the Syriac Orthodox Church, the Syriac Catholic Church, the Maronite Church, and also the Saint Thomas Christians, Syriac Christians of Kerala, India. One of the liturgical dialects was Mandaic, which besides becoming a vernacular, Neo-Mandaic, also remained the liturgical language of Mandaeism. Syriac was also the liturgical language of several now-extinct gnostic faiths, such as Manichaeism.

Neo-Aramaic languages are still spoken in the 21st century as a first language by many communities of Assyrians, Mizrahi Jews (in particular, the Jews of Kurdistan/Iraqi Jews), and Mandaeans of the Near East, with the main Neo-Aramaic languages being Suret (~240,000 speakers) and Turoyo (~250,000 speakers). Western Neo-Aramaic (~3,000) persists in only two villages in the Anti-Lebanon Mountains in western Syria. They have retained use of the once-dominant lingua franca despite subsequent language shifts experienced throughout the Middle East.

==Name==
The connection between Chaldean, Syriac, and Samaritan as &quot;Aramaic&quot; was first identified in 1679 by German theologian Johann Wilhelm Hilliger. In 1819–21 Ulrich Friedrich Kopp published his &quot;Bilder und Schriften der Vorzeit&quot; (&quot;Images and Inscriptions of the Past&quot;), in which he established the basis of the paleographical development of the Northwest Semitic scripts. Kopp criticised Jean-Jacques Barthélemy and other scholars who had characterized all the then-known inscriptions and coins as Phoenician, with &quot;everything left to the Phoenicians and nothing to the Arameans, as if they could not have written at all&quot;. Kopp noted that some of the words on the Carpentras Stele corresponded to the Aramaic in the Book of Daniel, and in the Book of Ruth.

Josephus and Strabo (the latter citing Posidonius) both stated that the &quot;Syrians&quot; called themselves &quot;Arameans&quot;. The Septuagint, the earliest extant full copy of the Hebrew Bible, a Greek translation, used the terms &quot;Syria&quot; and &quot;Syrian&quot; where the Masoretic Text, the earliest extant Hebrew copy of the Bible, uses the terms &quot;Aramean&quot; and &quot;Aramaic&quot;; numerous later bibles followed the Septuagint&#x27;s usage, including the King James Version. This connection between the names Syrian and Aramaic was discussed in 1835 by Étienne Marc Quatremère.

In historical sources, Aramaic language is designated by two distinctive groups of terms, first of them represented by endonymic (native) names, and the other one represented by various exonymic (foreign in origin) names. Native (endonymic) terms for Aramaic language were derived from the same word root as the name of its original speakers, the ancient Arameans. Endonymic forms were also adopted in some other languages, like ancient Hebrew. In the Torah (Hebrew Bible), &quot;Aram&quot; is used as a proper name of several people including descendants of Shem, Nahor, and Jacob. Ancient Aram, bordering northern Israel and what is now called Syria, is considered the linguistic center of Aramaic, the language of the Arameans who settled the area during the Bronze Age . The language is often mistakenly considered to have originated within Assyria (Iraq). In fact, Arameans carried their language and writing into Mesopotamia by voluntary migration, by forced exile of conquering armies, and by nomadic Chaldean invasions of Babylonia during the period from 1200 to 1000 BC.

Unlike in Hebrew, designations for Aramaic language in some other ancient languages were mostly exonymic. In ancient Greek, Aramaic language was most commonly known as the &quot;Syrian language&quot;, in relation to the native (non-Greek) inhabitants of the historical region of Syria. Since the name of Syria itself emerged as a variant of Assyria, the biblical Ashur, and Akkadian Ashuru, a complex set of semantic phenomena was created, becoming a subject of interest both among ancient writers and modern scholars.

The Koine Greek word (&quot;Hebraïstí&quot;) has been translated as &quot;Aramaic&quot; in some versions of the Christian New Testament, as Aramaic was at that time the language commonly spoken by the Jews. However, is consistently used in Koine Greek at this time to mean Hebrew and (&quot;Syristi&quot;) is used to mean Aramaic. In Biblical scholarship, the term &quot;Chaldean&quot; was for many years used as a synonym of Aramaic, due to its use in the book of Daniel and subsequent interpretation by Jerome.

==Geographic distribution==

During the Neo-Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian Empires, Arameans, the native speakers of Aramaic, began to settle in greater numbers in Babylonia, and later in the heartland of Assyria, also known as the &quot;Arbela triangle&quot; (Assur, Nineveh, and Arbela). The influx eventually resulted in the Neo-Assyrian Empire (911–605 BC) adopting an Akkadian-influenced Imperial Aramaic as the lingua franca of its empire. This policy was continued by the short-lived Neo-Babylonian Empire and the Medes, and all three empires became operationally bilingual in written sources, with Aramaic used alongside Akkadian. The Achaemenid Empire (539–323 BC) continued this tradition, and the extensive influence of these empires led to Aramaic gradually becoming the lingua franca of most of western Asia, Anatolia, the Caucasus, and Egypt.

Beginning with the rise of the Rashidun Caliphate and the early Muslim conquests in the late seventh century, Arabic gradually replaced Aramaic as the lingua franca of the Near East. However, Aramaic remains a spoken, literary, and liturgical language for local Christians and also some Jews. Aramaic also continues to be spoken by the Assyrians of northern Iraq, northeastern Syria, southeastern Turkey, and northwest Iran, with diaspora communities in Armenia, Georgia, Azerbaijan, and southern Russia. The Mandaeans also continue to use Classical Mandaic as a liturgical language, although most now speak Arabic as their first language. There are still also a small number of first-language speakers of Western Aramaic varieties in isolated villages in western Syria.

Being in contact with other regional languages, some Neo-Aramaic dialects were often engaged in the mutual exchange of influences, particularly with Arabic, Iranian, and Kurdish.

The turbulence of the last two centuries (particularly the Assyrian genocide, also known as &quot;Seyfo&quot; &quot;Sword&quot; in Syriac, has seen speakers of first-language and literary Aramaic dispersed throughout the world. However, there are several sizable Assyrian towns in northern Iraq, such as Alqosh, Bakhdida, Bartella, Tesqopa, and Tel Keppe, and numerous small villages, where Aramaic is still the main spoken language, and many large cities in this region also have Suret-speaking communities, particularly Mosul, Erbil, Kirkuk, Dohuk, and al-Hasakah. In modern Israel, the only native Aramaic-speaking population are the Jews of Kurdistan, although the language is dying out. However, Aramaic is also experiencing a revival among Maronites in Israel in Jish.

===Aramaic languages and dialects===
Aramaic is often spoken of as a single language but is actually a group of related languages. Some languages differ more from each other than the Romance languages do among themselves. Its long history, extensive literature, and use by different religious communities are all factors in the diversification of the language. Some Aramaic dialects are mutually intelligible, whereas others are not, similar to the situation with modern varieties of Arabic.

Some Aramaic languages are known under different names; for example, Syriac is particularly used to describe the Eastern Aramaic variety spoken by Syriac Christian communities in northern Iraq, southeastern Turkey, northeastern Syria, and northwestern Iran, and the Saint Thomas Christians in Kerala, India. Most dialects can be described as either &quot;Eastern&quot; or &quot;Western&quot;, the dividing line being roughly the Euphrates, or slightly west of it.

It is also helpful to distinguish modern living languages, or Neo-Aramaics, and those that are still in use as literary or liturgical languages or are only of interest to scholars. Although there are some exceptions to this rule, this classification gives &quot;Old&quot;, &quot;Middle&quot;, and &quot;Modern&quot; periods alongside &quot;Eastern&quot; and &quot;Western&quot; areas to distinguish between the various languages and dialects that are Aramaic.

==Writing system==

The earliest Aramaic alphabet was based on the Phoenician alphabet. In time, Aramaic developed its distinctive &quot;square&quot; style. The ancient Israelites and other peoples of Canaan adopted this alphabet for writing their own languages. Thus, it is better known as the Hebrew alphabet. This is the writing system used in Biblical Aramaic and other Jewish writing in Aramaic. The other main writing system used for Aramaic was developed by Christian communities: a cursive form known as the Syriac alphabet. A highly modified form of the Aramaic alphabet, the Mandaic alphabet, is used by the Mandaeans.

In addition to these writing systems, certain derivatives of the Aramaic alphabet were used in ancient times by particular groups: the Nabataean alphabet in Petra and the Palmyrene alphabet in Palmyra. In modern times, Turoyo (see below) has sometimes been written in a Latin script.

==Periodization==
Periodization of historical development of Aramaic language has been the subject of particular interest for scholars, who proposed several types of periodization, based on linguistic, chronological and territorial criteria. Overlapping terminology, used in different periodizations, led to the creation of several polysemic terms, that are used differently among scholars. Terms like: Old Aramaic, Ancient Aramaic, Early Aramaic, Middle Aramaic, Late Aramaic (and some others, like Paleo-Aramaic), were used in various meanings, thus referring (in scope or substance) to different stages in historical development of Aramaic language.

Most commonly used types of periodization are those of Klaus Beyer and Joseph Fitzmyer.

Periodization of Klaus Beyer (1929–2014):
* Old Aramaic, from the earliest records, to 200 AD
* Middle Aramaic, from 200 AD, to 1200 AD
* Modern Aramaic, from 1200 AD, up to the modern times

Periodization of Joseph Fitzmyer (1920–2016):
* Old Aramaic, from the earliest records, to regional prominence 700 BC
* Official Aramaic, from 700 BC, to 200 BC
* Middle Aramaic, from 200 BC, to 200 AD
* Late Aramaic, from 200 AD, to 700 AD
* Modern Aramaic, from 700 AD, up to the modern times

Recent periodization of Aaron Butts:
* Old Aramaic, from the earliest records, to 538 BC
* Achaemenid Aramaic, from 538 BC, to 333 BC
* Middle Aramaic, from 333 BC, to 200 AD
* Late Aramaic, from 200 AD, to 1200 AD
* Neo-Aramaic, from 1200 AD, up to the modern times

==Old Aramaic==

Aramaic&#x27;s long history and diverse and widespread use has led to the development of many divergent varieties, which are sometimes considered dialects, though they have become distinct enough over time that they are now sometimes considered separate languages. Therefore, there is not one singular, static Aramaic language; each time and place rather has had its own variation. The more widely spoken Eastern Aramaic languages are largely restricted to Assyrian, Mandean and Mizrahi Jewish communities in Iraq, northeastern Syria, northwestern Iran, and southeastern Turkey, whilst the severely endangered Western Neo-Aramaic language is spoken by small Christian and Muslim communities in the Anti-Lebanon mountains, and closely related western varieties of Aramaic persisted in Mount Lebanon until as late as the 17th century.
The term &quot;Old Aramaic&quot; is used to describe the varieties of the language from its first known use, until the point roughly marked by the rise of the Sasanian Empire (224 AD), dominating the influential, eastern dialect region. As such, the term covers over thirteen centuries of the development of Aramaic. This vast time span includes all Aramaic that is now effectively extinct. Regarding the earliest forms, Beyer suggests that written Aramaic probably dates from the 11th century BCE, as it is established by the 10th century, to which he dates the oldest inscriptions of northern Syria. Heinrichs uses the less controversial date of the 9th century, for which there is clear and widespread attestation.

The central phase in the development of Old Aramaic was its official use by the Neo-Assyrian Empire (911–608 BC), Neo-Babylonian Empire (620–539 BC), and Achaemenid Empire (500–330 BC). The period before this, dubbed &quot;Ancient Aramaic&quot;, saw the development of the language from being spoken in Aramaean city-states to become a major means of communication in diplomacy and trade throughout Mesopotamia, the Levant, and Egypt. After the fall of the Achaemenid Empire, local vernaculars became increasingly prominent, fanning the divergence of an Aramaic dialect continuum and the development of differing written standards.

===Ancient Aramaic===

&quot;Ancient Aramaic&quot; refers to the earliest known period of the language, from its origin until it becomes the lingua franca of the Fertile Crescent. It was the language of the Aramean city-states of Damascus, Hamath, and Arpad.

There are inscriptions that evidence the earliest use of the language, dating from the 10th century BC. These inscriptions are mostly diplomatic documents between Aramaean city-states. The alphabet of Aramaic at this early period seems to be based on the Phoenician alphabet, and there is a unity in the written language. It seems that, in time, a more refined alphabet, suited to the needs of the language, began to develop from this in the eastern regions of Aram. Due to increasing Aramean migration eastward, the Western periphery of Assyria became bilingual in Akkadian and Aramean at least as early as the mid-9th century BC. As the Neo-Assyrian Empire conquered Aramean lands west of the Euphrates, Tiglath-Pileser III made Aramaic the Empire&#x27;s second official language, and it eventually supplanted Akkadian completely.

From 700 BC, the language began to spread in all directions, but lost much of its unity. Different dialects emerged in Assyria, Babylonia, the Levant and Egypt. Around 600 BC, Adon, a Canaanite king, used Aramaic to write to an Egyptian Pharaoh.

===Imperial Aramaic===
Around 500 BC, following the Achaemenid (Persian) conquest of Mesopotamia under Darius I, Aramaic (as had been used in that region) was adopted by the conquerors as the &quot;vehicle for written communication between the different regions of the vast empire with its different peoples and languages. The use of a single official language, which modern scholarship has dubbed Official Aramaic or Imperial Aramaic, can be assumed to have greatly contributed to the astonishing success of the Achaemenids in holding their far-flung empire together for as long as they did&quot;. In 1955, Richard Frye questioned the classification of Imperial Aramaic as an &quot;official language&quot;, noting that no surviving edict expressly and unambiguously accorded that status to any particular language. Frye reclassifies Imperial Aramaic as the lingua franca of the Achaemenid territories, suggesting then that the Achaemenid-era use of Aramaic was more pervasive than generally thought.

Imperial Aramaic was highly standardised; its orthography was based more on historical roots than any spoken dialect, and the inevitable influence of Persian gave the language a new clarity and robust flexibility. For centuries after the fall of the Achaemenid Empire (in 330 BC), Imperial Aramaic – or a version thereof near enough for it to be recognisable – would remain an influence on the various native Iranian languages. Aramaic script and – as ideograms – Aramaic vocabulary would survive as the essential characteristics of the Pahlavi scripts.

One of the largest collections of Imperial Aramaic texts is that of the Persepolis Administrative Archives, found at Persepolis, which number about five hundred. Many of the extant documents witnessing to this form of Aramaic come from Egypt, and Elephantine in particular (see Elephantine papyri). Of them, the best known is the &quot;Story of Ahikar&quot;, a book of instructive aphorisms quite similar in style to the biblical Book of Proverbs. Consensus regards the Aramaic portion of the Biblical book of Daniel (i.e., 2:4b–7:28) as an example of Imperial (Official) Aramaic.

Achaemenid Aramaic is sufficiently uniform that it is often difficult to know where any particular example of the language was written. Only careful examination reveals the occasional loan word from a local language.

A group of thirty Aramaic documents from Bactria have been discovered, and an analysis was published in November 2006. The texts, which were rendered on leather, reflect the use of Aramaic in the 4th century BC Achaemenid administration of Bactria and Sogdia.

=== Biblical Aramaic ===
Biblical Aramaic is the Aramaic found in four discrete sections of the Old Testament:

* Ezra – documents from the Achaemenid period (5th century BC) concerning the restoration of the temple in Jerusalem.
* Daniel – five tales and an apocalyptic vision.
* Jeremiah 10:11 – a single sentence in the middle of a Hebrew text denouncing idolatry.
* Genesis – translation of a Hebrew place-name.

Biblical Aramaic is a somewhat hybrid dialect. It is theorized that some Biblical Aramaic material originated in both Babylonia and Judaea before the fall of the Achaemenid dynasty.

Biblical Aramaic presented various challenges for writers who were engaged in early Biblical studies. Since the time of Jerome of Stridon (d. 420), Aramaic of the Bible was named as &quot;Chaldean&quot; (Chaldaic, Chaldee). That label remained common in early Aramaic studies, and persisted up into the nineteenth century. The &quot;Chaldean misnomer&quot; was eventually abandoned, when modern scholarly analyses showed that Aramaic dialect used in the Hebrew Bible was not related to ancient Chaldeans and their language.

==Post-Achaemenid Aramaic==


The fall of the Achaemenid Empire ( 334–330 BC), and its replacement with the newly created political order, imposed by Alexander the Great (d. 323 BC) and his Hellenistic successors, marked an important turning point in the history of Aramaic language. During the early stages of the post-Achaemenid era, public use of Aramaic language was continued, but shared with the newly introduced Greek language. By the year 300 BC, all of the main Aramaic-speaking regions came under political rule of the newly created Seleucid Empire that promoted Hellenistic culture, and favored Greek language as the main language of public life and administration. During the 3rd century BCE, Greek overtook Aramaic in many spheres of public communication, particularly in highly Hellenized cities throughout the Seleucid domains. However, Aramaic continued to be used, in its post-Achaemenid form, among upper and literate classes of native Aramaic-speaking communities, and also by local authorities (along with the newly introduced Greek). Post-Achaemenid Aramaic, that bears a relatively close resemblance to that of the Achaemenid period, continued to be used up to the 2nd century BCE.

By the end of the 2nd century BC, several variants of Post-Achaemenid Aramaic emerged, bearing regional characteristics. One of them was Hasmonaean Aramaic, the official administrative language of Hasmonaean Judaea (142–37 BC), alongside Hebrew, which was the language preferred in religious and some other public uses (coinage). It influenced the Biblical Aramaic of the Qumran texts, and was the main language of non-biblical theological texts of that community. The major Targums, translations of the Hebrew Bible into Aramaic, were originally composed in Hasmonaean Aramaic. It also appears in quotations in the Mishnah and Tosefta, although smoothed into its later context. It is written quite differently from Achaemenid Aramaic; there is an emphasis on writing as words are pronounced rather than using etymological forms.

The use of &quot;written&quot; Aramaic in the Achaemenid bureaucracy also precipitated the adoption of Aramaic(-derived) scripts to render a number of Middle Iranian languages. Moreover, many common words, including even pronouns, particles, numerals, and auxiliaries, continued to be written as Aramaic &quot;words&quot; even when writing Middle Iranian languages. In time, in Iranian usage, these Aramaic &quot;words&quot; became disassociated from the Aramaic language and came to be understood as &quot;signs&quot; (i.e. logograms), much like the symbol &#x27;&amp;&#x27; is read as &quot;and&quot; in English and the original Latin &quot;et&quot; is now no longer obvious. Under the early 3rd-century BC Parthian Arsacids, whose government used Greek but whose native language was Parthian, the Parthian language and its Aramaic-derived writing system both gained prestige. This in turn also led to the adoption of the name &#x27;pahlavi&#x27; (&lt; &quot;parthawi&quot;, &quot;of the Parthians&quot;) for that writing system. The Persian Sassanids, who succeeded the Parthian Arsacids in the mid-3rd century AD, subsequently inherited/adopted the Parthian-mediated Aramaic-derived writing system for their own Middle Iranian ethnolect as well. That particular Middle Iranian dialect, Middle Persian, i.e. the language of Persia proper, subsequently also became a prestige language. Following the conquest of the Sassanids by the Arabs in the 7th-century, the Aramaic-derived writing system was replaced by the Arabic alphabet in all but Zoroastrian usage, which continued to use the name &#x27;pahlavi&#x27; for the Aramaic-derived writing system and went on to create the bulk of all Middle Iranian literature in that writing system.

Other regional dialects continued to exist alongside these, often as simple, spoken variants of Aramaic. Early evidence for these vernacular dialects is known only through their influence on words and names in a more standard dialect. However, some of those regional dialects became written languages by the 2nd century BC. These dialects reflect a stream of Aramaic that is not directly dependent on Achaemenid Aramaic, and they also show a clear linguistic diversity between eastern and western regions.

===Targumic===
Babylonian Targumic is the later post-Achaemenid dialect found in the Targum Onqelos and Targum Jonathan, the &quot;official&quot; targums. The original, Hasmonaean targums had reached Babylon sometime in the 2nd or 3rd century AD. They were then reworked according to the contemporary dialect of Babylon to create the language of the standard targums. This combination formed the basis of Babylonian Jewish literature for centuries to follow.

Galilean Targumic is similar to Babylonian Targumic. It is the mixing of literary Hasmonaean with the dialect of Galilee. The Hasmonaean targums reached Galilee in the 2nd century AD, and were reworked into this Galilean dialect for local use. The Galilean Targum was not considered an authoritative work by other communities, and documentary evidence shows that its text was amended. From the 11th century AD onwards, once the Babylonian Targum had become normative, the Galilean version became heavily influenced by it.

===Babylonian Documentary Aramaic===
Babylonian Documentary Aramaic is a dialect in use from the 3rd century AD onwards. It is the dialect of Babylonian private documents, and, from the 12th century, all Jewish private documents are in Aramaic. It is based on Hasmonaean with very few changes. This was perhaps because many of the documents in BDA are legal documents, the language in them had to be sensible throughout the Jewish community from the start, and Hasmonaean was the old standard.

===Nabataean===
Nabataean Aramaic was the written language of the Arab kingdom of Nabataea, whose capital was Petra. The kingdom (&quot;c.&quot; 200 BC – 106 AD) controlled the region to the east of the Jordan River, the Negev, the Sinai Peninsula, and the northern Hijaz, and supported a wide-ranging trade network. The Nabataeans used imperial Aramaic for written communications, rather than their native Arabic. Nabataean Aramaic developed from Imperial Aramaic, with some influence from Arabic: &quot;l&quot; is often turned into &quot;n&quot;, and there are some Arabic loanwords. Arabic influence on Nabataean Aramaic increased over time. Some Nabataean Aramaic inscriptions date from the early days of the kingdom, but most datable inscriptions are from the first four centuries AD. The language is written in a cursive script that was the precursor to the Arabic alphabet. After annexation by the Romans in 106 AD, most of Nabataea was subsumed into the province of Arabia Petraea, the Nabataeans turned to Greek for written communications, and the use of Aramaic declined.

===Palmyrene===
Palmyrene Aramaic is the dialect that was in use in the multicultural city state of Palmyra in the Syrian Desert from 44 BC to 274 AD. It was written in a rounded script, which later gave way to cursive Estrangela. Like Nabataean, Palmyrene was influenced by Arabic, but to a much lesser degree.

===Eastern dialects===
In the eastern regions (from Mesopotamia to Persia), dialects like Palmyrene Aramaic and Arsacid Aramaic gradually merged with the regional vernacular dialects, thus creating languages with a foot in Achaemenid and a foot in regional Aramaic.

In the Kingdom of Osroene, founded in 132 BCE and centred in Edessa (Urhay), the regional dialect became the official language: Edessan Aramaic (Urhaya), that later came to be known as Classical Syriac. On the upper reaches of the Tigris, East Mesopotamian Aramaic flourished, with evidence from the regions of Hatra and Assur.

Tatian the Assyrian (or Syrian), the author of the gospel harmony the Diatessaron came from Adiabene (Syr. &quot;Beth-Hadiab&quot;), and perhaps wrote his work (172 AD) in East Mesopotamian rather than Classical Syriac or Greek. In Babylonia, the regional dialect was used by the Jewish community, Jewish Old Babylonian (from ). This everyday language increasingly came under the influence of Biblical Aramaic and Babylonian Targumic.

The written form of Mandaic, the language of Mandaeism, was descended from the Arsacid chancery script.

===Western dialects===
The western regional dialects of Aramaic followed a similar course to those of the east. They are quite distinct from the eastern dialects and Imperial Aramaic. Aramaic came to coexist with Canaanite dialects, eventually completely displacing Phoenician in the first century BC and Hebrew around the turn of the fourth century AD.

The form of Late Old Western Aramaic used by the Jewish community is best attested, and is usually referred to as Jewish Old Palestinian. Its oldest form is Old East Jordanian, which probably comes from the region of Caesarea Philippi. This is the dialect of the oldest manuscript of the Book of Enoch (&quot;c.&quot; 170 BC). The next distinct phase of the language is called Old Judaean lasting into the second century AD. Old Judean literature can be found in various inscriptions and personal letters, preserved quotations in the Talmud and receipts from Qumran. Josephus&#x27; first, non-extant edition of his &quot;The Jewish War&quot; was written in Old Judean.

The Old East Jordanian dialect continued to be used into the first century AD by pagan communities living to the east of the Jordan. Their dialect is often then called Pagan Old Palestinian, and it was written in a cursive script somewhat similar to that used for Old Syriac. A Christian Old Palestinian dialect may have arisen from the pagan one, and this dialect may be behind some of the Western Aramaic tendencies found in the otherwise eastern Old Syriac gospels (see Peshitta).

===Languages during Jesus&#x27; lifetime===
It is generally believed by Christian scholars that in the first century, Jews in Judea primarily spoke Aramaic with a decreasing number using Hebrew as their first language, though many learned Hebrew as a liturgical language. Additionally, Koine Greek was the lingua franca of the Near East in trade, among the Hellenized classes (much like French in the 18th, 19th, and 20th centuries in Europe), and in the Roman administration. Latin, the language of the Roman army and higher levels of administration, had almost no impact on the linguistic landscape.

In addition to the formal, literary dialects of Aramaic based on Hasmonean and Babylonian, there were a number of colloquial Aramaic dialects spoken in the southern Levant. Seven Western Aramaic varieties were spoken in the vicinity of Judea in Jesus&#x27; time. They were probably distinctive yet mutually intelligible. Old Judean was the prominent dialect of Jerusalem and Judaea. The region of Ein Gedi spoke the Southeast Judaean dialect. Samaritan Aramaic was distinct; it ultimately merged [ʔ], [h], [ħ], and [ʕ] as a glottal stop, only maintaining [ʕ] in the initial position before the vowel [a]. Galilean Aramaic, the dialect of Jesus&#x27; home region, is only known from a few place names, the influences on Galilean Targumic, some rabbinic literature, and a few private letters. It seems to have a number of distinctive features, including the collapse of gutturals and the maintenance of diphthongs. In the Transjordan, the various dialects of East Jordanian Aramaic were spoken. In the region of Damascus and the Anti-Lebanon Mountains, Damascene Aramaic was spoken (deduced mostly from Modern Western Aramaic). Finally, as far north as Aleppo, the western dialect of Orontes Aramaic was spoken.

The three languages, especially Hebrew and Aramaic, influenced one another through loanwords and semantic loans. Hebrew words entered Jewish Aramaic. Most were mostly technical religious words, but a few were everyday words like &#x27; &quot;wood&quot;. Conversely, Aramaic words, such as &quot;māmmôn&quot; &quot;wealth&quot; were borrowed into Hebrew, and Hebrew words acquired additional senses from Aramaic. For instance, borrowed the sense &quot;worthy, seemly&quot; from Aramaic &#x27; &quot;seen, worthy&quot;.

New Testament Greek preserves some semiticisms, including transliterations of Semitic words. Some are Aramaic, like &quot;talitha&quot; (), which represents the Aramaic noun &quot;&quot;, and others may be either Hebrew or Aramaic like &quot;Rabbounei&quot; (), which means &quot;my master/great one/teacher&quot; in both languages. Other examples:
* &quot;Talitha kumi&quot; (טליתא קומי)
* &quot;Ephphatha&quot; (אתפתח)
* &quot;Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?&quot; (?אלי, אלי, למה שבקתני)

The 2004 film &quot;The Passion of the Christ&quot; used Aramaic for much of its dialogue, specially reconstructed by a scholar, William Fulco, S.J. Where the appropriate words (in first-century Aramaic) were no longer known, he used the Aramaic of Daniel and fourth-century Syriac and Hebrew as the basis for his work.

==Middle Aramaic==
During the Late Middle Aramaic period, spanning from 300 B.C.E. to 200 C.E., Aramaic diverged into its eastern and western branches. During this time, the nature of various Aramaic dialects began to change. The descendants of Imperial Aramaic ceased to be living languages, and the eastern and western regional dialects started to develop significant new literatures. Unlike many dialects of Old Aramaic, much is known about the vocabulary and grammar of Middle Aramaic.

===Eastern Middle Aramaic===
The dialects of Old Eastern Aramaic continued in ancient Assyria, Babylon, and the Achaemenid Empire as written languages using various Aramaic scripts. Eastern Middle Aramaic comprises Classical Mandaic, Hatran, Jewish Babylonian Aramaic dialects, and Classical Syriac
====Syriac Aramaic====


Syriac Aramaic (also &quot;Classical Syriac&quot;) is the literary, liturgical, and often spoken language of Syriac Christianity. It originated in the first century in the region of Osroene, centered in Edessa, but its golden age was the fourth to eighth centuries. This period began with the translation of the Bible into the language: the Peshitta, and the masterful prose and poetry of Ephrem the Syrian. Classical Syriac became the language of Eastern Christianity and missionary activity led to the spread of Syriac from Mesopotamia and Persia, into Central Asia, India, and China.

====Jewish Babylonian Aramaic====
Jewish Middle Babylonian is the language employed by Jewish writers in Babylonia between the fourth and the eleventh century. It is most commonly identified with the language of the Babylonian Talmud (which was completed in the seventh century) and of post-Talmudic Geonic literature, which are the most important cultural products of Babylonian Judaism. The most important epigraphic sources for the dialect are the hundreds of incantation bowls written in Jewish Babylonian Aramaic.

====Mandaic Aramaic====

Classical Mandaic, used as a liturgical language by the Mandaeans of Iraq and Iran, is a sister dialect to Jewish Babylonian Aramaic, though it is both linguistically and culturally distinct. It is the language in which the Mandaeans&#x27; gnostic religious literature was composed. It is characterized by a highly phonetic orthography and does not make use of vowel diacritics.

===Western Middle Aramaic===
The dialects of Old Western Aramaic continued with Nabataean, Jewish Palestinian (in Hebrew &quot;square script&quot;), Samaritan Aramaic (in the Old Hebrew script), and Christian Palestinian (in Syriac Estrangela script). Of these four, only Jewish Palestinian continued as a written language.

====Samaritan Aramaic====

The Samaritan Aramaic is earliest attested by the documentary tradition of the Samaritans that can be dated back to the fourth century. Its modern pronunciation is based on the form used in the tenth century.

====Jewish Palestinian Aramaic====

In 135, after the Bar Kokhba revolt, many Jewish leaders, expelled from Jerusalem, moved to Galilee. The Galilean dialect thus rose from obscurity to become the standard among Jews in the west. This dialect was spoken not only in Galilee, but also in the surrounding parts. It is the linguistic setting for the Jerusalem Talmud (completed in the 5th century), Palestinian targumim (Jewish Aramaic versions of scripture), and midrashim (biblical commentaries and teaching). The standard vowel pointing for the Hebrew Bible, the Tiberian system (7th century), was developed by speakers of the Galilean dialect of Jewish Middle Palestinian. Classical Hebrew vocalisation, therefore, in representing the Hebrew of this period, probably reflects the contemporary pronunciation of this Aramaic dialect.

Middle Judaean Aramaic, the descendant of Old Judaean Aramaic, was no longer the dominant dialect, and was used only in southern Judaea (the variant Engedi dialect continued throughout this period). Likewise, Middle East Jordanian Aramaic continued as a minor dialect from Old East Jordanian Aramaic. The inscriptions in the synagogue at Dura-Europos are either in Middle East Jordanian or Middle Judaean.

====Christian Palestinian Aramaic====

This was the language of the Christian Melkite (Chalcedonian) community, predominantly of Jewish descent, in Palestine, Transjordan and Sinai from the 5th to the 8th century. As a liturgical language, it was used up to the 13th century. It is also been called &quot;Melkite Aramaic&quot;, &quot;Syro-Palestinian&quot; and &quot;Palestinian Syriac&quot;. The language itself comes from Old Western Aramaic, but its writing conventions were based on the Aramaic dialect of Edessa, and it was heavily influenced by Greek. For example, the name Jesus, Syriac &quot;īšū‘&quot;, is written &quot;īsūs&quot;, a transliteration of the Greek form, in Christian Palestinian.

==Modern Aramaic==

As the Western Aramaic dialects of the Levant have become nearly extinct in non-liturgical usage, the most prolific speakers of Neo-Aramaic languages in the 21st century are Eastern Aramaic speakers, the most numerous being the Central Neo-Aramaic and Northeastern Neo-Aramaic (NENA) speakers of Mesopotamia. This includes speakers of the Assyrian (235,000 speakers) and Chaldean (216,000 speakers) varieties of Suret, and Turoyo (112,000 to 450,000 speakers). Having largely lived in remote areas as insulated communities for over a millennium, the remaining speakers of modern Aramaic dialects, such as the Arameans of the Qalamoun Mountains, Assyrians, Mandaeans and Mizrahi Jews, escaped the linguistic pressures experienced by others during the large-scale language shifts that saw the proliferation of other tongues among those who previously did not speak them, most recently the Arabization of the Middle East and North Africa by Arabs beginning with the early Muslim conquests of the seventh century.

===Modern Eastern Aramaic===


Modern Eastern Aramaic exists in a wide variety of dialects and languages. There is significant difference between the Aramaic spoken by Assyrians, Mizrahi Jews, and Mandaeans, with mutually unintelligible variations within each of these groups.

The Christian varieties of Northeastern Neo-Aramaic (NENA) are often called &quot;Assyrian&quot;, &quot;Chaldean&quot; or &quot;Eastern Syriac&quot;, and are spoken by the Assyrians in northern Iraq, northeast Syria, southeast Turkey, northwest Iran, and in the diaspora. However, they also have roots in numerous previously unwritten local Aramaic varieties and, in some cases, even contain Akkadian influences. These varieties are not purely the direct descendants of the language of Ephrem the Syrian, which was Classical Syriac.

The Judeo-Aramaic languages are now mostly spoken in Israel, and most are facing extinction. The Jewish varieties that have come from communities that once lived between Lake Urmia and Mosul are not all mutually intelligible. In some places, for example Urmia, Christian Assyrians and Mizrahi Jews speak mutually unintelligible varieties of Northeastern Neo-Aramaic in the same place. In others, the Nineveh Plains around Mosul for example, the varieties of these two ethnicities are similar enough to allow conversation.

Modern Central Neo-Aramaic, being in between Western Neo-Aramaic and Northeastern Neo-Aramaic, is generally represented by Turoyo, the language of the Assyrians/Syriacs of Tur Abdin. A related Neo-Aramaic language, Mlaḥsô, has recently become extinct.

Mandaeans living in the Khuzestan province of Iran and scattered throughout Iraq, speak Neo-Mandaic. It is quite distinct from any other Aramaic variety. Mandaeans number some 50,000–75,000 people, but it is believed Neo-Mandaic may now be spoken fluently by as few as 5,000 people, with other Mandaeans having varying degrees of knowledge.

===Modern Western Aramaic===

Very little remains of Western Aramaic. Its only remaining vernacular is Western Neo-Aramaic, which is still spoken in the Aramean villages of Maaloula and Jubb&#x27;adin on Syria&#x27;s side of the Anti-Lebanon Mountains, as well as by some people who migrated from these villages, to Damascus and other larger towns of Syria. Bakh&#x27;a was completely destroyed during the Syrian civil war and all the survivors fled to other parts of Syria or to Lebanon. All these speakers of modern Western Aramaic are fluent in Arabic as well. Other Western Aramaic languages, like Jewish Palestinian Aramaic and Samaritan Aramaic, are preserved only in liturgical and literary usage.

==Sample texts==
Matthew 2, verses 1–4, in Classical Syriac (Eastern accent), Christian Palestinian Aramaic and Suret (Swadaya):

Matthew 28, verse 16, in Classical Syriac (Eastern accent), Western Neo-Aramaic, Turoyo and Suret (Swadaya):

==Phonology==

Each dialect of Aramaic has its own distinctive pronunciation, and it would not be feasible here to go into all these properties. Aramaic has a phonological palette of 25 to 40 distinct phonemes. Some modern Aramaic pronunciations lack the series of &quot;emphatic&quot; consonants, and some have borrowed from the inventories of surrounding languages, particularly Arabic, Azerbaijani, Kurdish, Persian, and Turkish.

===Vowels===
As with most Semitic languages, Aramaic can be thought of as having three basic sets of vowels:
* Open &quot;a&quot;-vowels
* Close front &quot;i&quot;-vowels
* Close back &quot;u&quot;-vowels
These vowel groups are relatively stable, but the exact articulation of any individual is most dependent on its consonantal setting.

The open vowel is an open near-front unrounded vowel (&quot;short&quot; &quot;a&quot;, somewhat like the first vowel in the English &quot;batter&quot;, ). It usually has a back counterpart (&quot;long&quot; &quot;a&quot;, like the &quot;a&quot; in &quot;father&quot;, , or even tending to the vowel in &quot;caught&quot;, ), and a front counterpart (&quot;short&quot; &quot;e&quot;, like the vowel in &quot;head&quot;, ). There is much correspondence between these vowels between dialects. There is some evidence that Middle Babylonian dialects did not distinguish between the short &quot;a&quot; and short &quot;e&quot;. In West Syriac dialects, and possibly Middle Galilean, the long &quot;a&quot; became the &quot;o&quot; sound. The open &quot;e&quot; and back &quot;a&quot; are often indicated in writing by the use of the letters א &quot;alaph&quot; (a glottal stop) or ה &quot;he&quot; (like the English &quot;h&quot;).

The close front vowel is the &quot;long&quot; &quot;i&quot; (like the vowel in &quot;need&quot;, ). It has a slightly more open counterpart, the &quot;long&quot; &quot;e&quot;, as in the final vowel of &quot;café&quot; (). Both of these have shorter counterparts, which tend to be pronounced slightly more open. Thus, the short close &quot;e&quot; corresponds with the open &quot;e&quot; in some dialects. The close front vowels usually use the consonant י &quot;y&quot; as a mater lectionis.

The close back vowel is the &quot;long&quot; &quot;u&quot; (like the vowel in &quot;school&quot;, ). It has a more open counterpart, the &quot;long&quot; &quot;o&quot;, like the vowel in &quot;show&quot; (). There are shorter, and thus more open, counterparts to each of these, with the short close &quot;o&quot; sometimes corresponding with the long open &quot;a&quot;. The close back vowels often use the consonant ו &quot;w&quot; to indicate their quality.

Two basic diphthongs exist: an open vowel followed by י &quot;y&quot; (&quot;ay&quot;), and an open vowel followed by ו &quot;w&quot; (&quot;aw&quot;). These were originally full diphthongs, but many dialects have converted them to &quot;e&quot; and &quot;o&quot; respectively.

The so-called &quot;emphatic&quot; consonants (see the next section) cause all vowels to become mid-centralised.

===Consonants===
The various alphabets used for writing Aramaic languages have twenty-two letters (all of which are consonants). Some of these letters, though, can stand for two or three different sounds (usually a stop and a fricative at the same point of articulation). Aramaic classically uses a series of lightly contrasted plosives and fricatives:
* Labial set: פּ\פ &quot;p&quot;/&quot;f&quot; and בּ\ב &quot;b&quot;/&quot;v&quot;,
* Dental set: תּ\ת &quot;t&quot;/&quot;θ&quot; and דּ\ד &quot;d&quot;/&quot;ð&quot;,
* Velar set: כּ\כ &quot;k&quot;/&quot;x&quot; and גּ\ג &quot;ɡ&quot;/&quot;ɣ&quot;.
Each member of a certain pair is written with the same letter of the alphabet in most writing systems (that is, &quot;p&quot; and &quot;f&quot; are written with the same letter), and are near allophones.

A distinguishing feature of Aramaic phonology (and that of Semitic languages in general) is the presence of &quot;emphatic&quot; consonants. These are consonants that are pronounced with the root of the tongue retracted, with varying degrees of pharyngealization and velarization. Using their alphabetic names, these emphatics are:
* ח Ḥêṯ, a voiceless pharyngeal fricative, ,
* ט Ṭêṯ, a pharyngealized &quot;t&quot;, ,
* ע ʽAyin (or ʽE in some dialects), a pharyngealized glottal stop (sometimes considered to be a voiced pharyngeal approximant), or ,
* צ Ṣāḏê, a pharyngealized &quot;s&quot;, ,
* ק Qôp, a voiceless uvular stop, .
Ancient Aramaic may have had a larger series of emphatics, and some Neo-Aramaic languages definitely do. Not all dialects of Aramaic give these consonants their historic values.

Overlapping with the set of emphatics are the &quot;guttural&quot; consonants. They include ח Ḥêṯ and ע ʽAyn from the emphatic set, and add א ʼĀlap̄ (a glottal stop) and ה Hê (as the English &quot;h&quot;).

Aramaic classically has a set of four sibilants (ancient Aramaic may have had six):
* ס, שׂ (as in English &quot;sea&quot;),
* ז (as in English &quot;zero&quot;),
* שׁ (as in English &quot;ship&quot;),
* צ (the emphatic Ṣāḏê listed above).

In addition to these sets, Aramaic has the nasal consonants מ &quot;m&quot; and נ &quot;n&quot;, and the approximants ר &quot;r&quot; (usually an alveolar trill), ל &quot;l&quot;, י &quot;y&quot; and ו &quot;w&quot;.

===Historical sound changes===
Six broad features of sound change can be seen as dialect differentials:
* Vowel change occurs almost too frequently to document fully, but is a major distinctive feature of different dialects.
* Plosive/fricative pair reduction. Originally, Aramaic, like Tiberian Hebrew, had fricatives as conditioned allophones for each plosive. In the wake of vowel changes, the distinction eventually became phonemic; still later, it was often lost in certain dialects. For example, Turoyo has mostly lost , using instead, like Arabic; other dialects (for instance, standard Assyrian Neo-Aramaic) have lost and and replaced them with and , as with Modern Hebrew. In most dialects of Modern Syriac, and are realized as after a vowel.
* Loss of emphatics. Some dialects have replaced emphatic consonants with non-emphatic counterparts, while those spoken in the Caucasus often have glottalized rather than pharyngealized emphatics.
* Guttural assimilation is the main distinctive feature of Samaritan pronunciation, also found in Samaritan Hebrew: all the gutturals are reduced to a simple glottal stop. Some Modern Aramaic dialects do not pronounce &quot;h&quot; in all words (the third person masculine pronoun &quot;hu&quot; becomes &quot;ow&quot;).
* Proto-Semitic */θ/ */ð/ are reflected in Aramaic as */t/, */d/, whereas they became sibilants in Hebrew (the number three is שלוש &quot;šālôš&quot; in Hebrew but תלת &quot;tlāṯ&quot; in Aramaic, the word gold is זהב zahav in Hebrew but דהב dehav in Aramaic). Dental/sibilant shifts are still happening in the modern dialects.
* New phonetic inventory. Modern dialects have borrowed sounds from the dominant surrounding languages. The most frequent borrowings are (as the first consonant in &quot;azure&quot;), (as in &quot;jam&quot;), and (as in &quot;church&quot;). The Syriac alphabet has been adapted for writing these new sounds.

==Grammar==
As in other Semitic languages, Aramaic morphology (the way words are formed) is based on the consonantal root. The root generally consists of two or three consonants and has a basic meaning, for example, כת״ב &quot;k-t-b&quot; has the meaning of &#x27;writing&#x27;. This is then modified by the addition of vowels and other consonants to create different nuances of the basic meaning:
* כתבה &quot;kṯāḇâ&quot;, handwriting, inscription, script, book.
* כתבי &quot;kṯāḇê&quot;, books, the Scriptures.
* כתובה &quot;kāṯûḇâ&quot;, secretary, scribe.
* כתבת &quot;kiṯḇeṯ&quot;, I wrote.
* אכתב &quot;&#x27;eḵtûḇ&quot;, I shall write.

===Nouns and adjectives===
Aramaic nouns and adjectives are inflected to show &quot;gender&quot;, &quot;number&quot; and &quot;state&quot;.

Aramaic has two grammatical genders: masculine and feminine. The feminine absolute singular is often marked by the ending ה- &quot;-â&quot;.

Nouns can be either singular or plural, but an additional &quot;dual&quot; number exists for nouns that usually come in pairs. The dual number gradually disappeared from Aramaic over time and has little influence in Middle and Modern Aramaic.

Aramaic nouns and adjectives can exist in one of three states. To a certain extent, these states correspond to the role of articles and cases in the Indo-European languages:
# The &quot;absolute&quot; state is the basic form of a noun. In early forms of Aramaic, the absolute state expresses indefiniteness, comparable to the English indefinite article a(n) (for example, כתבה &quot;kṯāḇâ&quot;, &quot;a handwriting&quot;), and can be used in most syntactic roles. However, by the Middle Aramaic period, its use for nouns (but not adjectives) had been widely replaced by the emphatic state.
# The &quot;construct&quot; state is a form of the noun used to make possessive constructions (for example, כתבת מלכתא &quot;kṯāḇat malkṯâ&quot;, &quot;the handwriting of the queen&quot;). In the masculine singular, the form of the construct is often the same as the absolute, but it may undergo vowel reduction in longer words. The feminine construct and masculine construct plural are marked by suffixes. Unlike a genitive case, which marks the possessor, the construct state is marked on the possessed. This is mainly due to Aramaic word order: possessed[const.] possessor[abs./emph.] are treated as a speech unit, with the first unit (possessed) employing the construct state to link it to the following word. In Middle Aramaic, the use of the construct state for all but stock phrases (like בר נשא &quot;bar nāšâ&quot;, &quot;son of man&quot;) begins to disappear.
# The &quot;emphatic&quot; or &quot;determined&quot; state is an extended form of the noun that functions similarly to the definite article. It is marked with a suffix (for example, כתבתא &quot;kṯāḇtâ&quot;, &quot;the handwriting&quot;). Although its original grammatical function seems to have been to mark definiteness, it is used already in Imperial Aramaic to mark all important nouns, even if they should be considered technically indefinite. This practice developed to the extent that the absolute state became extraordinarily rare in later varieties of Aramaic.

Whereas other Northwest Semitic languages, like Hebrew, have the absolute and construct states, the emphatic/determined state is a unique feature to Aramaic. Case endings, as in Ugaritic, probably existed in a very early stage of the language, and glimpses of them can be seen in a few compound proper names. However, as most of those cases were expressed by short final vowels, they were never written, and the few characteristic long vowels of the masculine plural accusative and genitive are not clearly evidenced in inscriptions. Often, the direct object is marked by a prefixed -ל &quot;l-&quot; (the preposition &quot;to&quot;) if it is definite.

Adjectives agree with their nouns in number and gender but agree in state only if used attributively. Predicative adjectives are in the absolute state regardless of the state of their noun (a copula may or may not be written). Thus, an attributive adjective to an emphatic noun, as in the phrase &quot;the good king&quot;, is written also in the emphatic state מלכא טבא &quot;malkâ ṭāḇâ&quot;king[emph.] good[emph.]. In comparison, the predicative adjective, as in the phrase &quot;the king is good&quot;, is written in the absolute state מלכא טב &quot;malkâ ṭāḇ&quot;king[emph.] good[abs.].

The final א- &quot;-â&quot; in a number of these suffixes is written with the letter aleph. However, some Jewish Aramaic texts employ the letter he for the feminine absolute singular. Likewise, some Jewish Aramaic texts employ the Hebrew masculine absolute singular suffix ים- &quot;-îm&quot; instead of ין- &quot;-în&quot;. The masculine determined plural suffix, יא- &quot;-ayyâ&quot;, has an alternative version, &quot;-ê&quot;. The alternative is sometimes called the &quot;gentilic plural&quot; for its prominent use in ethnonyms (יהודיא &quot;yəhûḏāyê&quot;, &#x27;the Jews&#x27;, for example). This alternative plural is written with the letter aleph, and came to be the only plural for nouns and adjectives of this type in Syriac and some other varieties of Aramaic. The masculine construct plural, &quot;-ê&quot;, is written with yodh. In Syriac and some other variants this ending is diphthongized to &quot;-ai&quot;.

Possessive phrases in Aramaic can either be made with the construct state or by linking two nouns with the relative particle -[ד[י &quot;d[î]-&quot;. As the use of the construct state almost disappears from the Middle Aramaic period on, the latter method became the main way of making possessive phrases.

For example, the various forms of possessive phrases (for &quot;the handwriting of the queen&quot;) are:
# כתבת מלכתא kṯāḇaṯ malkṯâ – the oldest construction, also known as סמיכות səmîḵûṯ : the possessed object (כתבה kṯābâ, &quot;handwriting&quot;) is in the construct state (כתבת kṯāḇaṯ); the possessor (מלכה malkâ, &quot;queen&quot;) is in the emphatic state (מלכתא malkṯâ)
# כתבתא דמלכתא kṯāḇtâ d(î)-malkṯâ – both words are in the emphatic state and the relative particle -[ד[י &quot;d[î]-&quot; is used to mark the relationship
# כתבתה דמלכתא kṯāḇtāh d(î)-malkṯâ – both words are in the emphatic state, and the relative particle is used, but the possessed is given an anticipatory, pronominal ending (כתבתה kṯāḇtā-h, &quot;handwriting-her&quot;; literally, &quot;her writing, that (of) the queen&quot;).
In Modern Aramaic, the last form is by far the most common. In Biblical Aramaic, the last form is virtually absent.

===Verbs===
The Aramaic verb has gradually evolved in time and place, varying between varieties of the language. Verb forms are marked for person (first, second or third), number (singular or plural), gender (masculine or feminine), tense (perfect or imperfect), mood (indicative, imperative, jussive, or infinitive), and voice (active, reflexive, or passive). Aramaic also employs a system of conjugations, or verbal stems, to mark intensive and extensive developments in the lexical meaning of verbs.

====Aspectual tense====
Aramaic has two proper tenses: perfect and imperfect. These were originally aspectual, but developed into something more like a preterite and future. The perfect is unmarked, while the imperfect uses various preformatives that vary according to person, number and gender. In both tenses the third-person singular masculine is the unmarked form from which others are derived by addition of afformatives (and preformatives in the imperfect). In the chart below (on the root כת״ב K-T-B, meaning &quot;to write&quot;), the first form given is the usual form in Imperial Aramaic, while the second is Classical Syriac.

====Conjugations or verbal stems====
Like other Semitic languages, Aramaic employs a number of derived verb stems, to extend the lexical coverage of verbs. The basic form of the verb is called the &quot;ground stem&quot;, or &quot;G-stem&quot;. Following the tradition of mediaeval Arabic grammarians, it is more often called the Pə‘al פעל (also written Pe‘al), using the form of the Semitic root פע״ל P-‘-L, meaning &quot;to do&quot;. This stem carries the basic lexical meaning of the verb.

By doubling of the second radical, or root letter, the D-stem or פעל Pa‘‘el is formed. This is often an intensive development of the basic lexical meaning. For example, &quot;qəṭal&quot; means &quot;he killed&quot;, whereas &quot;qaṭṭel&quot; means &quot;he slew&quot;. The precise relationship in meaning between the two stems differs for every verb.

A preformative, which can be -ה &quot;ha-&quot;, -א &quot;a-&quot;, or -ש &quot;ša-&quot;, creates the C-stem or variously the Hap̄‘el, Ap̄‘el or Šap̄‘el (also spelt הפעל Haph‘el, אפעל Aph‘el, and שפעל Shaph‘el). This is often an extensive or causative development of the basic lexical meaning. For example, טעה &quot;ṭə‘â&quot; means &quot;he went astray&quot;, whereas אטעי &quot;aṭ‘î&quot; means &quot;he deceived&quot;. The Šap̄‘el שפעל is the least common variant of the C-stem. Because this variant is standard in Akkadian, it is possible that its use in Aramaic represents loanwords from that language. The difference between the variants הפעל Hap̄‘el and אפעל Ap̄‘el appears to be the gradual dropping of the initial ה &quot;h&quot; sound in later Old Aramaic. This is noted by the respelling of the older he preformative with א aleph.

These three conjugations are supplemented with three further derived stems, produced by the preformative -הת &quot;hiṯ-&quot; or -את &quot;eṯ-&quot;. The loss of the initial ה &quot;h&quot; sound occurs similarly to that in the form above. These three derived stems are the Gt-stem, התפעל Hiṯpə‘el or אתפעל Eṯpə‘el (also written Hithpe‘el or Ethpe‘el), the Dt-stem, התפעּל Hiṯpa‘‘al or אתפעּל Eṯpa‘‘al (also written Hithpa‘‘al or Ethpa‘‘al), and the Ct-stem, התהפעל Hiṯhap̄‘al, אתּפעל Ettap̄‘al, השתפעל Hištap̄‘al or אשתפעל Eštap̄‘al (also written Hithhaph‘al, Ettaph‘al, Hishtaph‘al, or Eshtaph‘al). Their meaning is usually reflexive, but later became passive. However, as with other stems, actual meaning differs from verb to verb.

Not all verbs use all of these conjugations, and, in some, the G-stem is not used. In the chart below (on the root כת״ב K-T-B, meaning &quot;to write&quot;), the first form given is the usual form in Imperial Aramaic, while the second is Classical Syriac.

In Imperial Aramaic, the participle began to be used for a historical present. Perhaps under influence from other languages, Middle Aramaic developed a system of composite tenses (combinations of forms of the verb with pronouns or an auxiliary verb), allowing for narrative that is more vivid. Aramaic syntax usually follows the order verb–subject–object (VSO). Imperial (Persian) Aramaic, however, tended to follow a S-O-V pattern (similar to Akkadian), which was the result of Persian syntactic influence.

==See also==

==References==
==Notes==
==Sources==
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .
*
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==


* Ancient Aramaic Audio Files: Contains audio recordings of scripture.
* The Aramaic Language and Its Classification – Efrem Yildiz, Journal of Assyrian Academic Studies 
* Comprehensive Aramaic Lexicon (including editions of Targums) at the Hebrew Union College, Cincinnati
* Dictionary of Judeo-Aramaic
* Jewish Language Research Website: Jewish Aramaic </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="0" end="7" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q162996" start="19" end="45" title="Northwest Semitic languages" label="Northwest Semitic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="77" end="92" title="Syria (region)" label="region of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="115" end="126" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570085" start="132" end="147" title="southern Levant" label="southern Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q155638" start="149" end="170" title="Southeastern Anatolia Region" label="southeastern Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165357" start="172" end="186" title="Eastern Arabia" label="Eastern Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="195" end="210" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329375" start="274" end="283" title="variety (linguistics)" label="varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="429" end="448" title="Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="Neo-Assyrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="450" end="471" title="Neo-Babylonian Empire" label="Neo-Babylonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="476" end="493" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="563" end="570" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="572" end="584" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="589" end="599" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414422" start="609" end="636" title="Neo-Aramaic languages" label="modern varieties of Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410322" start="666" end="680" title="Eastern Aramaic" label="eastern branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="694" end="703" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="705" end="713" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="718" end="730" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q34226" start="732" end="747" title="Western Neo-Aramaic" label="Western Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="792" end="810" title="Terms for Syriac Christians#Aramean identity" label="Arameans (Syriacs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q740804" start="827" end="835" title="Maaloula" label="Maaloula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166073" start="847" end="861" title="Jubb&amp;#x27;adin" label="Jubb&amp;#x27;adin"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="865" end="870" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="984" end="991" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981696" start="993" end="1005" title="Samaritanism" label="Samaritanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="1011" end="1020" title="Mandaeism" label="Mandaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="1069" end="1092" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q747547" start="1140" end="1159" title="Canaanite languages" label="Canaanite languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="1168" end="1174" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363529" start="1176" end="1183" title="Edomite language" label="Edomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q36385" start="1185" end="1192" title="Moabite language" label="Moabite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974858" start="1194" end="1202" title="Ekronite language" label="Ekronite"/>
<link wikidata="Q650947" start="1204" end="1210" title="Suteans" label="Sutean"/>
<link wikidata="Q36734" start="1216" end="1226" title="Phoenician language" label="Phoenician"/>
<link wikidata="Q35941" start="1239" end="1246" title="Amorite language" label="Amorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q36928" start="1251" end="1259" title="Ugaritic" label="Ugaritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26978" start="1298" end="1314" title="Aramaic alphabet" label="Aramaic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="1336" end="1355" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Phoenician alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26567" start="1404" end="1419" title="Syriac alphabet" label="Syriac alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="1431" end="1438" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="1575" end="1584" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="1598" end="1613" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebrew alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8196" start="1622" end="1637" title="Arabic alphabet" label="Arabic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="1681" end="1691" title="endangered language" label="endangered"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1949" end="1967" title="Terms for Syriac Christians#Aramean identity" label="Arameans (Syriacs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265930" start="1975" end="1993" title="Qalamoun Mountains" label="Qalamoun mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="1995" end="2004" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="2041" end="2050" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="2068" end="2080" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q98078904" start="2089" end="2109" title="Canaanite and Aramaic inscriptions" label="Aramaic inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624925" start="2158" end="2195" title="List of languages by first written account" label="earliest languages to be written down"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332483" start="2437" end="2445" title="language of Jesus" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="2456" end="2473" title="Jesus of Nazareth" label="Jesus of Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q28151255" start="2592" end="2600" title="Arameans" label="Arameans"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="2663" end="2669" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="2687" end="2693" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="2782" end="2787" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="2789" end="2796" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="2798" end="2804" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="2806" end="2812" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="2842" end="2853" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="2855" end="2859" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="2899" end="2918" title="Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="Neo-Assyrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="3015" end="3028" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="3046" end="3053" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="3096" end="3107" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="3113" end="3119" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="3133" end="3143" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="3145" end="3162" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q28926" start="3168" end="3180" title="Ancient Iran" label="Ancient Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="3251" end="3255" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="3257" end="3262" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="3264" end="3271" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="3273" end="3279" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="3281" end="3290" title="Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="3292" end="3298" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="3300" end="3306" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="3345" end="3351" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="3375" end="3392" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="3416" end="3420" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="3446" end="3454" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="3541" end="3558" title="Babylonian Talmud" label="Babylonian Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358436" start="3560" end="3569" title="Sanhedrin (tractate)" label="Sanhedrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332483" start="3661" end="3678" title="language of Jesus" label="language of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518598" start="3694" end="3710" title="Galilean dialect" label="Galilean dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="3790" end="3802" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q80115" start="3836" end="3842" title="Book of Daniel" label="Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131635" start="3847" end="3851" title="Book of Ezra" label="Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q623703" start="3882" end="3888" title="Targum" label="Targum"/>
<link wikidata="Q387422" start="3966" end="3982" title="Jerusalem Talmud" label="Jerusalem Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="3984" end="4001" title="Babylonian Talmud" label="Babylonian Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q205388" start="4007" end="4012" title="Zohar" label="Zohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="4034" end="4046" title="Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="Neo-Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="4141" end="4162" title="Neo-Babylonian Empire" label="Neo-Babylonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="4193" end="4210" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079491" start="4339" end="4355" title="Imperial Aramaic" label="Imperial Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="4387" end="4400" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q138659" start="4564" end="4572" title="logogram" label="logogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771716" start="4606" end="4621" title="Pahlavi scripts" label="Pahlavi scripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="4650" end="4674" title="Middle Iranian languages" label="Middle Iranian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q25953" start="4686" end="4694" title="Parthian language" label="Parthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q32063" start="4696" end="4710" title="Middle Persian" label="Middle Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q205979" start="4712" end="4719" title="Sogdian language" label="Sogdian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33138" start="4725" end="4736" title="Khwarezmian language" label="Khwarezmian"/>
<link wikidata="Q839470" start="4785" end="4801" title="sacred languages" label="sacred languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="4863" end="4879" title="Syriac language" label="Classical Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q80292" start="4908" end="4927" title="Syriac Christianity" label="Syriac Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q203179" start="4978" end="5005" title="Assyrian Church of the East" label="Assyrian Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q435787" start="5011" end="5037" title="Ancient Church of the East" label="Ancient Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q64868" start="5043" end="5067" title="Chaldean Catholic Church" label="Chaldean Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q210540" start="5073" end="5095" title="Syriac Orthodox Church" label="Syriac Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q755970" start="5101" end="5123" title="Syriac Catholic Church" label="Syriac Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q64900" start="5129" end="5144" title="Maronite Church" label="Maronite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q648601" start="5159" end="5182" title="Saint Thomas Christians" label="Saint Thomas Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q80292" start="5184" end="5201" title="Syriac Christianity" label="Syriac Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="5205" end="5211" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="5213" end="5218" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q33500" start="5255" end="5262" title="Mandaic language" label="Mandaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991742" start="5301" end="5312" title="Neo-Mandaic" label="Neo-Mandaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="5355" end="5364" title="Mandaeism" label="Mandaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="5429" end="5436" title="gnosticism" label="gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="5453" end="5464" title="Manichaeism" label="Manichaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414422" start="5467" end="5488" title="Neo-Aramaic languages" label="Neo-Aramaic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="5531" end="5545" title="first language" label="first language"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="5569" end="5578" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="5580" end="5592" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750102" start="5613" end="5630" title="Jews of Kurdistan" label="Jews of Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517398" start="5631" end="5641" title="Iraqi Jews" label="Iraqi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="5648" end="5657" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="5665" end="5674" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q29440" start="5718" end="5723" title="Suret language" label="Suret"/>
<link wikidata="Q34040" start="5748" end="5754" title="Turoyo language" label="Turoyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34226" start="5776" end="5795" title="Western Neo-Aramaic" label="Western Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q243276" start="5842" end="5864" title="Anti-Lebanon Mountains" label="Anti-Lebanon Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="5876" end="5881" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q266961" start="5960" end="5974" title="language shift" label="language shift"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6154" end="6177" title=":de:Johann Wilhelm Hilliger" label="Johann Wilhelm Hilliger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475821" start="6190" end="6211" title="Ulrich Friedrich Kopp" label="Ulrich Friedrich Kopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q179957" start="6363" end="6377" title="Palaeography" label="paleographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418816" start="6440" end="6463" title="Jean-Jacques Barthélemy" label="Jean-Jacques Barthélemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q98078904" start="6513" end="6546" title="Canaanite and Aramaic inscriptions" label="then-known inscriptions and coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q101247250" start="6726" end="6742" title="Carpentras Stele" label="Carpentras Stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q80115" start="6778" end="6792" title="Book of Daniel" label="Book of Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q80038" start="6805" end="6817" title="Book of Ruth" label="Book of Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="6820" end="6828" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="6833" end="6839" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q185770" start="6859" end="6869" title="Posidonius" label="Posidonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="6956" end="6966" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q380669" start="7106" end="7120" title="Masoretic Text" label="Masoretic Text"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="7302" end="7320" title="King James Version" label="King James Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q289886" start="7400" end="7423" title="Étienne Marc Quatremère" label="Étienne Marc Quatremère"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="7545" end="7554" title="endonymic" label="endonymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="7612" end="7620" title="exonymic" label="exonymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029" start="7721" end="7730" title="word root" label="word root"/>
<link wikidata="Q28151255" start="7781" end="7789" title="Arameans" label="Arameans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="7863" end="7869" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="7878" end="7883" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157079" start="8017" end="8021" title="Aram (region)" label="Aram"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="8188" end="8198" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q200969" start="8434" end="8442" title="Ancient Chaldeans" label="Chaldean"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="8616" end="8629" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q13415123" start="8776" end="8791" title="Syria (region)" label="region of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961540" start="8803" end="8816" title="name of Syria" label="name of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q200200" start="8870" end="8875" title="Assur" label="Ashur"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="8915" end="8923" title="semantic" label="semantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="9031" end="9042" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="9149" end="9162" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="9228" end="9232" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="9532" end="9538" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q28151255" start="9622" end="9630" title="Arameans" label="Arameans"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="9702" end="9711" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="9743" end="9750" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q200200" start="9799" end="9804" title="Assur" label="Assur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680" start="9806" end="9813" title="Nineveh" label="Nineveh"/>
<link wikidata="Q132754" start="9819" end="9825" title="Erbil" label="Arbela"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="9911" end="9919" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8735" start="10059" end="10064" title="Medes" label="Medes"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="10360" end="10368" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="10374" end="10382" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="10388" end="10393" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12490507" start="10427" end="10445" title="Rashidun Caliphate" label="Rashidun Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="10454" end="10476" title="early Muslim conquests" label="early Muslim conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="10568" end="10577" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="10850" end="10857" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="10859" end="10866" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="10868" end="10878" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="10893" end="10899" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q852236" start="11407" end="11424" title="Assyrian genocide" label="Assyrian genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150394" start="11652" end="11658" title="Alqosh" label="Alqosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995584" start="11660" end="11668" title="Bakhdida" label="Bakhdida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619715" start="11670" end="11678" title="Bartella" label="Bartella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115673" start="11680" end="11687" title="Tesqopa" label="Tesqopa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418956" start="11693" end="11702" title="Tel Keppe" label="Tel Keppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q83317" start="11870" end="11875" title="Mosul" label="Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q132754" start="11877" end="11882" title="Erbil" label="Erbil"/>
<link wikidata="Q173310" start="11884" end="11890" title="Kirkuk" label="Kirkuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q152831" start="11892" end="11897" title="Dohuk" label="Dohuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q311321" start="11903" end="11913" title="al-Hasakah" label="al-Hasakah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750102" start="11985" end="12002" title="Jews of Kurdistan" label="Jews of Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772330" start="12094" end="12113" title="Maronites in Israel" label="Maronites in Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527236" start="12117" end="12121" title="Jish" label="Jish"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="12307" end="12324" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422423" start="12595" end="12614" title="varieties of Arabic" label="varieties of Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80292" start="12764" end="12792" title="Syriac Christianity" label="Syriac Christian communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="12910" end="12916" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="13046" end="13055" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="13610" end="13629" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Phoenician alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="13744" end="13750" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="13838" end="13853" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebrew alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q843235" start="13890" end="13906" title="Biblical Aramaic" label="Biblical Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26567" start="14059" end="14074" title="Syriac alphabet" label="Syriac alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812130" start="14128" end="14144" title="Mandaic alphabet" label="Mandaic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="14161" end="14170" title="Mandaeism" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q855624" start="14308" end="14326" title="Nabataean alphabet" label="Nabataean alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788" start="14330" end="14335" title="Petra" label="Petra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17538100" start="14344" end="14362" title="Palmyrene alphabet" label="Palmyrene alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747" start="14366" end="14373" title="Palmyra" label="Palmyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q34040" start="14392" end="14398" title="Turoyo language" label="Turoyo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14404" end="14409" title="#Modern Eastern Aramaic" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="14443" end="14455" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q816829" start="14476" end="14489" title="Periodization" label="Periodization"/>
<link wikidata="Q191928" start="14790" end="14799" title="polysemic" label="polysemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398392" start="15245" end="15256" title="Old Aramaic" label="Old Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="15297" end="15311" title="Middle Aramaic" label="Middle Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414422" start="15339" end="15353" title="Modern Aramaic" label="Modern Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485142" start="15410" end="15425" title="Joseph Fitzmyer" label="Joseph Fitzmyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398392" start="15441" end="15452" title="Old Aramaic" label="Old Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079491" start="15513" end="15529" title="Official Aramaic" label="Official Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="15556" end="15570" title="Middle Aramaic" label="Middle Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="15597" end="15609" title="Late Aramaic" label="Late Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414422" start="15636" end="15650" title="Modern Aramaic" label="Modern Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398392" start="15728" end="15739" title="Old Aramaic" label="Old Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079491" start="15780" end="15798" title="Achaemenid Aramaic" label="Achaemenid Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="15825" end="15839" title="Middle Aramaic" label="Middle Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="15866" end="15878" title="Late Aramaic" label="Late Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414422" start="15906" end="15917" title="Neo-Aramaic" label="Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="16120" end="16127" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="16228" end="16236" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410322" start="16379" end="16404" title="Eastern Aramaic languages" label="Eastern Aramaic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="16431" end="16439" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="16441" end="16448" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandean"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="16453" end="16467" title="Mizrahi Jewish" label="Mizrahi Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="16483" end="16487" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="16502" end="16507" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="16522" end="16526" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="16545" end="16551" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q34226" start="16584" end="16603" title="Western Neo-Aramaic" label="Western Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q243276" start="16672" end="16694" title="Anti-Lebanon mountains" label="Anti-Lebanon mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q333711" start="16758" end="16771" title="Mount Lebanon" label="Mount Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="16966" end="16981" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="17606" end="17625" title="Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="Neo-Assyrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="17640" end="17661" title="Neo-Babylonian Empire" label="Neo-Babylonian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="17680" end="17697" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="17925" end="17936" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="17942" end="17948" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="17954" end="17959" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="18088" end="18105" title="dialect continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170526" start="18321" end="18337" title="Fertile Crescent" label="Fertile Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="18389" end="18397" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173545" start="18399" end="18403" title="Hama" label="Hama"/>
<link wikidata="Q698634" start="18411" end="18416" title="Arpad, Syria" label="Arpad"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="18674" end="18693" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Phoenician alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="19058" end="19077" title="Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="Neo-Assyrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="19114" end="19123" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q210074" start="19125" end="19144" title="Tiglath-Pileser III" label="Tiglath-Pileser III"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="19396" end="19402" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="19407" end="19412" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="19437" end="19443" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37110" start="19490" end="19497" title="Pharaoh" label="Pharaoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="19552" end="19562" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="19603" end="19611" title="Darius I" label="Darius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079491" start="19918" end="19934" title="Imperial Aramaic" label="Imperial Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="20652" end="20659" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="20911" end="20928" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771716" start="21039" end="21054" title="Pahlavi scripts" label="Pahlavi scripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752162" start="21129" end="21163" title="Persepolis Administrative Archives" label="Persepolis Administrative Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q129072" start="21174" end="21184" title="Persepolis" label="Persepolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="21293" end="21298" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q284009" start="21304" end="21315" title="Elephantine" label="Elephantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q520170" start="21335" end="21353" title="Elephantine papyri" label="Elephantine papyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q340528" start="21393" end="21408" title="Story of Ahikar" label="Story of Ahikar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579" start="21487" end="21503" title="Book of Proverbs" label="Book of Proverbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q132646" start="21898" end="21905" title="Bactria" label="Bactria"/>
<link wikidata="Q486244" start="22109" end="22115" title="Sogdia" label="Sogdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843235" start="22143" end="22159" title="Biblical Aramaic" label="Biblical Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="22214" end="22227" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q131635" start="22232" end="22236" title="Book of Ezra" label="Ezra"/>
<link wikidata="Q80115" start="22350" end="22356" title="Book of Daniel" label="Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22399" end="22413" title="Jeremiah 10:11" label="Jeremiah 10:11"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="22488" end="22495" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q794605" start="22802" end="22818" title="Biblical studies" label="Biblical studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="22838" end="22855" title="Jerome of Stridon" label="Jerome of Stridon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="22881" end="22886" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q625699" start="22978" end="22993" title="Aramaic studies" label="Aramaic studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q843235" start="23051" end="23068" title="Chaldean language (misnomer)" label="Chaldean misnomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q200969" start="23204" end="23221" title="ancient Chaldeans" label="ancient Chaldeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="23289" end="23306" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="23393" end="23412" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="23433" end="23444" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="23662" end="23676" title="Greek language" label="Greek language"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="23786" end="23801" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="23816" end="23835" title="Hellenistic culture" label="Hellenistic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="23849" end="23863" title="Greek language" label="Greek language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602782" start="24035" end="24045" title="Hellenized" label="Hellenized"/>
<link wikidata="Q496922" start="24645" end="24655" title="Hasmonean" label="Hasmonaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="24686" end="24692" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q223399" start="24820" end="24826" title="Qumran" label="Qumran"/>
<link wikidata="Q623703" start="24923" end="24929" title="Targum" label="Targum"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="25064" end="25071" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341410" start="25076" end="25083" title="Tosefta" label="Tosefta"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="25430" end="25444" title="Middle Iranian" label="Middle Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q138659" start="25804" end="25813" title="logograms" label="logograms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="25988" end="26005" title="Arsacid Empire" label="Parthian Arsacids"/>
<link wikidata="Q25953" start="26065" end="26073" title="Parthian language" label="Parthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771716" start="26214" end="26221" title="Pahlavi scripts" label="pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="26315" end="26332" title="Sassanid Empire" label="Persian Sassanids"/>
<link wikidata="Q32063" start="26569" end="26583" title="Middle Persian" label="Middle Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115549" start="26822" end="26839" title="Middle Persian literature" label="Zoroastrian usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="27151" end="27161" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079491" start="27422" end="27440" title="Achaemenid Aramaic" label="Achaemenid Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q623703" start="27554" end="27560" title="Targum" label="Targum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508627" start="27613" end="27627" title="Targum Onkelos" label="Targum Onqelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065923" start="27632" end="27647" title="Targum Jonathan" label="Targum Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="28101" end="28108" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q36178" start="29022" end="29039" title="Nabataean Aramaic" label="Nabataean Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788" start="29116" end="29121" title="Petra" label="Petra"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="29209" end="29221" title="Jordan River" label="Jordan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q162843" start="29227" end="29232" title="Negev" label="Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="29238" end="29253" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="29272" end="29277" title="Hijaz" label="Hijaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079491" start="29454" end="29470" title="Imperial Aramaic" label="Imperial Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079418" start="29825" end="29832" title="cursive" label="cursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q8196" start="29870" end="29885" title="Arabic alphabet" label="Arabic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510113" start="30105" end="30122" title="Palmyrene Aramaic" label="Palmyrene Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747" start="30189" end="30196" title="Palmyra" label="Palmyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q26567" start="30308" end="30318" title="Syriac alphabet" label="Estrangela"/>
<link wikidata="Q237234" start="30676" end="30694" title="Kingdom of Osroene" label="Kingdom of Osroene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190403" start="30730" end="30736" title="Edessa, Mesopotamia" label="Edessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="30854" end="30870" title="Syriac language" label="Classical Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="30900" end="30906" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q466614" start="30980" end="30985" title="Hatra" label="Hatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q200200" start="30990" end="30995" title="Assur" label="Assur"/>
<link wikidata="Q272087" start="30998" end="31017" title="Tatian" label="Tatian the Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q932676" start="31068" end="31079" title="Diatessaron" label="Diatessaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q149747" start="31090" end="31098" title="Adiabene" label="Adiabene"/>
<link wikidata="Q33500" start="31454" end="31461" title="Mandaic language" label="Mandaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="31479" end="31488" title="Mandaeism" label="Mandaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q36734" start="31805" end="31815" title="Phoenician language" label="Phoenician"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31844" end="31850" title="Hebrew language#Displacement by Aramaic" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q606295" start="32111" end="32128" title="Caesarea Philippi" label="Caesarea Philippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q220890" start="32182" end="32195" title="Book of Enoch" label="Book of Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="32428" end="32434" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q223399" start="32453" end="32459" title="Qumran" label="Qumran"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="32461" end="32469" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44276" start="32515" end="32529" title="The Jewish War" label="The Jewish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q795334" start="33037" end="33045" title="Peshitta" label="Peshitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="33175" end="33180" title="Judea (Roman province)" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="33236" end="33242" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="33335" end="33346" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="33526" end="33531" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q496922" start="33717" end="33726" title="Hasmonean dynasty" label="Hasmonean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394214" start="33831" end="33856" title="Western Aramaic languages" label="Western Aramaic varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="33897" end="33902" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="34013" end="34022" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011544" start="34049" end="34057" title="Ein Gedi" label="Ein Gedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56612" start="34095" end="34112" title="Samaritan Aramaic" label="Samaritan Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178034" start="34176" end="34188" title="glottal stop" label="glottal stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="34553" end="34562" title="diphthong" label="diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834492" start="34572" end="34583" title="Transjordan (region)" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="34662" end="34670" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q243276" start="34679" end="34701" title="Anti-Lebanon Mountains" label="Anti-Lebanon Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="34803" end="34809" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="34946" end="34954" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758487" start="34960" end="34974" title="semantic loans" label="semantic loans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486772" start="35382" end="35401" title="Language of the New Testament" label="New Testament Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="35460" end="35467" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51668" start="35892" end="35917" title="The Passion of the Christ" label="The Passion of the Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020014" start="36001" end="36014" title="William Fulco" label="William Fulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="36770" end="36777" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q733897" start="36779" end="36786" title="Old Babylonian Empire" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="36796" end="36813" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Achaemenid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26978" start="36849" end="36864" title="Aramaic alphabet" label="Aramaic scripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q33500" start="36899" end="36916" title="Mandaic language" label="Classical Mandaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832926" start="36918" end="36924" title="Hatran Aramaic" label="Hatran"/>
<link wikidata="Q33407" start="36926" end="36951" title="Jewish Babylonian Aramaic" label="Jewish Babylonian Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="36966" end="36982" title="Classical Syriac" label="Classical Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q80292" start="37117" end="37136" title="Syriac Christianity" label="Syriac Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8106" start="37159" end="37172" title="first century" label="first century"/>
<link wikidata="Q237234" start="37190" end="37197" title="Osroene" label="Osroene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190403" start="37211" end="37217" title="Edessa" label="Edessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q795334" start="37349" end="37357" title="Peshitta" label="Peshitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q200608" start="37397" end="37414" title="Ephrem the Syrian" label="Ephrem the Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="37456" end="37476" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="37550" end="37556" title="Iran" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="37563" end="37575" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="37577" end="37582" title="Indian subcontinent" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="37588" end="37593" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="37823" end="37829" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062089" start="37896" end="37902" title="Geonim" label="Geonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q392743" start="38059" end="38075" title="incantation bowl" label="incantation bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q33500" start="38141" end="38158" title="Mandaic language" label="Classical Mandaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="38197" end="38206" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="38210" end="38214" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="38219" end="38223" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="38381" end="38388" title="gnosticism" label="gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861106" start="38389" end="38409" title="list of Mandaean texts" label="religious literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q36178" start="38601" end="38610" title="Nabataean Aramaic" label="Nabataean"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="38635" end="38667" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebrew &amp;quot;square script&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="38696" end="38713" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Old Hebrew script"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38746" end="38770" title="Syriac alphabet#Classical ʾEsṭrangēlā" label="Syriac Estrangela script"/>
<link wikidata="Q56612" start="38877" end="38894" title="Samaritan Aramaic language" label="Samaritan Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="38952" end="38962" title="Samaritans" label="Samaritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q334502" start="39137" end="39154" title="Bar Kokhba revolt" label="Bar Kokhba revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="39161" end="39164" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="39191" end="39200" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="39211" end="39218" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q387422" start="39430" end="39446" title="Jerusalem Talmud" label="Jerusalem Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q623703" start="39491" end="39497" title="targum" label="targum"/>
<link wikidata="Q202344" start="39544" end="39551" title="midrash" label="midrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777790" start="39605" end="39619" title="niqqud" label="vowel pointing"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="39628" end="39640" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q464266" start="40255" end="40267" title="Dura-Europos" label="Dura-Europos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778933" start="40402" end="40409" title="Melkite" label="Melkite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="40453" end="40459" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="40472" end="40481" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834492" start="40483" end="40494" title="Transjordan (region)" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="40499" end="40504" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="40815" end="40822" title="Syriac language" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190403" start="40834" end="40840" title="Edessa" label="Edessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="40875" end="40880" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394214" start="41056" end="41080" title="Western Aramaic languages" label="Western Aramaic dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="41088" end="41094" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410322" start="41223" end="41238" title="Eastern Aramaic languages" label="Eastern Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347063" start="41277" end="41296" title="Central Neo-Aramaic" label="Central Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560578" start="41301" end="41325" title="Northeastern Neo-Aramaic" label="Northeastern Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="41345" end="41356" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29440" start="41461" end="41466" title="Suret language" label="Suret"/>
<link wikidata="Q34040" start="41472" end="41478" title="Turoyo language" label="Turoyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265930" start="41674" end="41692" title="Qalamoun Mountains" label="Qalamoun Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="41694" end="41703" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="41705" end="41714" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="41719" end="41731" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q266961" start="41811" end="41825" title="language shift" label="language shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369900" start="41936" end="41947" title="Arabization" label="Arabization"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="41987" end="41992" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="42012" end="42034" title="early Muslim conquests" label="early Muslim conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="42228" end="42237" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q501837" start="42239" end="42251" title="Mizrahi Jews" label="Mizrahi Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="42510" end="42519" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q935440" start="42600" end="42608" title="Assyrian–Chaldean–Syriac diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q35518" start="42730" end="42738" title="Akkadian language" label="Akkadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q200608" start="42824" end="42841" title="Ephrem the Syrian" label="Ephrem the Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="42853" end="42869" title="Syriac language" label="Classical Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633045" start="42876" end="42899" title="Judeo-Aramaic languages" label="Judeo-Aramaic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="42925" end="42931" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q199551" start="43042" end="43052" title="Lake Urmia" label="Lake Urmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83317" start="43057" end="43062" title="Mosul" label="Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q179665" start="43126" end="43131" title="Urmia" label="Urmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993049" start="43272" end="43286" title="Nineveh Plains" label="Nineveh Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347063" start="43402" end="43421" title="Central Neo-Aramaic" label="Central Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q506470" start="43567" end="43576" title="Tur Abdin" label="Tur Abdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393063" start="43610" end="43616" title="Mlaḥsô language" label="Mlaḥsô"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="43648" end="43657" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q241119" start="43672" end="43690" title="Khuzestan province" label="Khuzestan province"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991742" start="43736" end="43747" title="Neo-Mandaic" label="Neo-Mandaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34226" start="44093" end="44112" title="Western Neo-Aramaic" label="Western Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q740804" start="44163" end="44171" title="Maaloula" label="Maaloula"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166073" start="44176" end="44190" title="Jubb&amp;#x27;adin" label="Jubb&amp;#x27;adin"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="44194" end="44199" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q243276" start="44219" end="44241" title="Anti-Lebanon Mountains" label="Anti-Lebanon Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="44306" end="44314" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12197622" start="44348" end="44359" title="Al-Sarkha (Bakhah)" label="Bakh&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q178810" start="44396" end="44412" title="Syrian civil war" label="Syrian civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q948909" start="44592" end="44618" title="Jewish Palestinian Aramaic" label="Jewish Palestinian Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56612" start="44623" end="44640" title="Samaritan Aramaic" label="Samaritan Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789860" start="44713" end="44722" title="Matthew 2" label="Matthew 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789882" start="44826" end="44836" title="Matthew 28" label="Matthew 28"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="45317" end="45323" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="45325" end="45336" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="45338" end="45345" title="Kurdish languages" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="45347" end="45354" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="45360" end="45367" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q178034" start="46568" end="46580" title="glottal stop" label="glottal stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q761278" start="47113" end="47128" title="mater lectionis" label="mater lectionis"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="47602" end="47611" title="diphthong" label="diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q51597" start="48200" end="48204" title="stop consonant" label="stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q31427" start="48211" end="48220" title="fricative consonant" label="fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="48784" end="48793" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500482" start="49042" end="49059" title="pharyngealization" label="pharyngealization"/>
<link wikidata="Q19408" start="49064" end="49076" title="Velar consonant" label="velarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q920026" start="49140" end="49170" title="voiceless pharyngeal fricative" label="voiceless pharyngeal fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q178034" start="49270" end="49282" title="glottal stop" label="glottal stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q49751" start="49313" end="49342" title="Voiced pharyngeal fricative" label="voiced pharyngeal approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q849422" start="49405" end="49426" title="voiceless uvular stop" label="voiceless uvular stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q178034" start="49761" end="49773" title="glottal stop" label="glottal stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q51600" start="49855" end="49863" title="sibilant" label="sibilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51593" start="50101" end="50116" title="nasal consonant" label="nasal consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51606" start="50163" end="50175" title="approximant consonant" label="approximants"/>
<link wikidata="Q113159186" start="50204" end="50218" title="Dental, alveolar and postalveolar trills" label="alveolar trill"/>
<link wikidata="Q21283070" start="50563" end="50578" title="Tiberian vocalization" label="Tiberian Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="50610" end="50619" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34040" start="50778" end="50784" title="Turoyo language" label="Turoyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29440" start="50870" end="50890" title="Assyrian Neo-Aramaic" label="Assyrian Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="51155" end="51163" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q827454" start="51175" end="51186" title="Ejective consonant" label="glottalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500482" start="51199" end="51213" title="pharyngealization" label="pharyngealized"/>
<link wikidata="Q56502" start="51323" end="51339" title="Samaritan Hebrew" label="Samaritan Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q26567" start="52119" end="52134" title="Syriac alphabet" label="Syriac alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="52234" end="52244" title="morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q266273" start="52300" end="52304" title="Semitic root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="53503" end="53526" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641446" start="53957" end="53966" title="Status constructus" label="construct"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="54361" end="54374" title="genitive case" label="genitive case"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="54938" end="54954" title="Article (grammar)" label="definite article"/>
<link wikidata="Q162996" start="55399" end="55426" title="Northwest Semitic languages" label="Northwest Semitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="55543" end="55555" title="Inflection" label="Case endings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55563" end="55571" title="Ugaritic grammar#Case" label="Ugaritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q175026" start="55930" end="55943" title="Object (grammar)" label="direct object"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="55991" end="56002" title="preposition and postposition" label="preposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q207509" start="56231" end="56237" title="copula (linguistics)" label="copula"/>
<link wikidata="Q15033" start="56717" end="56722" title="aleph" label="aleph"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525321" start="56777" end="56779" title="he (letter)" label="he"/>
<link wikidata="Q15033" start="57284" end="57289" title="aleph" label="aleph"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525361" start="57471" end="57475" title="yodh" label="yodh"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="57526" end="57535" title="diphthong" label="diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="58931" end="58937" title="grammatical person" label="person"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="58964" end="58970" title="grammatical number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="58993" end="58999" title="grammatical gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="59025" end="59030" title="grammatical tense" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="59055" end="59059" title="grammatical mood" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q211101" start="59114" end="59119" title="voice (grammar)" label="voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="59186" end="59198" title="grammatical conjugation" label="conjugations"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="59343" end="59349" title="grammatical tense" label="tenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424306" start="59351" end="59358" title="perfective aspect" label="perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q371427" start="59363" end="59372" title="imperfective aspect" label="imperfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="59396" end="59405" title="grammatical aspect" label="aspectual"/>
<link wikidata="Q442485" start="59448" end="59457" title="preterite" label="preterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q501405" start="59462" end="59468" title="future tense" label="future"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897166" start="59485" end="59493" title="Markedness" label="unmarked"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="59528" end="59541" title="prefix" label="preformatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="59709" end="59721" title="Suffix" label="afformatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="59915" end="59931" title="Syriac language" label="Classical Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119048" start="60029" end="60047" title="Derived stem" label="derived verb stems"/>
<link wikidata="Q266273" start="60318" end="60330" title="Semitic root" label="Semitic root"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="60783" end="60795" title="preformative" label="preformative"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525321" start="61595" end="61597" title="he (letter)" label="he"/>
<link wikidata="Q15033" start="61618" end="61623" title="aleph" label="aleph"/>
<link wikidata="Q13475484" start="62252" end="62261" title="reflexive verb" label="reflexive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194697" start="62280" end="62287" title="passive voice" label="passive"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="62600" end="62616" title="Syriac language" label="Classical Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q814722" start="62644" end="62654" title="participle" label="participle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621027" start="62678" end="62696" title="historical present" label="historical present"/>
<link wikidata="Q465800" start="62853" end="62867" title="auxiliary verb" label="auxiliary verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="62921" end="62927" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q623703" start="63582" end="63588" title="Targum" label="Targum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2304" wikidata="Q320136" url="?curid=2304" title="Saint Titus">
<text>Titus ( ; , &quot;Títos&quot;) was an early Christian missionary and church leader, a companion and disciple of Paul the Apostle, mentioned in several of the Pauline epistles including the Epistle to Titus. He is believed to be a Gentile converted to Christianity by Paul and, according to tradition, he was consecrated as Bishop of the Island of Crete.

Titus brought a fundraising letter from Paul to Corinth, to collect for the poor in Jerusalem. According to Jerome, Titus was the amanuensis of this epistle (2 Corinthians). Later, on Crete, Titus appointed presbyters (elders) in every city and remained there into his old age, dying in Gortyna.

==Life==
Titus was a Greek, who may have studied Greek philosophy and poetry in his early years. He seems to have been converted by Paul, whereupon he served as Paul&#x27;s secretary and interpreter. In the year 48 or 49 CE, Titus accompanied Paul to the council held at Jerusalem, on the subject of the Mosaic rites.

In the fall of 55 or 56 CE, Paul, as he himself departed from Asia, sent Titus from Ephesus to Corinth, with full commission to remedy the fallout precipitated by Timothy&#x27;s delivery of 1 Corinthians and Paul&#x27;s &quot;Painful Visit&quot;, particularly a significant personal offense and challenge to Paul&#x27;s authority by one unnamed individual. During this journey, Titus served as the courier for what is commonly known as the &quot;Severe Letter&quot;, a Pauline missive that has been lost but is referred to in .

After success on this mission, Titus journeyed north and met Paul in Macedonia. There the apostle, overjoyed by Titus&#x27; success, wrote 2 Corinthians. Titus then returned to Corinth with a larger entourage, carrying 2 Corinthians with him. Paul joined Titus in Corinth later. From Corinth, Paul then sent Titus to organize the collections of alms for the Christians at Jerusalem. Titus was therefore a troubleshooter, peacemaker, ecclesiastical administrator, and missionary.

Early church tradition holds that Paul, after his release from his first imprisonment in Rome, stopped at the island of Crete to preach. Due to the needs of other churches, requiring his presence elsewhere, he ordained his disciple Titus as bishop of that island, and left him to finish the work he had started. John Chrysostom says that this is an indication of the esteem Paul held for Titus.

Paul summoned Titus from Crete to join him at Nicopolis in Epirus. Later, Titus traveled to Dalmatia. The New Testament does not record his death.
==Identification with Timothy==
It has been argued that the name &quot;Titus&quot; in 2 Corinthians and Galatians was an informal name used by Timothy, a view circumstantially supported by the fact that even though both are said to be long-term close companions of Paul, they never appear together in these books. The theory proposes that a number of passages (1 Corinthians 4:17, 16.10; 2 Corinthians 2:13, 7:6, 13–14, 12:18; and Acts 19.22) all refer to the same journey of a single individual, variously called Titus and Timothy. 

This theory is complicated by various details from Pauline episles. In , the author (putatively Paul) tells Timothy that Titus has departed to Dalmatia. Additionally, the fact that, in Acts 16 (), Paul circumcises Timothy, but in claims not to have compelled Titus to be circumsised, would indicate that they are different men, although some scholars interpret (drawing on the fourth-century commentaries of Gaius Marius Victorinus) as indicating that Paul did in fact circumcise Titus.

==Veneration==
He was venerated as a saint earlier than 261 CE. The feast day of Titus was not included in the Tridentine calendar. When added in 1854, it was assigned to 6 February. In 1969, the Catholic Church assigned the feast to 26 January so as to celebrate the two disciples of Paul, Titus and Timothy, the day after the feast of the Conversion of St. Paul. The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America celebrates these two, together with Silas, on the same date while he is honored on the calendars of the Church of England and Episcopal Church (with Timothy) on 26 January.

The Eastern Orthodox Church commemorates Titus on 25 August and on 4 January. His relics, now consisting of only his skull, are venerated in the Church of St. Titus, Heraklion, Crete, to which it was returned in 1966&lt;ref name=&quot;The Orthodox Messenger, v. 8(7/8), July/Aug 1997&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; after being removed to Venice during the period of Ottoman Crete (1667–1898).

Titus is the patron saint of the United States Army Chaplain Corps. The Corps has established the Order of Titus Award, described by the Department of Defense:

== See also ==

*Epistle of Pseudo-Titus
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q320136" start="0" end="5" title="Saint Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="112" end="128" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="158" end="174" title="Pauline epistles" label="Pauline epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q131493" start="189" end="205" title="Epistle to Titus" label="Epistle to Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q252837" start="230" end="237" title="Gentile" label="Gentile"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="347" end="352" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="403" end="410" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="463" end="469" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q499134" start="485" end="495" title="amanuensis" label="amanuensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q123808" start="513" end="526" title="Second Epistle to the Corinthians" label="2 Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q831474" start="562" end="571" title="presbyter" label="presbyter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136193" start="642" end="649" title="Gortyna" label="Gortyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q80687" start="825" end="834" title="secretary" label="secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q210439" start="839" end="850" title="interpreter" label="interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="956" end="962" title="Moses" label="Mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210718" start="1033" end="1037" title="Asia (Roman province)" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="1055" end="1062" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363688" start="1066" end="1073" title="Ancient Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q848466" start="1369" end="1376" title="courier" label="courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585442" start="1470" end="1474" title="Lost literary work" label="lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q207497" start="1569" end="1578" title="Macedonia (Roman province)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q931406" start="1845" end="1849" title="alms" label="alms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078905" start="1905" end="1919" title="Troubleshooting" label="troubleshooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079361" start="1921" end="1931" title="Peace makers" label="peacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q358832" start="1933" end="1961" title="ecclesiastical administrator" label="ecclesiastical administrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="1967" end="1977" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q43706" start="2292" end="2307" title="John Chrysostom" label="John Chrysostom"/>
<link wikidata="Q943637" start="2422" end="2431" title="Nicopolis" label="Nicopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q565751" start="2435" end="2441" title="Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2468" end="2476" title="Early centers of Christianity#Salona" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="2482" end="2495" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q80355" start="2884" end="2899" title="1 Corinthians 4" label="1 Corinthians 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q12470262" start="2911" end="2926" title="2 Corinthians 2" label="2 Corinthians 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q12491755" start="2954" end="2961" title="Acts 19" label="Acts 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q16160377" start="3243" end="3250" title="Acts 16" label="Acts 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q708247" start="3466" end="3489" title="Gaius Marius Victorinus" label="Gaius Marius Victorinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883976" start="3657" end="3676" title="Tridentine calendar" label="Tridentine calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3742" end="3757" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282" start="3780" end="3790" title="January 26" label="26 January"/>
<link wikidata="Q901397" start="3887" end="3909" title="Conversion of St. Paul" label="Conversion of St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="3915" end="3953" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q312376" start="3990" end="3995" title="Silas" label="Silas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282" start="4004" end="4013" title="January 26" label="same date"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019506" start="4058" end="4075" title="Calendar of saints (Church of England)" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019509" start="4080" end="4096" title="Calendar of saints (Episcopal Church)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q212647" start="4103" end="4110" title="Saint Timothy" label="Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282" start="4115" end="4125" title="January 26" label="26 January"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="4132" end="4155" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q40304" start="4195" end="4204" title="Seventy disciples" label="4 January"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="4245" end="4250" title="skull" label="skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q160544" start="4294" end="4303" title="Heraklion" label="Heraklion"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="4457" end="4463" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599571" start="4485" end="4498" title="Ottoman Crete" label="Ottoman Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073197" start="4546" end="4579" title="United States Army Chaplain Corps" label="United States Army Chaplain Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383614" start="4691" end="4714" title="Epistle of Pseudo-Titus" label="Epistle of Pseudo-Titus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2308" wikidata="Q19577" url="?curid=2308" title="Actinide">
<text>The actinide () or actinoid () series encompasses at least the 14 metallic chemical elements in the 5f series, with atomic numbers from 89 to 102, actinium through nobelium. Number 103, lawrencium, is also generally included despite being part of the 6d transition series. The actinide series derives its name from the first element in the series, actinium. The informal chemical symbol An is used in general discussions of actinide chemistry to refer to any actinide.

The 1985 IUPAC &quot;Red Book&quot; recommends that &quot;actinoid&quot; be used rather than &quot;actinide&quot;, since the suffix &quot;-ide&quot; normally indicates a negative ion. However, owing to widespread current use, &quot;actinide&quot; is still allowed. Since &quot;actinoid&quot; literally means &quot;actinium-like&quot; (cf. &quot;humanoid&quot; or &quot;android&quot;), it has been argued for semantic reasons that actinium cannot logically be an actinoid, but IUPAC acknowledges its inclusion based on common usage.

Actinium through nobelium are f-block elements, while lawrencium is a d-block element and a transition metal. The series mostly corresponds to the filling of the 5f electron shell, although as isolated atoms in the ground state many have anomalous configurations involving the filling of the 6d shell due to interelectronic repulsion. In comparison with the lanthanides, also mostly f-block elements, the actinides show much more variable valence. They all have very large atomic and ionic radii and exhibit an unusually large range of physical properties. While actinium and the late actinides (from curium onwards) behave similarly to the lanthanides, the elements thorium, protactinium, and uranium are much more similar to transition metals in their chemistry, with neptunium, plutonium, and americium occupying an intermediate position.

All actinides are radioactive and release energy upon radioactive decay; naturally occurring uranium and thorium, and synthetically produced plutonium are the most abundant actinides on Earth. These have been used in nuclear reactors, and uranium and plutonium are critical elements of nuclear weapons. Uranium and thorium also have diverse current or historical uses, and americium is used in the ionization chambers of most modern smoke detectors.

Of the actinides, primordial thorium and uranium occur naturally in substantial quantities. The radioactive decay of uranium produces transient amounts of actinium and protactinium, and atoms of neptunium and plutonium are occasionally produced from transmutation reactions in uranium ores. The other actinides are purely synthetic elements. Nuclear weapons tests have released at least six actinides heavier than plutonium into the environment; analysis of debris from a 1952 hydrogen bomb explosion showed the presence of americium, curium, berkelium, californium, einsteinium and fermium.

In presentations of the periodic table, the f-block elements are customarily shown as two additional rows below the main body of the table. This convention is entirely a matter of aesthetics and formatting practicality; a rarely used wide-formatted periodic table inserts the 4f and 5f series in their proper places, as parts of the table&#x27;s sixth and seventh rows (periods).
Actinides


== Discovery, isolation and synthesis ==
Like the lanthanides, the actinides form a family of elements with similar properties. Within the actinides, there are two overlapping groups: transuranium elements, which follow uranium in the periodic table; and transplutonium elements, which follow plutonium. Compared to the lanthanides, which (except for promethium) are found in nature in appreciable quantities, most actinides are rare. Most do not occur in nature, and of those that do, only thorium and uranium do so in more than trace quantities. The most abundant or easily synthesized actinides are uranium and thorium, followed by plutonium, americium, actinium, protactinium, neptunium, and curium.

The existence of transuranium elements was suggested in 1934 by Enrico Fermi, based on his experiments. However, even though four actinides were known by that time, it was not yet understood that they formed a family similar to lanthanides. The prevailing view that dominated early research into transuranics was that they were regular elements in the 7th period, with thorium, protactinium and uranium corresponding to 6th-period hafnium, tantalum and tungsten, respectively. Synthesis of transuranics gradually undermined this point of view. By 1944, an observation that curium failed to exhibit oxidation states above 4 (whereas its supposed 6th period homolog, platinum, can reach oxidation state of 6) prompted Glenn Seaborg to formulate an &quot;actinide hypothesis&quot;. Studies of known actinides and discoveries of further transuranic elements provided more data in support of this position, but the phrase &quot;actinide hypothesis&quot; (the implication being that a &quot;hypothesis&quot; is something that has not been decisively proven) remained in active use by scientists through the late 1950s.

At present, there are two major methods of producing isotopes of transplutonium elements: (1) irradiation of the lighter elements with neutrons; (2) irradiation with accelerated charged particles. The first method is more important for applications, as only neutron irradiation using nuclear reactors allows the production of sizeable amounts of synthetic actinides; however, it is limited to relatively light elements. The advantage of the second method is that elements heavier than plutonium, as well as neutron-deficient isotopes, can be obtained, which are not formed during neutron irradiation.

In 1962–1966, there were attempts in the United States to produce transplutonium isotopes using a series of six underground nuclear explosions. Small samples of rock were extracted from the blast area immediately after the test to study the explosion products, but no isotopes with mass number greater than 257 could be detected, despite predictions that such isotopes would have relatively long half-lives of α-decay. This non-observation was attributed to spontaneous fission owing to the large speed of the products and to other decay channels, such as neutron emission and nuclear fission.

=== From actinium to uranium ===
Uranium and thorium were the first actinides discovered. Uranium was identified in 1789 by the German chemist Martin Heinrich Klaproth in pitchblende ore. He named it after the planet Uranus, which had been discovered eight years earlier. Klaproth was able to precipitate a yellow compound (likely sodium diuranate) by dissolving pitchblende in nitric acid and neutralizing the solution with sodium hydroxide. He then reduced the obtained yellow powder with charcoal, and extracted a black substance that he mistook for metal. Sixty years later, the French scientist Eugène-Melchior Péligot identified it as uranium oxide. He also isolated the first sample of uranium metal by heating uranium tetrachloride with metallic potassium. The atomic mass of uranium was then calculated as 120, but Dmitri Mendeleev in 1872 corrected it to 240 using his periodicity laws. This value was confirmed experimentally in 1882 by K. Zimmerman.

Thorium oxide was discovered by Friedrich Wöhler in the mineral thorianite, which was found in Norway (1827). Jöns Jacob Berzelius characterized this material in more detail in 1828. By reduction of thorium tetrachloride with potassium, he isolated the metal and named it thorium after the Norse god of thunder and lightning Thor. The same isolation method was later used by Péligot for uranium.

Actinium was discovered in 1899 by André-Louis Debierne, an assistant of Marie Curie, in the pitchblende waste left after removal of radium and polonium. He described the substance (in 1899) as similar to titanium and (in 1900) as similar to thorium. The discovery of actinium by Debierne was however questioned in 1971 and 2000, arguing that Debierne&#x27;s publications in 1904 contradicted his earlier work of 1899–1900. This view instead credits the 1902 work of Friedrich Oskar Giesel, who discovered a radioactive element named &quot;emanium&quot; that behaved similarly to lanthanum. The name actinium comes from the , meaning beam or ray. This metal was discovered not by its own radiation but by the radiation of the daughter products. Owing to the close similarity of actinium and lanthanum and low abundance, pure actinium could only be produced in 1950. The term actinide was probably introduced by Victor Goldschmidt in 1937.

Protactinium was possibly isolated in 1900 by William Crookes. It was first identified in 1913, when Kasimir Fajans and Oswald Helmuth Göhring encountered the short-lived isotope 234mPa (half-life 1.17 minutes) during their studies of the 238U decay chain. They named the new element &quot;brevium&quot; (from Latin &quot;brevis&quot; meaning brief); the name was changed to &quot;protoactinium&quot; (from Greek πρῶτος + ἀκτίς meaning &quot;first beam element&quot;) in 1918 when two groups of scientists, led by the Austrian Lise Meitner and Otto Hahn of Germany and Frederick Soddy and John Arnold Cranston of Great Britain, independently discovered the much longer-lived 231Pa. The name was shortened to &quot;protactinium&quot; in 1949. This element was little characterized until 1960, when Alfred Maddock and his co-workers in the U.K. isolated 130 grams of protactinium from 60 tonnes of waste left after extraction of uranium from its ore.

=== Neptunium and above ===
Neptunium (named for the planet Neptune, the next planet out from Uranus, after which uranium was named) was discovered by Edwin McMillan and Philip H. Abelson in 1940 in Berkeley, California. They produced the 239Np isotope (half-life 2.4 days) by bombarding uranium with slow neutrons. It was the first transuranium element produced synthetically.

Transuranium elements do not occur in sizeable quantities in nature and are commonly synthesized via nuclear reactions conducted with nuclear reactors. For example, under irradiation with reactor neutrons, uranium-238 partially converts to plutonium-239:
: formula_1

This synthesis reaction was used by Fermi and his collaborators in their design of the reactors located at the Hanford Site, which produced significant amounts of plutonium-239 for the nuclear weapons of the Manhattan Project and the United States&#x27; post-war nuclear arsenal.

Actinides with the highest mass numbers are synthesized by bombarding uranium, plutonium, curium and californium with ions of nitrogen, oxygen, carbon, neon or boron in a particle accelerator. Thus nobelium was produced by bombarding uranium-238 with neon-22 as
: &lt;chem&gt;_{92}^{238}U + _{10}^{22}Ne -&gt; _{102}^{256}No + 4_0^1n&lt;/chem&gt;.

The first isotopes of transplutonium elements, americium-241 and curium-242, were synthesized in 1944 by Glenn T. Seaborg, Ralph A. James and Albert Ghiorso. Curium-242 was obtained by bombarding plutonium-239 with 32-MeV α-particles:
: &lt;chem&gt;_{94}^{239}Pu + _2^4He -&gt; _{96}^{242}Cm + _0^1n&lt;/chem&gt;.

The americium-241 and curium-242 isotopes also were produced by irradiating plutonium in a nuclear reactor. The latter element was named after Marie Curie and her husband Pierre who are noted for discovering radium and for their work in radioactivity.

Bombarding curium-242 with α-particles resulted in an isotope of californium 245Cf in 1950, and a similar procedure yielded berkelium-243 from americium-241 in 1949. The new elements were named after Berkeley, California, by analogy with its lanthanide homologue terbium, which was named after the village of Ytterby in Sweden.

In 1945, B. B. Cunningham obtained the first bulk chemical compound of a transplutonium element, namely americium hydroxide. Over the few years, milligram quantities of americium and microgram amounts of curium were accumulated that allowed production of isotopes of berkelium and californium. Sizeable amounts of these elements were produced in 1958, and the first californium compound (0.3 μg of CfOCl) was obtained in 1960 by B. B. Cunningham and J. C. Wallmann.

Einsteinium and fermium were identified in 1952–1953 in the fallout from the &quot;Ivy Mike&quot; nuclear test (1 November 1952), the first successful test of a hydrogen bomb. Instantaneous exposure of uranium-238 to a large neutron flux resulting from the explosion produced heavy isotopes of uranium, which underwent a series of beta decays to nuclides such as einsteinium-253 and fermium-255. The discovery of the new elements and the new data on neutron capture were initially kept secret on the orders of the US military until 1955 due to Cold War tensions. Nevertheless, the Berkeley team were able to prepare einsteinium and fermium by civilian means, through the neutron bombardment of plutonium-239, and published this work in 1954 with the disclaimer that it was not the first studies that had been carried out on those elements. The &quot;Ivy Mike&quot; studies were declassified and published in 1955. The first significant (submicrogram) amounts of einsteinium were produced in 1961 by Cunningham and colleagues, but this has not been done for fermium yet.

The first isotope of mendelevium, 256Md (half-life 87 min), was synthesized by Albert Ghiorso, Glenn T. Seaborg, Gregory Robert Choppin, Bernard G. Harvey and Stanley Gerald Thompson when they bombarded an 253Es target with alpha particles in the 60-inch cyclotron of Berkeley Radiation Laboratory; this was the first isotope of any element to be synthesized one atom at a time.

There were several attempts to obtain isotopes of nobelium by Swedish (1957) and American (1958) groups, but the first reliable result was the synthesis of 256No by the Russian group of Georgy Flyorov in 1965, as acknowledged by the IUPAC in 1992. In their experiments, Flyorov et al. bombarded uranium-238 with neon-22.

In 1961, Ghiorso et al. obtained the first isotope of lawrencium by irradiating californium (mostly californium-252) with boron-10 and boron-11 ions. The mass number of this isotope was not clearly established (possibly 258 or 259) at the time. In 1965, 256Lr was synthesized by Flyorov et al. from 243Am and 18O. Thus IUPAC recognized the nuclear physics teams at Dubna and Berkeley as the co-discoverers of lawrencium.

== Isotopes ==

Thirty-four isotopes of actinium and eight excited isomeric states of some of its nuclides are known, ranging in mass number from 203 to 236.{{NUBASE2020|ref}} Three isotopes, 225Ac, 227Ac and 228Ac, were found in nature and the others were produced in the laboratory; only the three natural isotopes are used in applications. Actinium-225 is a member of the radioactive neptunium series; it was first discovered in 1947 as a decay product of uranium-233 and it is an α-emitter with a half-life of 10 days. Actinium-225 is less available than actinium-228, but is more promising in radiotracer applications. Actinium-227 (half-life 21.77 years) occurs in all uranium ores, but in small quantities. One gram of uranium (in radioactive equilibrium) contains only 2{{e|-10}} gram of 227Ac.{{NUBASE2020|ref}} Actinium-228 is a member of the radioactive thorium series formed by the decay of 228Ra; it is a β− emitter with a half-life of 6.15 hours. In one tonne of thorium there is 5{{e|-8}} gram of 228Ac. It was discovered by Otto Hahn in 1906.

There are 32 known isotopes of thorium ranging in mass number from 207 to 238.{{NUBASE2020|ref}} Of these, the longest-lived is 232Th, whose half-life of {{val|1.4|e=10|u=years}} means that it still exists in nature as a primordial nuclide. The next longest-lived is 230Th, an intermediate decay product of 238U with a half-life of 75,400 years. Several other thorium isotopes have half-lives over a day; all of these are also transient in the decay chains of 232Th, 235U, and 238U.

Twenty-nine isotopes of protactinium are known with mass numbers 211–239{{NUBASE2020|ref}} as well as three excited isomeric states. Only 231Pa and 234Pa have been found in nature. All the isotopes have short lifetimes, except for protactinium-231 (half-life 32,760 years). The most important isotopes are 231Pa and 233Pa, which is an intermediate product in obtaining uranium-233 and is the most affordable among artificial isotopes of protactinium. 233Pa has convenient half-life and energy of γ-radiation, and thus was used in most studies of protactinium chemistry. Protactinium-233 is a β-emitter with a half-life of 26.97 days.{{NUBASE2020|ref}}

There are 27 known isotopes of uranium, having mass numbers 215–242 (except 220). Three of them, 234U, 235U and 238U, are present in appreciable quantities in nature. Among others, the most important is 233U, which is a final product of transformation of 232Th irradiated by slow neutrons. 233U has a much higher fission efficiency by low-energy (thermal) neutrons, compared e.g. with 235U. Most uranium chemistry studies were carried out on uranium-238 owing to its long half-life of 4.4{{e|9}} years.

There are 25 isotopes of neptunium with mass numbers 219–244 (except 221); they are all highly radioactive. The most popular among scientists are long-lived 237Np (t1/2 = 2.20{{e|6}} years) and short-lived 239Np, 238Np (t1/2 ~ 2 days).

There are 21 known isotopes of plutonium, having mass numbers 227–247. The most stable isotope of plutonium is 244Pu with half-life of 8.13{{e|7}} years.{{NUBASE2020|ref}}

Eighteen isotopes of americium are known with mass numbers from 229 to 247 (with the exception of 231). The most important are 241Am and 243Am, which are alpha-emitters and also emit soft, but intense γ-rays; both of them can be obtained in an isotopically pure form. Chemical properties of americium were first studied with 241Am, but later shifted to 243Am, which is almost 20 times less radioactive. The disadvantage of 243Am is production of the short-lived daughter isotope 239Np, which has to be considered in the data analysis.

Among 19 isotopes of curium, ranging in mass number from 233 to 251, the most accessible are 242Cm and 244Cm; they are α-emitters, but with much shorter lifetime than the americium isotopes. These isotopes emit almost no γ-radiation, but undergo spontaneous fission with the associated emission of neutrons. More long-lived isotopes of curium (245–248Cm, all α-emitters) are formed as a mixture during neutron irradiation of plutonium or americium. Upon short irradiation, this mixture is dominated by 246Cm, and then 248Cm begins to accumulate. Both of these isotopes, especially 248Cm, have a longer half-life (3.48{{e|5}} years) and are much more convenient for carrying out chemical research than 242Cm and 244Cm, but they also have a rather high rate of spontaneous fission. 247Cm has the longest lifetime among isotopes of curium (1.56{{e|7}} years), but is not formed in large quantities because of the strong fission induced by thermal neutrons.

Seventeen isotopes of berkelium have been identified with mass numbers 233, 234, 236, 238, and 240–252. Only 249Bk is available in large quantities; it has a relatively short half-life of 330 days and emits mostly soft β-particles, which are inconvenient for detection. Its alpha radiation is rather weak (1.45{{e|-3}}% with respect to β-radiation), but is sometimes used to detect this isotope. 247Bk is an alpha-emitter with a long half-life of 1,380 years, but it is hard to obtain in appreciable quantities; it is not formed upon neutron irradiation of plutonium because β-decay of curium isotopes with mass number below 248 is not known. (247Cm would actually release energy by β-decaying to 247Bk, but this has never been seen.)

The 20 isotopes of californium with mass numbers 237–256 are formed in nuclear reactors; californium-253 is a β-emitter and the rest are α-emitters. The isotopes with even mass numbers (250Cf, 252Cf and 254Cf) have a high rate of spontaneous fission, especially 254Cf of which 99.7% decays by spontaneous fission. Californium-249 has a relatively long half-life (352 years), weak spontaneous fission and strong γ-emission that facilitates its identification. 249Cf is not formed in large quantities in a nuclear reactor because of the slow β-decay of the parent isotope 249Bk and a large cross section of interaction with neutrons, but it can be accumulated in the isotopically pure form as the β-decay product of (pre-selected) 249Bk. Californium produced by reactor-irradiation of plutonium mostly consists of 250Cf and 252Cf, the latter being predominant for large neutron fluences, and its study is hindered by the strong neutron radiation.

Among the 18 known isotopes of einsteinium with mass numbers from 240 to 257, the most affordable is 253Es. It is an α-emitter with a half-life of 20.47 days, a relatively weak γ-emission and small spontaneous fission rate as compared with the isotopes of californium. Prolonged neutron irradiation also produces a long-lived isotope 254Es (t1/2 = 275.5 days).

Twenty isotopes of fermium are known with mass numbers of 241–260. 254Fm, 255Fm and 256Fm are α-emitters with a short half-life (hours), which can be isolated in significant amounts. 257Fm (t1/2 = 100 days) can accumulate upon prolonged and strong irradiation. All these isotopes are characterized by high rates of spontaneous fission.

Among the 17 known isotopes of mendelevium (mass numbers from 244 to 260), the most studied is 256Md, which mainly decays through electron capture (α-radiation is ≈10%) with a half-life of 77 minutes. Another alpha emitter, 258Md, has a half-life of 53 days. Both these isotopes are produced from rare einsteinium (253Es and 255Es respectively), that therefore limits their availability.{{NUBASE2020|ref}}

Long-lived isotopes of nobelium and isotopes of lawrencium (and of heavier elements) have relatively short half-lives. For nobelium, 13 isotopes are known, with mass numbers 249–260 and 262. The chemical properties of nobelium and lawrencium were studied with 255No (t1/2 = 3 min) and 256Lr (t1/2 = 35 s). The longest-lived nobelium isotope, 259No, has a half-life of approximately 1 hour.{{NUBASE2020|ref}} Lawrencium has 14 known isotopes with mass numbers 251–262, 264, and 266. The most stable of them is 266Lr with a half life of 11 hours.

Among all of these, the only isotopes that occur in sufficient quantities in nature to be detected in anything more than traces and have a measurable contribution to the atomic weights of the actinides are the primordial 232Th, 235U, and 238U, and three long-lived decay products of natural uranium, 230Th, 231Pa, and 234U. Natural thorium consists of 0.02(2)% 230Th and 99.98(2)% 232Th; natural protactinium consists of 100% 231Pa; and natural uranium consists of 0.0054(5)% 234U, 0.7204(6)% 235U, and 99.2742(10)% 238U.

== Formation in nuclear reactors ==

The figure &quot;buildup of actinides&quot; is a table of nuclides with the number of neutrons on the horizontal axis (isotopes) and the number of protons on the vertical axis (elements). The red dot divides the nuclides in two groups, so the figure is more compact. Each nuclide is represented by a square with the mass number of the element and its half-life. Naturally existing actinide isotopes (Th, U) are marked with a bold border, alpha emitters have a yellow colour, and beta emitters have a blue colour. Pink indicates electron capture (236Np), whereas white stands for a long-lasting metastable state (242Am).

The formation of actinide nuclides is primarily characterised by:
* Neutron capture reactions (n,γ), which are represented in the figure by a short right arrow.
* The (n,2n) reactions and the less frequently occurring (γ,n) reactions are also taken into account, both of which are marked by a short left arrow.
* Even more rarely and only triggered by fast neutrons, the (n,3n) reaction occurs, which is represented in the figure with one example, marked by a long left arrow.

In addition to these neutron- or gamma-induced nuclear reactions, the radioactive conversion of actinide nuclides also affects the nuclide inventory in a reactor. These decay types are marked in the figure by diagonal arrows. The beta-minus decay, marked with an arrow pointing up-left, plays a major role for the balance of the particle densities of the nuclides. Nuclides decaying by positron emission (beta-plus decay) or electron capture (ϵ) do not occur in a nuclear reactor except as products of knockout reactions; their decays are marked with arrows pointing down-right. Due to the long half-lives of the given nuclides, alpha decay plays almost no role in the formation and decay of the actinides in a power reactor, as the residence time of the nuclear fuel in the reactor core is rather short (a few years). Exceptions are the two relatively short-lived nuclides 242Cm (T1/2 = 163 d) and 236Pu (T1/2 = 2.9 y). Only for these two cases, the α decay is marked on the nuclide map by a long arrow pointing down-left. A few long-lived actinide isotopes, such as 244Pu and 250Cm, cannot be produced in reactors because neutron capture does not happen quickly enough to bypass the short-lived beta-decaying nuclides 243Pu and 249Cm; they can however be generated in nuclear explosions, which have much higher neutron fluxes.

== Distribution in nature ==
Thorium and uranium are the most abundant actinides in nature with the respective mass concentrations of 16 ppm and 4 ppm. Uranium mostly occurs in the Earth&#x27;s crust as a mixture of its oxides in the mineral uraninite, which is also called pitchblende because of its black color. There are several dozens of other uranium minerals such as carnotite (KUO2VO4·3H2O) and autunite (Ca(UO2)2(PO4)2·nH2O). The isotopic composition of natural uranium is 238U (relative abundance 99.2742%), 235U (0.7204%) and 234U (0.0054%); of these 238U has the largest half-life of 4.51{{e|9}} years. The worldwide production of uranium in 2009 amounted to 50,572 tonnes, of which 27.3% was mined in Kazakhstan. Other important uranium mining countries are Canada (20.1%), Australia (15.7%), Namibia (9.1%), Russia (7.0%), and Niger (6.4%).

The most abundant thorium minerals are thorianite ({{chem2|ThO2}}), thorite ({{chem2|ThSiO4}}) and monazite, ({{chem2|(Th,Ca,Ce)PO4}}). Most thorium minerals contain uranium and vice versa; and they all have significant fraction of lanthanides. Rich deposits of thorium minerals are located in the United States (440,000 tonnes), Australia and India (~300,000 tonnes each) and Canada (~100,000 tonnes).

The abundance of actinium in the Earth&#x27;s crust is only about 5{{e|-15}}%. Actinium is mostly present in uranium-containing, but also in other minerals, though in much smaller quantities. The content of actinium in most natural objects corresponds to the isotopic equilibrium of parent isotope 235U, and it is not affected by the weak Ac migration. Protactinium is more abundant (10−12%) in the Earth&#x27;s crust than actinium. It was discovered in uranium ore in 1913 by Fajans and Göhring. As actinium, the distribution of protactinium follows that of 235U.

The half-life of the longest-lived isotope of neptunium, 237Np, is negligible compared to the age of the Earth. Thus neptunium is present in nature in negligible amounts produced as intermediate decay products of other isotopes. Traces of plutonium in uranium minerals were first found in 1942, and the more systematic results on 239Pu are summarized in the table (no other plutonium isotopes could be detected in those samples). The upper limit of abundance of the longest-living isotope of plutonium, 244Pu, is 3{{e|-20}}%. Plutonium could not be detected in samples of lunar soil. Owing to its scarcity in nature, most plutonium is produced synthetically.

== Extraction ==
Owing to the low abundance of actinides, their extraction is a complex, multistep process. Fluorides of actinides are usually used because they are insoluble in water and can be easily separated with redox reactions. Fluorides are reduced with calcium, magnesium or barium:
: formula_2

Among the actinides, thorium and uranium are the easiest to isolate. Thorium is extracted mostly from monazite: thorium pyrophosphate (ThP2O7) is reacted with nitric acid, and the produced thorium nitrate treated with tributyl phosphate. Rare-earth impurities are separated by increasing the pH in sulfate solution.

In another extraction method, monazite is decomposed with a 45% aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide at 140 °C. Mixed metal hydroxides are extracted first, filtered at 80 °C, washed with water and dissolved with concentrated hydrochloric acid. Next, the acidic solution is neutralized with hydroxides to pH = 5.8 that results in precipitation of thorium hydroxide (Th(OH)4) contaminated with ~3% of rare-earth hydroxides; the rest of rare-earth hydroxides remains in solution. Thorium hydroxide is dissolved in an inorganic acid and then purified from the rare earth elements. An efficient method is the dissolution of thorium hydroxide in nitric acid, because the resulting solution can be purified by extraction with organic solvents:

:Th(OH)4 + 4 HNO3 → Th(NO3)4 + 4 H2O

Metallic thorium is separated from the anhydrous oxide, chloride or fluoride by reacting it with calcium in an inert atmosphere:

:ThO2 + 2 Ca → 2 CaO + Th

Sometimes thorium is extracted by electrolysis of a fluoride in a mixture of sodium and potassium chloride at 700–800 °C in a graphite crucible. Highly pure thorium can be extracted from its iodide with the crystal bar process.

Uranium is extracted from its ores in various ways. In one method, the ore is burned and then reacted with nitric acid to convert uranium into a dissolved state. Treating the solution with a solution of tributyl phosphate (TBP) in kerosene transforms uranium into an organic form UO2(NO3)2(TBP)2. The insoluble impurities are filtered and the uranium is extracted by reaction with hydroxides as (NH4)2U2O7 or with hydrogen peroxide as UO4·2H2O.

When the uranium ore is rich in such minerals as dolomite, magnesite, etc., those minerals consume much acid. In this case, the carbonate method is used for uranium extraction. Its main component is an aqueous solution of sodium carbonate, which converts uranium into a complex [UO2(CO3)3]4−, which is stable in aqueous solutions at low concentrations of hydroxide ions. The advantages of the sodium carbonate method are that the chemicals have low corrosivity (compared to nitrates) and that most non-uranium metals precipitate from the solution. The disadvantage is that tetravalent uranium compounds precipitate as well. Therefore, the uranium ore is treated with sodium carbonate at elevated temperature and under oxygen pressure:
:2 UO2 + O2 + 6 {{chem|CO|3|2-}} → 2 [UO2(CO3)3]4−
This equation suggests that the best solvent for the uranyl carbonate processing is a mixture of carbonate with bicarbonate. At high pH, this results in precipitation of diuranate, which is treated with hydrogen in the presence of nickel yielding an insoluble uranium tetracarbonate.

Another separation method uses polymeric resins as a polyelectrolyte. Ion exchange processes in the resins result in separation of uranium. Uranium from resins is washed with a solution of ammonium nitrate or nitric acid that yields uranyl nitrate, UO2(NO3)2·6H2O. When heated, it turns into UO3, which is converted to UO2 with hydrogen:
: UO3 + H2 → UO2 + H2O
Reacting uranium dioxide with hydrofluoric acid changes it to uranium tetrafluoride, which yields uranium metal upon reaction with magnesium metal:
: 4 HF + UO2 → UF4 + 2 H2O

To extract plutonium, neutron-irradiated uranium is dissolved in nitric acid, and a reducing agent (FeSO4, or H2O2) is added to the resulting solution. This addition changes the oxidation state of plutonium from +6 to +4, while uranium remains in the form of uranyl nitrate (UO2(NO3)2). The solution is treated with a reducing agent and neutralized with ammonium carbonate to pH = 8 that results in precipitation of Pu4+ compounds.

In another method, Pu4+ and {{chem|UO|2|2+}} are first extracted with tributyl phosphate, then reacted with hydrazine washing out the recovered plutonium.

The major difficulty in separation of actinium is the similarity of its properties with those of lanthanum. Thus actinium is either synthesized in nuclear reactions from isotopes of radium or separated using ion-exchange procedures.

== Properties ==
Actinides have similar properties to lanthanides. Just as the 4f electron shells are filled in the lanthanides, the 5f electron shells are filled in the actinides. Because the 5f, 6d, 7s, and 7p shells are close in energy, many irregular configurations arise; thus, in gas-phase atoms, just as the first 4f electron only appears in cerium, so the first 5f electron appears even later, in protactinium. However, just as lanthanum is the first element to use the 4f shell in compounds, so actinium is the first element to use the 5f shell in compounds. The f-shells complete their filling together, at ytterbium and nobelium. The first experimental evidence for the filling of the 5f shell in actinides was obtained by McMillan and Abelson in 1940. As in lanthanides (see lanthanide contraction), the ionic radius of actinides monotonically decreases with atomic number (see also actinoid contraction).

The shift of electron configurations in the gas phase does not always match the chemical behaviour. For example, the early-transition-metal-like prominence of the highest oxidation state, corresponding to removal of all valence electrons, extends up to uranium even though the 5f shells begin filling before that. On the other hand, electron configurations resembling the lanthanide congeners already begin at plutonium, even though lanthanide-like behaviour does not become dominant until the second half of the series begins at curium. The elements between uranium and curium form a transition between these two kinds of behaviour, where higher oxidation states continue to exist, but lose stability with respect to the +3 state. The +2 state becomes more important near the end of the series, and is the most stable oxidation state for nobelium, the last 5f element. Oxidation states rise again only after nobelium, showing that a new series of 6d transition metals has begun: lawrencium shows only the +3 oxidation state, and rutherfordium only the +4 state, making them respectively congeners of lutetium and hafnium in the 5d row.

=== Physical properties ===

Actinides are typical metals. All of them are soft and have a silvery color (but tarnish in air), relatively high density and plasticity. Some of them can be cut with a knife. Their electrical resistivity varies between 15 and 150 μΩ·cm. The hardness of thorium is similar to that of soft steel, so heated pure thorium can be rolled in sheets and pulled into wire. Thorium is nearly half as dense as uranium and plutonium, but is harder than either of them. All actinides are radioactive, paramagnetic, and, with the exception of actinium, have several crystalline phases: plutonium has seven, and uranium, neptunium and californium three. The crystal structures of protactinium, uranium, neptunium and plutonium do not have clear analogs among the lanthanides and are more similar to those of the 3&quot;d&quot;-transition metals.

All actinides are pyrophoric, especially when finely divided, that is, they spontaneously ignite upon reaction with air at room temperature. The melting point of actinides does not have a clear dependence on the number of &quot;f&quot;-electrons. The unusually low melting point of neptunium and plutonium (~640 °C) is explained by hybridization of 5&quot;f&quot; and 6&quot;d&quot; orbitals and the formation of directional bonds in these metals.

=== Chemical properties ===
Like the lanthanides, all actinides are highly reactive with halogens and chalcogens; however, the actinides react more easily. Actinides, especially those with a small number of 5&quot;f&quot;-electrons, are prone to hybridization. This is explained by the similarity of the electron energies at the 5&quot;f&quot;, 7&quot;s&quot; and 6&quot;d&quot; shells. Most actinides exhibit a larger variety of valence states, and the most stable are +6 for uranium, +5 for protactinium and neptunium, +4 for thorium and plutonium and +3 for actinium and other actinides.

Actinium is chemically similar to lanthanum, which is explained by their similar ionic radii and electronic structures. Like lanthanum, actinium almost always has an oxidation state of +3 in compounds, but it is less reactive and has more pronounced basic properties. Among other trivalent actinides Ac3+ is least acidic, i.e. has the weakest tendency to hydrolyze in aqueous solutions.

Thorium is rather active chemically. Owing to lack of electrons on 6&quot;d&quot; and 5&quot;f&quot; orbitals, tetravalent thorium compounds are colorless. At pH &lt; 3, solutions of thorium salts are dominated by the cations [Th(H2O)8]4+. The Th4+ ion is relatively large, and depending on the coordination number can have a radius between 0.95 and 1.14 Å. As a result, thorium salts have a weak tendency to hydrolyse. The distinctive ability of thorium salts is their high solubility both in water and polar organic solvents.

Protactinium exhibits two valence states; the +5 is stable, and the +4 state easily oxidizes to protactinium(V). Thus tetravalent protactinium in solutions is obtained by the action of strong reducing agents in a hydrogen atmosphere. Tetravalent protactinium is chemically similar to uranium(IV) and thorium(IV). Fluorides, phosphates, hypophosphates, iodates and phenylarsonates of protactinium(IV) are insoluble in water and dilute acids. Protactinium forms soluble carbonates. The hydrolytic properties of pentavalent protactinium are close to those of tantalum(V) and niobium(V). The complex chemical behavior of protactinium is a consequence of the start of the filling of the 5&quot;f&quot; shell in this element.

Uranium has a valence from 3 to 6, the last being most stable. In the hexavalent state, uranium is very similar to the group 6 elements. Many compounds of uranium(IV) and uranium(VI) are non-stoichiometric, i.e. have variable composition. For example, the actual chemical formula of uranium dioxide is UO2+x, where &quot;x&quot; varies between −0.4 and 0.32. Uranium(VI) compounds are weak oxidants. Most of them contain the linear &quot;uranyl&quot; group, {{chem|UO|2|2+}}. Between 4 and 6 ligands can be accommodated in an equatorial plane perpendicular to the uranyl group. The uranyl group acts as a hard acid and forms stronger complexes with oxygen-donor ligands than with nitrogen-donor ligands. {{chem|NpO|2|2+}} and {{chem|PuO|2|2+}} are also the common form of Np and Pu in the +6 oxidation state. Uranium(IV) compounds exhibit reducing properties, e.g., they are easily oxidized by atmospheric oxygen. Uranium(III) is a very strong reducing agent. Owing to the presence of d-shell, uranium (as well as many other actinides) forms organometallic compounds, such as UIII(C5H5)3 and UIV(C5H5)4.

Neptunium has valence states from 3 to 7, which can be simultaneously observed in solutions. The most stable state in solution is +5, but the valence +4 is preferred in solid neptunium compounds. Neptunium metal is very reactive. Ions of neptunium are prone to hydrolysis and formation of coordination compounds.

Plutonium also exhibits valence states between 3 and 7 inclusive, and thus is chemically similar to neptunium and uranium. It is highly reactive, and quickly forms an oxide film in air. Plutonium reacts with hydrogen even at temperatures as low as 25–50 °C; it also easily forms halides and intermetallic compounds. Hydrolysis reactions of plutonium ions of different oxidation states are quite diverse. Plutonium(V) can enter polymerization reactions.

The largest chemical diversity among actinides is observed in americium, which can have valence between 2 and 6. Divalent americium is obtained only in dry compounds and non-aqueous solutions (acetonitrile). Oxidation states +3, +5 and +6 are typical for aqueous solutions, but also in the solid state. Tetravalent americium forms stable solid compounds (dioxide, fluoride and hydroxide) as well as complexes in aqueous solutions. It was reported that in alkaline solution americium can be oxidized to the heptavalent state, but these data proved erroneous. The most stable valence of americium is 3 in aqueous solution and 3 or 4 in solid compounds.

Valence 3 is dominant in all subsequent elements up to lawrencium (with the exception of nobelium). Curium can be tetravalent in solids (fluoride, dioxide). Berkelium, along with a valence of +3, also shows the valence of +4, more stable than that of curium; the valence 4 is observed in solid fluoride and dioxide. The stability of Bk4+ in aqueous solution is close to that of Ce4+. Only valence 3 was observed for californium, einsteinium and fermium. The divalent state is proven for mendelevium and nobelium, and in nobelium it is more stable than the trivalent state. Lawrencium shows valence 3 both in solutions and solids.

The redox potential &lt;chem&gt;\mathit E_\frac{M^4+}{AnO2^2+}&lt;/chem&gt; increases from −0.32 V in uranium, through 0.34 V (Np) and 1.04 V (Pu) to 1.34 V in americium revealing the increasing reduction ability of the An4+ ion from americium to uranium. All actinides form AnH3 hydrides of black color with salt-like properties. Actinides also produce carbides with the general formula of AnC or AnC2 (U2C3 for uranium) as well as sulfides An2S3 and AnS2.

== Compounds ==

=== Oxides and hydroxides ===

: 

Some actinides can exist in several oxide forms such as An2O3, AnO2, An2O5 and AnO3. For all actinides, oxides AnO3 are amphoteric and An2O3, AnO2 and An2O5 are basic, they easily react with water, forming bases:

: An2O3 + 3 H2O → 2 An(OH)3.
These bases are poorly soluble in water and by their activity are close to the hydroxides of rare-earth metals.
Np(OH)3 has not yet been synthesized, Pu(OH)3 has a blue color while Am(OH)3 is pink and Cm(OH)3 is colorless. Bk(OH)3 and Cf(OH)3 are also known, as are tetravalent hydroxides for Np, Pu and Am and pentavalent for Np and Am.

The strongest base is of actinium. All compounds of actinium are colorless, except for black actinium sulfide (Ac2S3). Dioxides of tetravalent actinides crystallize in the cubic system, same as in calcium fluoride.

Thorium reacting with oxygen exclusively forms the dioxide:
: &lt;chem&gt;Th{} + O2 -&gt;[\ce{1000^\circ C}] \overbrace{ThO2}^{Thorium~dioxide}&lt;/chem&gt;

Thorium dioxide is a refractory material with the highest melting point among any known oxide (3390 °C). Adding 0.8–1% ThO2 to tungsten stabilizes its structure, so the doped filaments have better mechanical stability to vibrations. To dissolve ThO2 in acids, it is heated to 500–600 °C; heating above 600 °C produces a very resistant to acids and other reagents form of ThO2. Small addition of fluoride ions catalyses dissolution of thorium dioxide in acids.

Two protactinium oxides have been obtained: PaO2 (black) and Pa2O5 (white); the former is isomorphic with ThO2 and the latter is easier to obtain. Both oxides are basic, and Pa(OH)5 is a weak, poorly soluble base.

Decomposition of certain salts of uranium, for example UO2(NO3)·6H2O in air at 400 °C, yields orange or yellow UO3. This oxide is amphoteric and forms several hydroxides, the most stable being uranyl hydroxide UO2(OH)2. Reaction of uranium(VI) oxide with hydrogen results in uranium dioxide, which is similar in its properties with ThO2. This oxide is also basic and corresponds to the uranium hydroxide U(OH)4.

Plutonium, neptunium and americium form two basic oxides: An2O3 and AnO2. Neptunium trioxide is unstable; thus, only Np3O8 could be obtained so far. However, the oxides of plutonium and neptunium with the chemical formula AnO2 and An2O3 are well characterized.

=== Salts ===
:


Actinides easily react with halogens forming salts with the formulas MX3 and MX4 (X = halogen). So the first berkelium compound, BkCl3, was synthesized in 1962 with an amount of 3 nanograms. Like the halogens of rare earth elements, actinide chlorides, bromides, and iodides are water-soluble, and fluorides are insoluble. Uranium easily yields a colorless hexafluoride, which sublimates at a temperature of 56.5 °C; because of its volatility, it is used in the separation of uranium isotopes with gas centrifuge or gaseous diffusion. Actinide hexafluorides have properties close to anhydrides. They are very sensitive to moisture and hydrolyze forming AnO2F2. The pentachloride and black hexachloride of uranium were synthesized, but they are both unstable.

Action of acids on actinides yields salts, and if the acids are non-oxidizing then the actinide in the salt is in low-valence state:
: U + 2 H2SO4 → U(SO4)2 + 2 H2
: 2 Pu + 6 HCl → 2 PuCl3 + 3 H2
However, in these reactions the regenerating hydrogen can react with the metal, forming the corresponding hydride. Uranium reacts with acids and water much more easily than thorium.

Actinide salts can also be obtained by dissolving the corresponding hydroxides in acids. Nitrates, chlorides, sulfates and perchlorates of actinides are water-soluble. When crystallizing from aqueous solutions, these salts form hydrates, such as Th(NO3)4·6H2O, Th(SO4)2·9H2O and Pu2(SO4)3·7H2O. Salts of high-valence actinides easily hydrolyze. So, colorless sulfate, chloride, perchlorate and nitrate of thorium transform into basic salts with formulas Th(OH)2SO4 and Th(OH)3NO3. The solubility and insolubility of trivalent and tetravalent actinides is like that of lanthanide salts. So phosphates, fluorides, oxalates, iodates and carbonates of actinides are weakly soluble in water; they precipitate as hydrates, such as ThF4·3H2O and Th(CrO4)2·3H2O.

Actinides with oxidation state +6, except for the AnO22+-type cations, form [AnO4]2−, [An2O7]2− and other complex anions. For example, uranium, neptunium and plutonium form salts of the Na2UO4 (uranate) and (NH4)2U2O7 (diuranate) types. In comparison with lanthanides, actinides more easily form coordination compounds, and this ability increases with the actinide valence. Trivalent actinides do not form fluoride coordination compounds, whereas tetravalent thorium forms K2ThF6, KThF5, and even K5ThF9 complexes. Thorium also forms the corresponding sulfates (for example Na2SO4·Th(SO4)2·5H2O), nitrates and thiocyanates. Salts with the general formula An2Th(NO3)6·&quot;n&quot;H2O are of coordination nature, with the coordination number of thorium equal to 12. Even easier is to produce complex salts of pentavalent and hexavalent actinides. The most stable coordination compounds of actinides – tetravalent thorium and uranium – are obtained in reactions with diketones, e.g. acetylacetone.

== Applications ==

While actinides have some established daily-life applications, such as in smoke detectors (americium) and gas mantles (thorium), they are mostly used in nuclear weapons and as fuel in nuclear reactors. The last two areas exploit the property of actinides to release enormous energy in nuclear reactions, which under certain conditions may become self-sustaining chain reactions.
The most important isotope for nuclear power applications is uranium-235. It is used in the thermal reactor, and its concentration in natural uranium does not exceed 0.72%. This isotope strongly absorbs thermal neutrons releasing much energy. One fission act of 1 gram of 235U converts into about 1 MW·day. Of importance, is that {{nuclide|U|235}} emits more neutrons than it absorbs; upon reaching the critical mass, {{nuclide|U|235}} enters into a self-sustaining chain reaction. Typically, uranium nucleus is divided into two fragments with the release of 2–3 neutrons, for example:
: {{nuclide|U|235|link=yes}} + {{nuclide|neutronium|1|link=yes}} ⟶ {{nuclide|Rh|115}} + {{Nuclide|Ag|118}} + 3{{nuclide|neutronium|1}}

Other promising actinide isotopes for nuclear power are thorium-232 and its product from the thorium fuel cycle, uranium-233.

Emission of neutrons during the fission of uranium is important not only for maintaining the nuclear chain reaction, but also for the synthesis of the heavier actinides. Uranium-239 converts via β-decay into plutonium-239, which, like uranium-235, is capable of spontaneous fission. The world&#x27;s first nuclear reactors were built not for energy, but for producing plutonium-239 for nuclear weapons.

About half of produced thorium is used as the light-emitting material of gas mantles. Thorium is also added into multicomponent alloys of magnesium and zinc. Mg-Th alloys are light and strong, but also have high melting point and ductility and thus are widely used in the aviation industry and in the production of missiles. Thorium also has good electron emission properties, with long lifetime and low potential barrier for the emission. The relative content of thorium and uranium isotopes is widely used to estimate the age of various objects, including stars (see radiometric dating).

The major application of plutonium has been in nuclear weapons, where the isotope plutonium-239 was a key component due to its ease of fission and availability. Plutonium-based designs allow reducing the critical mass to about a third of that for uranium-235. The &quot;Fat Man&quot;-type plutonium bombs produced during the Manhattan Project used explosive compression of plutonium to obtain significantly higher densities than normal, combined with a central neutron source to begin the reaction and increase efficiency. Thus only 6.2 kg of plutonium was needed for an explosive yield equivalent to 20 kilotons of TNT. (See also Nuclear weapon design.) Hypothetically, as little as 4 kg of plutonium—and maybe even less—could be used to make a single atomic bomb using very sophisticated assembly designs.

Plutonium-238 is potentially more efficient isotope for nuclear reactors, since it has smaller critical mass than uranium-235, but it continues to release much thermal energy (0.56 W/g) by decay even when the fission chain reaction is stopped by control rods. Its application is limited by its high price (about US$1000/g). This isotope has been used in thermopiles and water distillation systems of some space satellites and stations. The Galileo and Apollo spacecraft (e.g. Apollo 14) had heaters powered by kilogram quantities of plutonium-238 oxide; this heat is also transformed into electricity with thermopiles. The decay of plutonium-238 produces relatively harmless alpha particles and is not accompanied by gamma rays. Therefore, this isotope (~160 mg) is used as the energy source in heart pacemakers where it lasts about 5 times longer than conventional batteries.

Actinium-227 is used as a neutron source. Its high specific energy (14.5 W/g) and the possibility of obtaining significant quantities of thermally stable compounds are attractive for use in long-lasting thermoelectric generators for remote use. 228Ac is used as an indicator of radioactivity in chemical research, as it emits high-energy electrons (2.18 MeV) that can be easily detected. 228Ac-228Ra mixtures are widely used as an intense gamma-source in industry and medicine.

Development of self-glowing actinide-doped materials with durable crystalline matrices is a new area of actinide utilization as the addition of alpha-emitting radionuclides to some glasses and crystals may confer luminescence.

== Toxicity ==

{{Periodic table (transuranium element)}}

Radioactive substances can harm human health via (i) local skin contamination, (ii) internal exposure due to ingestion of radioactive isotopes, and (iii) external overexposure by β-activity and γ-radiation. Together with radium and transuranium elements, actinium is one of the most dangerous radioactive poisons with high specific α-activity. The most important feature of actinium is its ability to accumulate and remain in the surface layer of skeletons. At the initial stage of poisoning, actinium accumulates in the liver. Another danger of actinium is that it undergoes radioactive decay faster than being excreted. Adsorption from the digestive tract is much smaller (~0.05%) for actinium than radium.

Protactinium in the body tends to accumulate in the kidneys and bones. The maximum safe dose of protactinium in the human body is 0.03 μCi that corresponds to 0.5 micrograms of 231Pa. This isotope, which might be present in the air as aerosol, is 2.5{{e|8}} times more toxic than hydrocyanic acid.{{page needed|date=August 2024}}

Plutonium, when entering the body through air, food or blood (e.g. a wound), mostly settles in the lungs, liver and bones with only about 10% going to other organs, and remains there for decades. The long residence time of plutonium in the body is partly explained by its poor solubility in water. Some isotopes of plutonium emit ionizing α-radiation, which damages the surrounding cells. The median lethal dose (LD50) for 30 days in dogs after intravenous injection of plutonium is 0.32 milligram per kg of body mass, and thus the lethal dose for humans is approximately 22 mg for a person weighing 70 kg; the amount for respiratory exposure should be approximately four times greater. Another estimate assumes that plutonium is 50 times less toxic than radium, and thus permissible content of plutonium in the body should be 5 μg or 0.3 μCi. Such amount is nearly invisible under microscope. After trials on animals, this maximum permissible dose was reduced to 0.65 μg or 0.04 μCi. Studies on animals also revealed that the most dangerous plutonium exposure route is through inhalation, after which 5–25% of inhaled substances is retained in the body. Depending on the particle size and solubility of the plutonium compounds, plutonium is localized either in the lungs or in the lymphatic system, or is absorbed in the blood and then transported to the liver and bones. Contamination via food is the least likely way. In this case, only about 0.05% of soluble and 0.01% of insoluble compounds of plutonium absorbs into blood, and the rest is excreted. Exposure of damaged skin to plutonium would retain nearly 100% of it.

Using actinides in nuclear fuel, sealed radioactive sources or advanced materials such as self-glowing crystals has many potential benefits. However, a serious concern is the extremely high radiotoxicity of actinides and their migration in the environment. Use of chemically unstable forms of actinides in MOX and sealed radioactive sources is not appropriate by modern safety standards. There is a challenge to develop stable and durable actinide-bearing materials, which provide safe storage, use and final disposal. A key need is application of actinide solid solutions in durable crystalline host phases.

== See also ==
* Actinides in the environment
* Lanthanides
* Major actinides
* Minor actinides
* Transuranics
{{clear}}

==Notes ==
{{reflist|group=notes}}

== References ==
{{reflist|30em}}

== Bibliography ==
* {{cite book|author=Golub, A. M.|title=Общая и неорганическая химия (General and Inorganic Chemistry)|year=1971|volume=2}}
* {{Greenwood&amp;Earnshaw2nd}}
* {{cite book|author=Myasoedov, B.|title=Analytical chemistry of transplutonium elements|place=Moscow|publisher=Nauka|year=1972|isbn=978-0-470-62715-0|title-link=Transuranium element}}

== External links ==
{{Commons category|Actinides}}
* Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory image of historic periodic table by Seaborg showing actinide series for the first time
* Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, &quot;Uncovering the Secrets of the Actinides&quot;
* Los Alamos National Laboratory, &quot;Actinide Research Quarterly&quot;

{{Navbox periodic table}}
{{Periodic table (navbox)}}

{{Authority control}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19577" start="4" end="12" title="Actinide" label="actinide"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577" start="19" end="27" title="Actinide" label="actinoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="75" end="91" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="116" end="129" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121" start="147" end="155" title="actinium" label="actinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901" start="164" end="172" title="nobelium" label="nobelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905" start="186" end="196" title="lawrencium" label="lawrencium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577" start="387" end="389" title="Actinide" label="An"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078184" start="479" end="505" title="IUPAC nomenclature of inorganic chemistry" label="IUPAC &amp;quot;Red Book&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="640" end="652" title="negative ion" label="negative ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="878" end="886" title="semantic" label="semantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33438" start="946" end="951" title="IUPAC" label="IUPAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q193099" start="1033" end="1040" title="f-block" label="f-block"/>
<link wikidata="Q193099" start="1073" end="1080" title="d-block" label="d-block"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="1095" end="1111" title="transition metal" label="transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q193793" start="1168" end="1182" title="electron shell" label="electron shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q19569" start="1361" end="1371" title="lanthanide" label="lanthanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q171407" start="1442" end="1449" title="valence (chemistry)" label="valence"/>
<link wikidata="Q483788" start="1476" end="1482" title="atomic radius" label="atomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q908801" start="1487" end="1498" title="ionic radius" label="ionic radii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876" start="1604" end="1610" title="curium" label="curium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="1670" end="1677" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109" start="1679" end="1691" title="protactinium" label="protactinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="1697" end="1704" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="1730" end="1746" title="transition metal" label="transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105" start="1773" end="1782" title="neptunium" label="neptunium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="1784" end="1793" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872" start="1799" end="1808" title="americium" label="americium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="1864" end="1875" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="2063" end="2078" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="2132" end="2146" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q640610" start="2244" end="2262" title="ionization chamber" label="ionization chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q565858" start="2279" end="2293" title="smoke detector" label="smoke detector"/>
<link wikidata="Q759767" start="2315" end="2325" title="Primordial nuclide" label="primordial"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="2547" end="2560" title="Nuclear transmutation" label="transmutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542864" start="2574" end="2585" title="uranium ore" label="uranium ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q755992" start="2619" end="2636" title="synthetic element" label="synthetic element"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="2730" end="2741" title="natural environment" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="2774" end="2787" title="hydrogen bomb" label="hydrogen bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876" start="2832" end="2838" title="curium" label="curium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882" start="2840" end="2849" title="berkelium" label="berkelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888" start="2851" end="2862" title="californium" label="californium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892" start="2864" end="2875" title="einsteinium" label="einsteinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896" start="2880" end="2887" title="fermium" label="fermium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="2914" end="2928" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q19569" start="3332" end="3342" title="lanthanide" label="lanthanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q106844" start="3466" end="3486" title="transuranium element" label="transuranium element"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="3517" end="3531" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809" start="3633" end="3643" title="promethium" label="promethium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8753" start="4051" end="4063" title="Enrico Fermi" label="Enrico Fermi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119" start="4418" end="4425" title="hafnium" label="hafnium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123" start="4427" end="4435" title="tantalum" label="tantalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="4440" end="4448" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="4652" end="4660" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973" start="4703" end="4716" title="Glenn Seaborg" label="Glenn Seaborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060127" start="4739" end="4758" title="actinide concept" label="actinide hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="5154" end="5161" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="5236" end="5243" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058675" start="5815" end="5845" title="Underground nuclear testing" label="underground nuclear explosions"/>
<link wikidata="Q101395" start="5985" end="5996" title="mass number" label="mass number"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="6099" end="6109" title="half-life" label="half-lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="6113" end="6120" title="Alpha decay" label="α-decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q146682" start="6161" end="6180" title="spontaneous fission" label="spontaneous fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11429" start="6280" end="6295" title="nuclear fission" label="nuclear fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="6331" end="6338" title="Uranium" label="Uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="6343" end="6350" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195325" start="6376" end="6386" title="discovery of the chemical elements" label="discovered"/>
<link wikidata="Q160196" start="6441" end="6465" title="Martin Heinrich Klaproth" label="Martin Heinrich Klaproth"/>
<link wikidata="Q206467" start="6469" end="6480" title="Uraninite" label="pitchblende"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="6515" end="6521" title="Uranus (planet)" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q418442" start="6629" end="6645" title="sodium diuranate" label="sodium diuranate"/>
<link wikidata="Q206467" start="6661" end="6672" title="pitchblende" label="pitchblende"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="6676" end="6687" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="6723" end="6739" title="sodium hydroxide" label="sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q903801" start="6898" end="6921" title="Eugène-Melchior Péligot" label="Eugène-Melchior Péligot"/>
<link wikidata="Q413036" start="7016" end="7037" title="uranium tetrachloride" label="uranium tetrachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="7052" end="7061" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840065" start="7067" end="7078" title="atomic mass" label="atomic mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q9106" start="7122" end="7138" title="Dmitri Mendeleev" label="Dmitri Mendeleev"/>
<link wikidata="Q420634" start="7261" end="7274" title="Thorium oxide" label="Thorium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q58575" start="7293" end="7309" title="Friedrich Wöhler" label="Friedrich Wöhler"/>
<link wikidata="Q425572" start="7325" end="7335" title="thorianite" label="thorianite"/>
<link wikidata="Q151911" start="7371" end="7391" title="Jöns Jacob Berzelius" label="Jöns Jacob Berzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313787" start="7460" end="7481" title="thorium tetrachloride" label="thorium tetrachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="7551" end="7560" title="norse mythology" label="Norse god"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="7586" end="7590" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121" start="7658" end="7666" title="Actinium" label="Actinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q468371" start="7693" end="7713" title="André-Louis Debierne" label="André-Louis Debierne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="7731" end="7742" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="7863" end="7871" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q76033" start="8125" end="8147" title="Friedrich Oskar Giesel" label="Friedrich Oskar Giesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q213668" start="8569" end="8587" title="Victor Goldschmidt" label="Victor Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109" start="8598" end="8610" title="Protactinium" label="Protactinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q189552" start="8644" end="8659" title="William Crookes" label="William Crookes"/>
<link wikidata="Q213667" start="8699" end="8713" title="Kasimir Fajans" label="Kasimir Fajans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4402060" start="8718" end="8740" title="Oswald Helmuth Göhring" label="Oswald Helmuth Göhring"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8837" end="8853" title="Decay chain#Uranium series" label="238U decay chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="9005" end="9010" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q56189" start="9125" end="9137" title="Lise Meitner" label="Lise Meitner"/>
<link wikidata="Q57065" start="9142" end="9151" title="Otto Hahn" label="Otto Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q102830" start="9167" end="9182" title="Frederick Soddy" label="Frederick Soddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21608032" start="9187" end="9207" title="John Arnold Cranston" label="John Arnold Cranston"/>
<link wikidata="Q61631054" start="9395" end="9409" title="Alfred Maddock" label="Alfred Maddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="9608" end="9615" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="9626" end="9632" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q19009" start="9699" end="9713" title="Edwin McMillan" label="Edwin McMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q377815" start="9718" end="9735" title="Philip H. Abelson" label="Philip H. Abelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="9747" end="9767" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="9854" end="9861" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q106844" start="9881" end="9901" title="transuranium element" label="transuranium element"/>
<link wikidata="Q238323" start="10028" end="10044" title="nuclear reaction" label="nuclear reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="10133" end="10144" title="uranium-238" label="uranium-238"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141329" start="10167" end="10180" title="plutonium-239" label="plutonium-239"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284526" start="10306" end="10318" title="Hanford Site" label="Hanford Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="10403" end="10420" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="10594" end="10597" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="10647" end="10667" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901" start="10674" end="10682" title="nobelium" label="nobelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q470437" start="10727" end="10734" title="neon-22" label="neon-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885334" start="10872" end="10885" title="americium-241" label="americium-241"/>
<link wikidata="Q468340" start="10890" end="10900" title="curium-242" label="curium-242"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973" start="10930" end="10946" title="Glenn T. Seaborg" label="Glenn T. Seaborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023093" start="10948" end="10962" title="Ralph A. James" label="Ralph A. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q468345" start="10967" end="10981" title="Albert Ghiorso" label="Albert Ghiorso"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="11283" end="11294" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q37463" start="11311" end="11317" title="Pierre Curie" label="Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="11348" end="11354" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="11377" end="11390" title="radioactivity" label="radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088652" start="11470" end="11475" title="Californium-245" label="245Cf"/>
<link wikidata="Q221118" start="11517" end="11530" title="berkelium-243" label="berkelium-243"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="11593" end="11613" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q19569" start="11635" end="11645" title="lanthanide" label="lanthanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q741844" start="11646" end="11655" title="Homologous series" label="homologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1838" start="11656" end="11663" title="terbium" label="terbium"/>
<link wikidata="Q631733" start="11702" end="11709" title="Ytterby" label="Ytterby"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359030" start="11826" end="11845" title="Americium(III) hydroxide" label="americium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q248542" start="12272" end="12280" title="Ivy Mike" label="Ivy Mike"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="12520" end="12530" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q785082" start="12552" end="12567" title="einsteinium-253" label="einsteinium-253"/>
<link wikidata="Q465498" start="12572" end="12583" title="fermium-255" label="fermium-255"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="12733" end="12741" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q469744" start="13294" end="13299" title="mendelevium-256" label="256Md"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885631" start="13373" end="13395" title="Gregory Robert Choppin" label="Gregory Robert Choppin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068373" start="13419" end="13442" title="Stanley Gerald Thompson" label="Stanley Gerald Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="13484" end="13498" title="alpha particle" label="alpha particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q204469" start="13515" end="13524" title="cyclotron" label="cyclotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="13528" end="13557" title="Berkeley Radiation Laboratory" label="Berkeley Radiation Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q470491" start="13796" end="13801" title="Nobelium-256" label="256No"/>
<link wikidata="Q723033" start="13826" end="13840" title="Georgy Flyorov" label="Georgy Flyorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q33438" start="13873" end="13878" title="IUPAC" label="IUPAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088652" start="14062" end="14077" title="californium-252" label="californium-252"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="14084" end="14092" title="boron-10" label="boron-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="14097" end="14105" title="boron-11" label="boron-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q101395" start="14116" end="14127" title="mass number" label="mass number"/>
<link wikidata="Q468409" start="14216" end="14221" title="Lawrencium-256" label="256Lr"/>
<link wikidata="Q784903" start="14261" end="14266" title="Americium-243" label="243Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q662269" start="14271" end="14274" title="oxygen-18" label="18O"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417724" start="14412" end="14432" title="isotopes of actinium" label="isotopes of actinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="14451" end="14466" title="nuclear isomerism" label="isomeric states"/>
<link wikidata="Q108149" start="14482" end="14489" title="nuclide" label="nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4060124" start="14576" end="14581" title="Actinium-225" label="225Ac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417724" start="14583" end="14588" title="Actinium-227" label="227Ac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417724" start="14593" end="14598" title="Actinium-228" label="228Ac"/>
<link wikidata="Q191645" start="14771" end="14787" title="neptunium series" label="neptunium series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668919" start="14843" end="14854" title="uranium-233" label="uranium-233"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15237" end="15263" title="Radioactive series#Thorium series" label="radioactive thorium series"/>
<link wikidata="Q377262" start="15287" end="15292" title="Radium-228" label="228Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q57065" start="15424" end="15433" title="Otto Hahn" label="Otto Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895097" start="15463" end="15482" title="isotopes of thorium" label="isotopes of thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q759767" start="15665" end="15683" title="primordial nuclide" label="primordial nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498986" start="15940" end="15964" title="isotopes of protactinium" label="isotopes of protactinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="16044" end="16059" title="nuclear isomerism" label="isomeric states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498986" start="16066" end="16071" title="protactinium-231" label="231Pa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498986" start="16076" end="16081" title="protactinium-234" label="234Pa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498986" start="16244" end="16249" title="protactinium-233" label="233Pa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="16424" end="16435" title="Gamma radiation" label="γ-radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q103531" start="16520" end="16529" title="Beta radiation" label="β-emitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369686" start="16600" end="16619" title="isotopes of uranium" label="isotopes of uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153640" start="16678" end="16682" title="Uranium-234" label="234U"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885290" start="16836" end="16841" title="Thorium-232" label="232Th"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393673" start="17098" end="17119" title="isotopes of neptunium" label="isotopes of neptunium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348563" start="17341" end="17362" title="isotopes of plutonium" label="isotopes of plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q784903" start="17504" end="17525" title="isotopes of americium" label="isotopes of americium"/>
<link wikidata="Q468340" start="18040" end="18058" title="isotopes of curium" label="isotopes of curium"/>
<link wikidata="Q146682" start="18277" end="18296" title="spontaneous fission" label="spontaneous fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q221118" start="18996" end="19017" title="isotopes of berkelium" label="isotopes of berkelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="19205" end="19216" title="Beta decay" label="β-particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="19260" end="19275" title="alpha radiation" label="alpha radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088652" start="19729" end="19752" title="isotopes of californium" label="isotopes of californium"/>
<link wikidata="Q785082" start="20687" end="20710" title="isotopes of einsteinium" label="isotopes of einsteinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q465498" start="21037" end="21056" title="isotopes of fermium" label="isotopes of fermium"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="21124" end="21134" title="Alpha radiation" label="α-emitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q469744" start="21386" end="21409" title="isotopes of mendelevium" label="isotopes of mendelevium"/>
<link wikidata="Q470491" start="21785" end="21805" title="isotopes of nobelium" label="isotopes of nobelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q468409" start="21810" end="21832" title="isotopes of lawrencium" label="isotopes of lawrencium"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="23474" end="23490" title="nuclear isomer" label="metastable state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064418" start="23569" end="23584" title="Neutron capture" label="Neutron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q238323" start="24026" end="24042" title="nuclear reaction" label="nuclear reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="24209" end="24225" title="beta decay" label="beta-minus decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357356" start="24365" end="24382" title="positron emission" label="positron emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="24404" end="24420" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="24608" end="24619" title="alpha decay" label="alpha decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q206467" start="25551" end="25560" title="uraninite" label="uraninite"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25657" end="25673" title=":Category:Uranium minerals" label="uranium minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q409100" start="25682" end="25691" title="carnotite" label="carnotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q407345" start="25711" end="25719" title="autunite" label="autunite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148503" start="25790" end="25794" title="Uranium-238" label="238U"/>
<link wikidata="Q848497" start="25826" end="25830" title="Uranium-235" label="235U"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153640" start="25845" end="25849" title="Uranium-234" label="234U"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="25986" end="25991" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="26022" end="26032" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="26114" end="26121" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="26130" end="26136" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="26149" end="26154" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26182" end="26198" title=":Category:Thorium minerals" label="thorium minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q425572" start="26203" end="26213" title="thorianite" label="thorianite"/>
<link wikidata="Q414989" start="26232" end="26239" title="thorite" label="thorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q422011" start="26263" end="26271" title="monazite" label="monazite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393673" start="27191" end="27196" title="Neptunium-237" label="237Np"/>
<link wikidata="Q44793182" start="27902" end="27910" title="Fluoride" label="Fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="28011" end="28016" title="redox" label="redox"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="28055" end="28062" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="28064" end="28073" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112" start="28077" end="28083" title="barium" label="barium"/>
<link wikidata="Q422011" start="28200" end="28208" title="monazite" label="monazite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55506489" start="28218" end="28231" title="pyrophosphate" label="pyrophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="28257" end="28268" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q425370" start="28287" end="28302" title="thorium nitrate" label="thorium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q613394" start="28316" end="28334" title="tributyl phosphate" label="tributyl phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="28336" end="28346" title="Rare earth element" label="Rare-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="28390" end="28392" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="28499" end="28515" title="sodium hydroxide" label="sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="28640" end="28657" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4138119" start="28761" end="28778" title="thorium hydroxide" label="thorium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="28971" end="28989" title="rare earth element" label="rare earth element"/>
<link wikidata="Q780219" start="29118" end="29128" title="Liquid-liquid extraction" label="extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q420634" start="29240" end="29245" title="Thorium dioxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313787" start="29247" end="29255" title="Thorium(IV) chloride" label="chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522890" start="29259" end="29267" title="Thorium(IV) fluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="29382" end="29394" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="29474" end="29482" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q899149" start="29555" end="29574" title="crystal bar process" label="crystal bar process"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="29808" end="29816" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q416326" start="29972" end="29982" title="Ammonium diuranate" label="(NH4)2U2O7"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="29991" end="30008" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="hydrogen peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q415526" start="30012" end="30020" title="Uranyl peroxide" label="UO4·2H2O"/>
<link wikidata="Q167741" start="30072" end="30080" title="dolomite (mineral)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q425450" start="30082" end="30091" title="magnesite" label="magnesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q190227" start="30245" end="30261" title="sodium carbonate" label="sodium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="30472" end="30483" title="Corrosion" label="corrosivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899763" start="30862" end="30878" title="uranyl carbonate" label="uranyl carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552125" start="30979" end="30988" title="diuranate" label="diuranate"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="31012" end="31020" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q901016" start="31147" end="31162" title="polyelectrolyte" label="polyelectrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q182329" start="31283" end="31299" title="ammonium nitrate" label="ammonium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q416785" start="31327" end="31341" title="uranyl nitrate" label="uranyl nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q425420" start="31386" end="31389" title="Uranium trioxide" label="UO3"/>
<link wikidata="Q378379" start="31413" end="31416" title="uranium dioxide" label="UO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q209569" start="31485" end="31502" title="hydrofluoric acid" label="hydrofluoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q419846" start="31517" end="31538" title="uranium tetrafluoride" label="uranium tetrafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q214863" start="31731" end="31736" title="Iron(II) sulfate" label="FeSO4"/>
<link wikidata="Q171877" start="31741" end="31745" title="hydrogen peroxide" label="H2O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q204873" start="31985" end="32003" title="ammonium carbonate" label="ammonium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q58447" start="32172" end="32181" title="hydrazine" label="hydrazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q428677" start="33241" end="33263" title="lanthanide contraction" label="lanthanide contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q908801" start="33270" end="33282" title="ionic radius" label="ionic radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q130493266" start="33349" end="33369" title="actinoid contraction" label="actinoid contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905" start="34353" end="34363" title="lawrencium" label="lawrencium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226" start="34403" end="34416" title="rutherfordium" label="rutherfordium"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="34654" end="34661" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="34722" end="34744" title="electrical resistivity" label="electrical resistivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="35029" end="35041" title="paramagnetism" label="paramagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="35184" end="35201" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="35353" end="35369" title="transition metal" label="transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q912400" start="35391" end="35401" title="Pyrophoricity" label="pyrophoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="35518" end="35531" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q274511" start="35705" end="35718" title="Hybridization (chemistry)" label="hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="35911" end="35918" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104567" start="35924" end="35933" title="chalcogen" label="chalcogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q274511" start="36068" end="36081" title="Hybridization (chemistry)" label="hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="36664" end="36669" title="Base (chemistry)" label="basic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="36856" end="36864" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q397226" start="37097" end="37116" title="coordination number" label="coordination number"/>
<link wikidata="Q44793182" start="37644" end="37652" title="Fluoride" label="Fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="37655" end="37664" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492149" start="37667" end="37680" title="hypophosphate" label="hypophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q415631" start="37683" end="37689" title="iodate" label="iodate"/>
<link wikidata="Q418592" start="37695" end="37709" title="phenylarsonate" label="phenylarsonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="37799" end="37808" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123" start="37887" end="37895" title="tantalum" label="tantalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046" start="37903" end="37910" title="niobium" label="niobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q193280" start="38171" end="38186" title="group 6 element" label="group 6 element"/>
<link wikidata="Q899734" start="38239" end="38257" title="non-stoichiometric compound" label="non-stoichiometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="38442" end="38450" title="Oxidizing agent" label="oxidants"/>
<link wikidata="Q421141" start="38490" end="38496" title="uranyl" label="uranyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q131857" start="38657" end="38666" title="hard acid" label="hard acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q237200" start="39094" end="39117" title="organometallic compound" label="organometallic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="39446" end="39467" title="coordination compound" label="coordination compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="39679" end="39687" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q193086" start="39750" end="39756" title="halide" label="halide"/>
<link wikidata="Q428069" start="39762" end="39784" title="intermetallic compound" label="intermetallic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q181898" start="39898" end="39912" title="polymerization" label="polymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q408047" start="40118" end="40130" title="acetonitrile" label="acetonitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q425412" start="40280" end="40287" title="Americium dioxide" label="dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q467666" start="40289" end="40297" title="Americium(IV) fluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40302" end="40311" title="Americium(IV) hydroxide" label="hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144613" start="40714" end="40722" title="Curium(IV) fluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144615" start="40724" end="40731" title="Curium(IV) oxide" label="dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q820875" start="40871" end="40879" title="Berkelium tetrafluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q820876" start="40884" end="40891" title="Berkelium(IV) oxide" label="dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385" start="40955" end="40957" title="Cerium" label="Ce"/>
<link wikidata="Q241906" start="41562" end="41569" title="carbide" label="carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937977" start="41612" end="41616" title="Uranium carbide" label="U2C3"/>
<link wikidata="Q182677" start="41839" end="41849" title="Amphoterism" label="amphoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q425597" start="42041" end="42050" title="hydroxide" label="hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42112" end="42119" title="Plutonium(III) hydroxide" label="Pu(OH)3"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359030" start="42143" end="42150" title="Americium(III) hydroxide" label="Am(OH)3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560768" start="42163" end="42170" title="Curium(III) hydroxide" label="Cm(OH)3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539686" start="42394" end="42410" title="actinium sulfide" label="actinium sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="42473" end="42485" title="cubic system" label="cubic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q413374" start="42498" end="42514" title="calcium fluoride" label="calcium fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="43084" end="43093" title="Catalyst" label="catalyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q415222" start="43544" end="43560" title="uranyl hydroxide" label="uranyl hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="44130" end="44137" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q820865" start="44173" end="44178" title="Berkelium(III) chloride" label="BkCl3"/>
<link wikidata="Q44791900" start="44286" end="44294" title="chloride" label="chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q422423" start="44297" end="44304" title="bromide" label="bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801340" start="44311" end="44317" title="iodide" label="iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q44793182" start="44342" end="44350" title="fluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q131800" start="44421" end="44431" title="Sublimation (phase transition)" label="sublimates"/>
<link wikidata="Q134141" start="44542" end="44556" title="gas centrifuge" label="gas centrifuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138138" start="44560" end="44577" title="gaseous diffusion" label="gaseous diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17992308" start="44627" end="44636" title="anhydride" label="anhydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899704" start="44709" end="44722" title="Uranium pentachloride" label="pentachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899678" start="44733" end="44745" title="Uranium hexachloride" label="hexachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="44945" end="44950" title="Sulfuric acid" label="H2SO4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339326" start="44953" end="44960" title="Uranium(IV) sulfate" label="U(SO4)2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="44979" end="44982" title="Hydrochloric acid" label="HCl"/>
<link wikidata="Q421272" start="44987" end="44992" title="Plutonium(III) chloride" label="PuCl3"/>
<link wikidata="Q425370" start="45429" end="45442" title="Thorium(IV) nitrate" label="Th(NO3)4·6H2O"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45444" end="45457" title="Thorium(IV) sulfate" label="Th(SO4)2·9H2O"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45462" end="45476" title="Plutonium(III) sulfate" label="Pu2(SO4)3·7H2O"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="45772" end="45781" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q44793182" start="45784" end="45792" title="fluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q417351" start="45795" end="45802" title="oxalate" label="oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q415631" start="45805" end="45811" title="iodate" label="iodate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="45817" end="45826" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522890" start="45908" end="45917" title="Thorium(IV) fluoride" label="ThF4·3H2O"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45922" end="45936" title="Thorium(IV) chromate" label="Th(CrO4)2·3H2O"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552125" start="46133" end="46140" title="uranate" label="uranate"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="46235" end="46256" title="coordination compound" label="coordination compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q172290" start="46491" end="46498" title="sulfate" label="sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="46536" end="46543" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q77747995" start="46549" end="46560" title="thiocyanate" label="thiocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q397226" start="46660" end="46679" title="coordination number" label="coordination number"/>
<link wikidata="Q413447" start="46920" end="46933" title="acetylacetone" label="acetylacetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q781080" start="47062" end="47072" title="gas mantle" label="gas mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="47109" end="47123" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q194523" start="47132" end="47136" title="nuclear fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219068" start="47318" end="47333" title="Nuclear chain reaction" label="chain reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="47366" end="47379" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q848497" start="47396" end="47407" title="uranium-235" label="uranium-235"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756060" start="47427" end="47442" title="thermal reactor" label="thermal reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="47538" end="47553" title="thermal neutron" label="thermal neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q208470" start="47738" end="47751" title="critical mass" label="critical mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885290" start="48113" end="48124" title="thorium-232" label="thorium-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q302806" start="48150" end="48168" title="thorium fuel cycle" label="thorium fuel cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668919" start="48170" end="48181" title="uranium-233" label="uranium-233"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369686" start="48354" end="48365" title="Uranium-239" label="Uranium-239"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="48379" end="48386" title="Beta decay" label="β-decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="48716" end="48721" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="48726" end="48735" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="48740" end="48744" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q974850" start="48903" end="48910" title="missile" label="missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327057" start="48935" end="48952" title="electron emission" label="electron emission"/>
<link wikidata="" start="49157" end="49175" title=":Category:Radiometric dating" label="radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="49226" end="49240" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208470" start="49383" end="49396" title="critical mass (nuclear)" label="critical mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q188163" start="49449" end="49456" title="Fat Man" label="Fat Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="49504" end="49521" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062538" start="49750" end="49765" title="Nuclear weapon yield" label="explosive yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="49795" end="49798" title="Trinitrotoluene" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221814" start="49810" end="49831" title="Nuclear weapon design" label="Nuclear weapon design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663606" start="49988" end="50001" title="Plutonium-238" label="Plutonium-238"/>
<link wikidata="Q915693" start="50342" end="50352" title="thermopile" label="thermopile"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="50364" end="50376" title="distillation" label="distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105425030" start="50428" end="50435" title="Galileo (spacecraft)" label="Galileo"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="50440" end="50446" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q178871" start="50464" end="50473" title="Apollo 14" label="Apollo 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="50705" end="50714" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417724" start="50866" end="50878" title="Actinium-227" label="Actinium-227"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="51144" end="51157" title="radioactivity" label="radioactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417724" start="51254" end="51259" title="Actinium-228" label="228Ac"/>
<link wikidata="Q377262" start="51260" end="51265" title="Radium-228" label="228Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q103531" start="51811" end="51821" title="Beta particle" label="β-activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="51826" end="51837" title="Gamma ray" label="γ-radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="51964" end="51974" title="Alpha radiation" label="α-activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881" start="52079" end="52087" title="skeleton" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="52153" end="52158" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q180254" start="52254" end="52264" title="Adsorption" label="Adsorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q229354" start="52477" end="52480" title="Curie (unit)" label="μCi"/>
<link wikidata="Q104541" start="52577" end="52584" title="aerosol" label="aerosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="52622" end="52638" title="hydrocyanic acid" label="hydrocyanic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q711849" start="53066" end="53084" title="median lethal dose" label="median lethal dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128" start="53428" end="53434" title="radium" label="radium"/>
<link wikidata="Q712604" start="53955" end="53971" title="lymphatic system" label="lymphatic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676887" start="54926" end="54954" title="Actinides in the environment" label="Actinides in the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q19569" start="54957" end="54968" title="Lanthanides" label="Lanthanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738321" start="54971" end="54986" title="Major actinides" label="Major actinides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869151" start="54989" end="55004" title="Minor actinides" label="Minor actinides"/>
<link wikidata="Q106844" start="55007" end="55019" title="transuranium" label="Transuranics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2310" wikidata="Q80596" url="?curid=2310" title="Arthur Miller">
<text>Arthur Asher Miller (October 17, 1915 – February 10, 2005) was an American playwright, essayist and screenwriter in the 20th-century American theater. Among his most popular plays are &quot;All My Sons&quot; (1947), &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot; (1949), &quot;The Crucible&quot; (1953), and &quot;A View from the Bridge&quot; (1955). He wrote several screenplays, including &quot;The Misfits&quot; (1961). The drama &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot; is considered one of the best American plays of the 20th century.

Miller was often in the public eye, particularly during the late 1940s, 1950s and early 1960s. During this time, he received a Pulitzer Prize for Drama, testified before the House Un-American Activities Committee, and married Marilyn Monroe. In 1980, he received the St. Louis Literary Award from the Saint Louis University Library Associates. He received the Praemium Imperiale prize in 2001, the Prince of Asturias Award in 2002, and the Jerusalem Prize in 2003, and the Dorothy and Lillian Gish Prize in 1999.

== Early life and education ==
Miller was born in the Harlem area of Manhattan Island, the second of three children of Augusta (Barnett) and Isidore Miller. He was born into a Jewish family of Polish-Jewish descent. His father was born in Radomyśl Wielki, Galicia (then part of Austria-Hungary, now Poland), and his mother was a native of New York whose parents also arrived from that town. Isidore owned a women&#x27;s clothing manufacturing business employing 400 people. He became a well respected man in the community. The family, including Miller&#x27;s younger sister Joan Copeland, lived on West 110th Street in Manhattan, owned a summer house in Far Rockaway, Queens, and employed a chauffeur. In the Wall Street crash of 1929, the family lost almost everything and moved to Gravesend, Brooklyn. According to Peter Applebome, they moved to Midwood.

As a teenager, Miller delivered bread every morning before school to help the family. Miller later published an account of his early years under the title &quot;A Boy Grew in Brooklyn&quot;. After graduating in 1932 from Abraham Lincoln High School, he worked at several menial jobs to pay for his college tuition at the University of Michigan. After graduation (), he worked as a psychiatric aide and copywriter before accepting faculty posts at New York University and University of New Hampshire. On May 1, 1935, he joined the League of American Writers (1935–1943), whose members included Alexander Trachtenberg of International Publishers, Franklin Folsom, Louis Untermeyer, I. F. Stone, Myra Page, Millen Brand, Lillian Hellman and Dashiell Hammett. Members were largely either Communist Party members or fellow travelers.

At the University of Michigan, Miller first majored in journalism and wrote for the student newspaper, &quot;The Michigan Daily&quot;, and the satirical &quot;Gargoyle Humor Magazine&quot;. It was during this time that he wrote his first play, &quot;No Villain&quot;. He switched his major to English, and subsequently won the Avery Hopwood Award for &quot;No Villain.&quot; The award led him to consider that he could have a career as a playwright. He enrolled in a playwriting seminar with the influential Professor Kenneth Rowe, who emphasized how a play was built to achieve its intended effect, or what Miller called &quot;the dynamics of play construction&quot;. Rowe gave Miller realistic feedback and much-needed encouragement, and became a lifelong friend. Miller retained strong ties to his alma mater through the rest of his life, establishing the university&#x27;s Arthur Miller Award in 1985 and the Arthur Miller Award for Dramatic Writing in 1999, and lending his name to the Arthur Miller Theatre in 2000. In 1937, Miller wrote &quot;Honors at Dawn,&quot; which also received the Avery Hopwood Award. After his graduation in 1938, he joined the Federal Theatre Project, a New Deal agency established to provide jobs in the theater. He chose the theater project despite the more lucrative offer to work as a scriptwriter for 20th Century Fox. However, Congress, worried about possible Communist infiltration, closed the project in 1939. Miller began working in the Brooklyn Navy Yard while continuing to write radio plays, some of which were broadcast on CBS.

== Career ==

=== 1940–1949: Early career ===
In 1940, Miller married Mary Grace Slattery. The couple had two children, Jane (born September 7, 1944) and Robert (May 31, 1947 – March 6, 2022). Miller was exempted from military service during World War II because of a high school football injury to his left kneecap. In 1944 Miller&#x27;s first play was produced: &quot;The Man Who Had All the Luck&quot; won the Theatre Guild&#x27;s National Award. The play closed after four performances with disastrous reviews.

In 1947, Miller&#x27;s play &quot;All My Sons&quot;, the writing of which had commenced in 1941, was a success on Broadway (earning him his first Tony Award, for Best Author) and his reputation as a playwright was established. Years later, in a 1994 interview with Ron Rifkin, Miller said that most contemporary critics regarded &quot;All My Sons&quot; as &quot;a very depressing play in a time of great optimism&quot; and that positive reviews from Brooks Atkinson of &quot;The New York Times&quot; had saved it from failure.

In 1948, Miller built a small studio in Roxbury, Connecticut. There, in less than a day, he wrote Act I of &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot;. Within six weeks, he completed the rest of the play, one of the classics of world theater. &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot; premiered on Broadway on February 10, 1949, at the Morosco Theatre, directed by Elia Kazan, and starring Lee J. Cobb as Willy Loman, Mildred Dunnock as Linda, Arthur Kennedy as Biff, and Cameron Mitchell as Happy. The play was commercially successful and critically acclaimed, winning a Tony Award for Best Author, the New York Drama Circle Critics&#x27; Award, and the Pulitzer Prize for Drama. It was the first play to win all three of these major awards. The play was performed 742 times.

In 1949, Miller exchanged letters with Eugene O&#x27;Neill regarding Miller&#x27;s production of &quot;All My Sons&quot;. O&#x27;Neill had sent Miller a congratulatory telegram; in response, he wrote a letter that consisted of a few paragraphs detailing his gratitude for the telegram, apologizing for not responding earlier, and inviting Eugene to the opening of &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot;. O&#x27;Neill replied, accepting the apology, but declining the invitation, explaining that his Parkinson&#x27;s disease made it difficult to travel. He ended the letter with an invitation to Boston, a trip that never occurred.

=== 1950–1963: Critical years and HUAC controversy ===
In 1952, Elia Kazan appeared before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC). Kazan named eight members of the Group Theatre, including Clifford Odets, Paula Strasberg, Lillian Hellman, J. Edward Bromberg, and John Garfield, who in recent years had been fellow members of the Communist Party. Miller and Kazan were close friends throughout the late 1940s and early 1950s, but after Kazan&#x27;s testimony to the HUAC, the pair&#x27;s friendship ended. After speaking with Kazan about his testimony, Miller traveled to Salem, Massachusetts, to research the witch trials of 1692. He and Kazan did not speak to each other for the next ten years. Kazan later defended his own actions through his film &quot;On the Waterfront&quot;, in which a dockworker heroically testifies against a corrupt union boss. Miller would retaliate against Kazan&#x27;s work by writing &quot;A View from the Bridge&quot;, a play where a longshoreman outs his co-workers motivated only by jealousy and greed. He sent a copy of the initial script to Kazan and when the director asked in jest to direct the movie, Miller replied &quot;I only sent you the script to let you know what I think of stool-pigeons.&quot;

In &quot;The Crucible&quot;, which was first performed at the Martin Beck Theatre on Broadway on January 22, 1953, Miller likened the situation with the House Un-American Activities Committee to the witch hunt in Salem in 1692. Though widely considered only somewhat successful at the time of its release, &quot;The Crucible&quot; is Miller&#x27;s most frequently produced work throughout the world. It was adapted into an opera by Robert Ward in 1961. Earlier in 1955, a one-act version of Miller&#x27;s verse drama, titled &quot;A View from the Bridge&quot;, opened on Broadway in a joint bill with one of Miller&#x27;s lesser-known plays, &quot;A Memory of Two Mondays&quot;. The following year, Miller revised &quot;A View from the Bridge&quot; as a two-act prose drama, which Peter Brook directed in London. A French-Italian co-production &quot;Vu du pont&quot;, based on the play, was released in 1962.

The HUAC took an interest in Miller himself not long after &quot;The Crucible&quot; opened, engineering the US State Department&#x27;s denying him a passport to attend the play&#x27;s London opening in 1954. When Miller applied in 1956 for a routine renewal of his passport, the House Un-American Activities Committee used this opportunity to subpoena him to appear before the committee. Before appearing, Miller asked the committee not to ask him to name names, to which the chairman, Francis E. Walter (D-PA) agreed. When Miller attended the hearing, to which Monroe accompanied him, risking her own career, he gave the committee a detailed account of his political activities. Reneging on the chairman&#x27;s promise, the committee demanded the names of friends and colleagues who had participated in similar activities. Miller refused to comply, saying &quot;I could not use the name of another person and bring trouble on him.&quot; As a result, a judge found Miller guilty of contempt of Congress in May 1957. Miller was sentenced to a fine and a prison sentence, blacklisted from Hollywood, and disallowed a US passport. In August 1958, his conviction was overturned by the court of appeals, which ruled that Miller had been misled by the chairman of the HUAC.

Miller&#x27;s experience with the HUAC affected him throughout his life. In the late 1970s, he joined other celebrities (including William Styron and Mike Nichols) who were brought together by the journalist Joan Barthel. Barthel&#x27;s coverage of the highly publicized Barbara Gibbons murder case helped raise bail for Gibbons&#x27; son Peter Reilly, who had been convicted of his mother&#x27;s murder based on what many felt was a coerced confession and little other evidence. Barthel documented the case in her book &quot;A Death in Canaan&quot;, which was made as a television film of the same name and broadcast in 1978. &quot;City Confidential&quot;, an A&amp;E Network series, produced an episode about the murder, postulating that part of the reason Miller took such an active interest (including supporting Reilly&#x27;s defense and using his own celebrity to bring attention to Reilly&#x27;s plight) was because he had felt similarly persecuted in his run-ins with the HUAC. He sympathized with Reilly, whom he firmly believed to be innocent and to have been railroaded by the Connecticut State Police and the Attorney General who had initially prosecuted the case.

Miller began work on writing the screenplay for &quot;The Misfits&quot; in 1960, directed by John Huston and starring Monroe. It was during the filming that Miller&#x27;s and Monroe&#x27;s relationship hit difficulties, and he later said that the filming was one of the lowest points in his life. Monroe was taking drugs to help her sleep and other drugs to help her wake up, arriving on the set late, and having trouble remembering her lines. Huston was unaware that Miller and Monroe were having problems in their private life. He recalled later, &quot;I was impertinent enough to say to Arthur that to allow her to take drugs of any kind was criminal and utterly irresponsible. Shortly after that I realized that she wouldn&#x27;t listen to Arthur at all; he had no say over her actions.&quot;

Shortly before the film&#x27;s premiere in 1961, Miller and Monroe divorced after five years of marriage. Nineteen months later, on August 5, 1962, Monroe died of a likely drug overdose. Huston, who had also directed her in her first major role in &quot;The Asphalt Jungle&quot; in 1950, and who had seen her rise to stardom, put the blame for her death on her doctors as opposed to the stresses of being a star: &quot;The girl was an addict of sleeping pills and she was made so by the God-damn doctors. It had nothing to do with the Hollywood set-up.&quot;

=== 1964–2004: Later career ===
In 1964, &quot;After the Fall&quot; was produced, and is said to be a deeply personal view of Miller&#x27;s experiences during his marriage to Monroe. It reunited Miller with his former friend Kazan; they collaborated on the script and direction. It opened on January 23, 1964, at the ANTA Theatre in Washington Square Park amid a flurry of publicity and outrage at putting a Monroe-like character, Maggie, on stage. Robert Brustein, in a review in the &quot;New Republic&quot;, called &quot;After the Fall&quot; &quot;a three and one half hour breach of taste, a confessional autobiography of embarrassing explicitness ... There is a misogynistic strain in the play which the author does not seem to recognize. ... He has created a shameless piece of tabloid gossip, an act of exhibitionism which makes us all voyeurs ... a wretched piece of dramatic writing.&quot; That year, Miller produced &quot;Incident at Vichy&quot;. In 1965, he was elected the first American president of PEN International, a position which he held for four years. A year later, he organized the 1966 PEN congress in New York City. He also wrote the penetrating family drama &quot;The Price&quot;, produced in 1968. It was his most successful play since &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot;.

In 1968, Miller attended the Democratic National Convention as a delegate for Eugene McCarthy. In 1969, Miller&#x27;s works were banned in the Soviet Union after he campaigned for the freedom of dissident writers. Throughout the 1970s, he spent much of his time experimenting with the theatre, producing one-act plays such as &quot;Fame&quot; and &quot;The Reason Why&quot;, and traveling with his wife, producing &quot;In the Country&quot; and &quot;Chinese Encounters&quot; with her. Both his 1972 comedy &quot;The Creation of the World and Other Business&quot; and its musical adaptation, &quot;Up from Paradise&quot;, were critical and commercial failures.

Miller was an unusually articulate commentator on his own work. In 1978, he published a collection of his &quot;Theater Essays&quot;, edited by Robert A. Martin and with a foreword by Miller. Highlights of the collection included Miller&#x27;s introduction to his &quot;Collected Plays&quot;, his reflections on the theory of tragedy, comments on the McCarthy Era, and pieces arguing for a publicly supported theater. Reviewing this collection in the &quot;Chicago Tribune,&quot; Studs Terkel remarked, &quot;In reading [the &quot;Theater Essays&quot;] ... you are exhilaratingly aware of a social critic, as well as a playwright, who knows what he&#x27;s talking about.&quot;

In 1983, Miller traveled to China to produce and direct &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot; at the People&#x27;s Art Theatre in Beijing. It was a success in China and in 1984, &quot;Salesman in Beijing&quot;, a book about Miller&#x27;s experiences in Beijing, was published. Around the same time, &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot; was adapted into a television film starring Dustin Hoffman as Willy Loman. The film was broadcast on CBS, and garnered an audience viewership of 25 million. In late 1987, Miller&#x27;s autobiographical work, &quot;Timebends&quot;, was published. Before it was published, it was well known that Miller would not talk about Monroe in interviews; however, in the book, he wrote extensively in detail about his experiences with Monroe.

During the early 1990s, Miller wrote three new plays: &quot;The Ride Down Mt. Morgan&quot; (1991), &quot;The Last Yankee&quot; (1992), and &quot;Broken Glass&quot; (1994). In 1996, a film adaptation of &quot;The Crucible&quot; starring Daniel Day-Lewis, Paul Scofield, Bruce Davison and Winona Ryder was released. Miller spent much of 1996 working on the screenplay.

&quot;Mr. Peters&#x27; Connections&quot; was staged Off-Broadway in 1998, and &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot; was revived on Broadway in 1999 to celebrate its 50th anniversary. The 1999 revival ran for 274 performances at the Eugene O&#x27;Neill Theatre, starring Brian Dennehy as Willy Loman. Once again, it was a large critical success, winning a Tony Award for Best Revival of a Play.

In 1993, Miller received the National Medal of Arts. He was honored with the PEN/Laura Pels Theater Award for a Master American Dramatist in 1998. In 2001, the National Endowment for the Humanities selected him for the Jefferson Lecture, the U.S. federal government&#x27;s highest honor for achievement in the humanities. His lecture, &quot;On Politics and the Art of Acting&quot;, analyzed political events (including the U.S. presidential election of 2000)
in terms of the &quot;arts of performance&quot;. It drew attacks from some conservatives such as Jay Nordlinger, who called it &quot;a disgrace&quot;; and George Will, who argued that Miller was not a legitimate &quot;scholar&quot;.

In October 1999, Miller received The Dorothy and Lillian Gish Prize, given annually to &quot;a man or woman who has made an outstanding contribution to the beauty of the world and to mankind&#x27;s enjoyment and understanding of life&quot;. Additionally in 1999, San Jose State University honored Miller with the John Steinbeck &quot;In the Souls of the People&quot; Award, which is given to those who capture &quot;Steinbeck&#x27;s empathy, commitment to democratic values, and belief in the dignity of people who by circumstance are pushed to the fringes.&quot; In 2001, he received the National Book Foundation&#x27;s Medal for Distinguished Contribution to American Letters. On May 1, 2002, he received Spain&#x27;s Principe de Asturias Prize for Literature as &quot;the undisputed master of modern drama&quot;. Later that year, Ingeborg Morath died of lymphatic cancer at the age of 78. The following year, Miller won the Jerusalem Prize.

In December 2004, 89-year-old Miller announced that he had been in love with 34-year-old minimalist painter Agnes Barley and had been living with her at his Connecticut farm since 2002, and that they intended to marry. 
Miller&#x27;s final play, &quot;Finishing the Picture&quot;, opened at the Goodman Theatre, Chicago, in the fall of 2004, with one character said to be based on Barley. It was reportedly based on his experience during the filming of &quot;The Misfits&quot;, though Miller insisted the play was a work of fiction with independent characters that were no more than composite shadows of history.

== Personal life ==
=== Marriages and family ===
In June 1956, Miller left his first wife, Mary Slattery, whom he had married in 1940, and wed film star Marilyn Monroe. They met in 1951, had a brief affair, and remained in contact. Monroe had just turned 30 when they married; she never had a real family of her own and was eager to join the family of her new husband.

Monroe began to reconsider her career and the fact that trying to manage it made her feel helpless. She admitted to Miller, &quot;I hate Hollywood. I don&#x27;t want it any more. I want to live quietly in the country and just be there when you need me. I can&#x27;t fight for myself any more.&quot; Monroe converted to Judaism to &quot;express her loyalty and get close to both Miller and his parents&quot;, writes biographer Jeffrey Meyers. She told her close friend, Susan Strasberg: &quot;I can identify with the Jews. Everybody&#x27;s always out to get them, no matter what they do, like me.&quot; Soon after Monroe converted, Egypt banned all of her movies. Away from Hollywood and the culture of celebrity, Monroe&#x27;s life became more normal; she began cooking, keeping house, and giving Miller more attention and affection than he had been used to.

Later that year, Miller was subpoenaed by the House Un-American Activities Committee, and Monroe accompanied him. In her personal notes, she wrote about her worries during this period:
During the filming of the 1961 film &quot;The Misfits&quot;, which Miller wrote the script for, Miller and Monroe&#x27;s marriage dissolved. Monroe obtained a &quot;Mexican divorce&quot; from Miller in January 1961.

In February 1962, Miller married photographer Inge Morath, who had worked as a photographer documenting the production of &quot;The Misfits&quot;. The first of their two children, Rebecca, was born September 15, 1962. Their son Daniel was born with Down syndrome in November 1966. Against his wife&#x27;s wishes, Miller had him institutionalized, first at a home for infants in New York City, then at the Southbury Training School in Connecticut. Though Morath visited Daniel often, Miller never visited him at the school and rarely spoke of him. Miller and Inge remained together until her death in 2002. Miller&#x27;s son-in-law, actor Daniel Day-Lewis, is said to have visited Daniel frequently and to have persuaded Miller to meet with him.

=== Death ===
Miller died on the evening of February 10, 2005 (the 56th anniversary of the Broadway debut of &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot;) at age 89 of bladder cancer and heart failure, at his home in Roxbury, Connecticut. He had been in hospice care at his sister&#x27;s apartment in New York since his release from hospital the previous month. He was surrounded by his companion (the painter Agnes Barley), family, and friends. His body was interred at Roxbury Center Cemetery in Roxbury. Within hours of her father&#x27;s death, Rebecca Miller, who had been consistently opposed to the relationship with Barley, ordered her to vacate the home she shared with Arthur.

== Legacy ==
Miller&#x27;s writing career spanned over seven decades, and at the time of his death, he was considered one of the 20th century&#x27;s greatest dramatists. After his death, many respected actors, directors, and producers paid tribute to him, some calling him the last great practitioner of the American stage, and Broadway theatres darkened their lights in a show of respect.
Miller&#x27;s alma mater, the University of Michigan, opened the Arthur Miller Theatre in March 2007. Per his express wish, it is the only theater in the world that bears his name.

Miller&#x27;s letters, notes, drafts and other papers are housed at the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center at the University of Texas at Austin. Miller is also a member of the American Theater Hall of Fame. He was inducted in 1979. In 1993, he received the Four Freedoms Award for Freedom of Speech. In 2017, his daughter, Rebecca Miller, a writer and filmmaker, completed a documentary about her father&#x27;s life, &quot;Arthur Miller: Writer&quot;. Minor planet 3769 Arthurmiller is named after him. In the 2022 Netflix film &quot;Blonde&quot;, Miller was portrayed by Adrien Brody.

=== Foundation ===
The Arthur Miller Foundation was founded to honor the legacy of Miller and the New York City Public School education. Its mission is &quot;Promoting increased access and equity to theater arts education in our schools and increasing the number of students receiving theater arts education as an integral part of their academic curriculum.&quot; Its other initiatives include certification of new theater teachers and their placement in public schools, increasing the number of theater teachers in the system from the current estimate of 180 teachers in 1800 schools, supporting professional development of all certified theater teachers, and providing teaching artists, cultural partners, physical spaces, and theater ticket allocations for students. The foundation&#x27;s primary purpose is to provide arts education in the New York City school system. Its current chancellor is Carmen Farina, a prominent proponent of the Common Core State Standards Initiative. The Master Arts Council includes Alec Baldwin, Ellen Barkin, Bradley Cooper, Dustin Hoffman, Scarlett Johansson, Tony Kushner, Julianne Moore, Michael Moore, Liam Neeson, David O. Russell, and Liev Schreiber. Miller&#x27;s son-in-law, Daniel Day-Lewis, has served on the current board of directors since 2016.

The foundation celebrated Miller&#x27;s 100th birthday with a one-night performance of his seminal works in November 2015. The Arthur Miller Foundation currently supports a pilot program in theater and film at the public school Quest to Learn, in partnership with the Institute of Play. The model is being used as an in-school elective theater class and lab. Its objective is to create a sustainable theater education model to disseminate to teachers at professional development workshops.

=== Archive ===
Miller donated thirteen boxes of his earliest manuscripts to the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin in 1961 and 1962. This collection included the original handwritten notebooks and early typed drafts for &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot;, &quot;The Crucible&quot;, &quot;All My Sons&quot;, and other works. In January 2018, the Ransom Center announced the acquisition of the remainder of the Miller archive, totaling over 200 boxes. The full archive opened in November 2019.

=== Literary and public criticism ===
Christopher Bigsby wrote &quot;Arthur Miller: The Definitive Biography&quot; based on boxes of papers Miller made available to him before his death in 2005. The book was published in November 2008, and is reported to reveal unpublished works in which Miller &quot;bitterly attack[ed] the injustices of American racism long before it was taken up by the civil rights movement&quot;. In his book &quot;Trinity of Passion&quot;, author Alan M. Wald conjectures that Miller was &quot;a member of a writer&#x27;s unit of the Communist Party around 1946&quot;, using the pseudonym Matt Wayne, and editing a drama column in the magazine &quot;The New Masses&quot;.

In 1999, the writer Christopher Hitchens attacked Miller for comparing the Monica Lewinsky investigation to the Salem witch hunt. Miller had asserted a parallel between the examination of physical evidence on Lewinsky&#x27;s dress and the examinations of women&#x27;s bodies for signs of the &quot;Devil&#x27;s Marks&quot; in Salem. Hitchens scathingly disputed the parallel. In his memoir, &quot;Hitch-22&quot;, Hitchens bitterly noted that Miller, despite his prominence as a left-wing intellectual, had failed to support author Salman Rushdie during the Iranian fatwa involving &quot;The Satanic Verses&quot;.

== Works ==
=== Stage plays ===

* &quot;No Villain&quot; (1936)
* &quot;They Too Arise&quot; (1937, based on &quot;No Villain&quot;)
* &quot;Honors at Dawn&quot; (1938, based on &quot;They Too Arise&quot;)
* &quot;The Grass Still Grows&quot; (1938, based on &quot;They Too Arise&quot;)
* &quot;The Great Disobedience&quot; (1938)
* &quot;Listen My Children&quot; (1939, with Norman Rosten)
* &quot;The Golden Years&quot; (1940)
* &quot;The Half-Bridge&quot; (1943)
* &quot;The Man Who Had All the Luck&quot; (1944)
* &quot;All My Sons&quot; (1947)
* &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot; (1949)
* &quot;An Enemy of the People&quot; (1950, adaptation of Henrik Ibsen&#x27;s play &quot;An Enemy of the People&quot;)
* &quot;The Crucible&quot; (1953)
* &quot;A View from the Bridge&quot; (1955)
* &quot;A Memory of Two Mondays&quot; (1955)
* &quot;After the Fall&quot; (1964)
* &quot;Incident at Vichy&quot; (1964)
* &quot;The Price&quot; (1968)
* &quot;The Reason Why&quot; (1970)
* &quot;Fame&quot; (one-act, 1970; revised for television 1978)
* &quot;The Creation of the World and Other Business&quot; (1972)
* &quot;Up from Paradise&quot; (1974)
* &quot;The Archbishop&#x27;s Ceiling&quot; (1977)
* &quot;The American Clock&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Playing for Time&quot; (television play, 1980)
* &quot;Elegy for a Lady&quot; (short play, 1982, first part of &quot;Two Way Mirror&quot;)
* &quot;Some Kind of Love Story&quot; (short play, 1982, second part of &quot;Two Way Mirror&quot;)
* &quot;I Think About You a Great Deal&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Playing for Time&quot; (stage version, 1985)
* &quot;I Can&#x27;t Remember Anything&quot; (1987, collected in &quot;Danger: Memory!&quot;)
* &quot;Clara&quot; (1987, collected in &quot;Danger: Memory!&quot;)
* &quot;The Ride Down Mt. Morgan&quot; (1991)
* &quot;The Last Yankee&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Broken Glass&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Mr. Peters&#x27; Connections&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Resurrection Blues&quot; (2002)
* &quot;Finishing the Picture&quot; (2004)

=== Radio plays ===
* &quot;The Pussycat and the Expert Plumber Who Was a Man&quot; (1940)
* &quot;Joel Chandler Harris&quot; (1941)
* &quot;The Battle of the Ovens&quot; (1942)
* &quot;Thunder from the Mountains&quot; (1942)
* &quot;I Was Married in Bataan&quot; (1942)
* &quot;That They May Win&quot; (1943)
* &quot;Listen for the Sound of Wings&quot; (1943)
* &quot;Bernardine&quot; (1944)
* &quot;I Love You&quot; (1944)
* &quot;Grandpa and the Statue&quot; (1944)
* &quot;The Philippines Never Surrendered&quot; (1944)
* &quot;The Guardsman&quot; (1944, based on Ferenc Molnár&#x27;s play)
* &quot;The Story of Gus&quot; (1947)

=== Screenplays ===
* &quot;The Hook&quot; (1947)
* &quot;All My Sons&quot; (1948)
* &quot;Let&#x27;s Make Love&quot; (1960)
* &quot;The Misfits&quot; (1961)
* &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Everybody Wins&quot; (1990)
* &quot;The Crucible&quot; (1996)

=== Assorted fiction ===
* &quot;Focus&quot; (novel, 1945)
* &quot;The Misfits&quot; (short story, published in &quot;Esquire&quot;, October 1957)
* &quot;I Don&#x27;t Need You Anymore&quot; (short stories, 1967)
* &quot;Homely Girl: A Life&quot; (short story, 1992, published in UK as &quot;Plain Girl: A Life&quot; 1995)
* &quot;Presence: Stories&quot; (2007) (short stories include &quot;The Bare Manuscript&quot;, &quot;Beavers&quot;, &quot;The Performance&quot;, and &quot;Bulldog&quot;)
=== Non-fiction ===
* &quot;Situation Normal&quot; (1944) is based on his experiences researching the war correspondence of Ernie Pyle.
* &quot;In Russia&quot; (1969), the first of three books created with his photographer wife Inge Morath, offers Miller&#x27;s impressions of Russia and Russian society.
* &quot;In the Country&quot; (1977), with photographs by Morath and text by Miller, provides insight into how Miller spent his time in Roxbury, Connecticut, and profiles of his various neighbors.
* &quot;Chinese Encounters&quot; (1979) is a travel journal with photographs by Morath. It depicts the Chinese society in the state of flux which followed the end of the Cultural Revolution. Miller discusses the hardships of many writers, professors, and artists during Mao Zedong&#x27;s regime.
* &quot;Salesman in Beijing&quot; (1984) details Miller&#x27;s experiences with the 1983 Beijing People&#x27;s Theatre production of &quot;Death of a Salesman&quot;. He describes directing a Chinese cast in an American play.
* &quot;Timebends: A Life&quot;, Methuen London (1987) . Miller&#x27;s autobiography.
* &quot;On Politics and the Art of Acting&quot;, Viking 2001 {ISBN 0-670-030-422} an 85-page essay about the thespian skills in American politics, comparing FDR, JFK, Reagan, Clinton.

=== Collections ===
* Abbotson, Susan C. W. (ed.), &quot;Arthur Miller: Collected Essays&quot;, Penguin 2016 
* Kushner, Tony, ed. &quot;Arthur Miller, Collected Plays 1944–1961&quot; (Library of America, 2006) .
* Martin, Robert A. (ed.), &quot;The theater essays of Arthur Miller&quot;, foreword by Arthur Miller. NY: Viking Press, 1978 

== References ==
=== Bibliography ===
* Bigsby, Christopher (ed.), &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Arthur Miller&quot;, Cambridge 1997 
* Gottfried, Martin, &quot;Arthur Miller, A Life&quot;, Da Capo Press (US)/Faber and Faber (UK), 2003 
* Koorey, Stefani, &quot;Arthur Miller&#x27;s Life and Literature&quot;, Scarecrow, 2000 
* Moss, Leonard. &quot;Arthur Miller&quot;, Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1980.

== Further reading ==
* &quot;Critical Companion to Arthur Miller&quot;, Susan Greenwood (2007)
* &quot;Student Companion to Arthur Miller&quot;, Susan C. W. Abbotson, Facts on File (2000)
* &quot;File on Miller&quot;, Christopher Bigsby (1988)
* &quot;Arthur Miller &amp; Company&quot;, Christopher Bigsby, editor (1990)
* &quot;Arthur Miller: A Critical Study&quot;, Christopher Bigsby (2005)
* &quot;Remembering Arthur Miller&quot;, Christopher Bigsby, editor (2005)
* &quot;Arthur Miller 1915–1962&quot;, Christopher Bigsby (2008, U.K.; 2009, U.S.)
* &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Arthur Miller (Cambridge Companions to Literature)&quot;, Christopher Bigsby, editor (1998, updated and republished 2010)
* &quot;Arthur Miller 1962–2005&quot;, Christopher Bigsby (2011)
* &quot;Arthur Miller: Critical Insights&quot;, Brenda Murphy, editor, Salem (2011)
* &quot;Understanding Death of a Salesman&quot;, Brenda Murphy and Susan C. W. Abbotson, Greenwood (1999)

Critical articles
* &quot;Arthur Miller Journal&quot;, published biannually by Penn State UP. Vol. 1.1 (2006)
* Radavich, David. &quot;Arthur Miller&#x27;s Sojourn in the Heartland&quot;. &quot;American Drama&quot; 16:2 (Summer 2007): 28–45.

== External links ==
Organizations
* Arthur Miller official website
* Arthur Miller Society
* The Arthur Miller Foundation
Archive
* Arthur Miller Papers at the Harry Ransom Center
* &quot;Playwright Arthur Miller&#x27;s archive comes to the Harry Ransom Center&quot;
* Finding aid to Arthur Miller papers at Columbia University. Rare Book &amp; Manuscript Library.
Databases
* 
Websites
* 
* A Visit With Castro – Miller&#x27;s article in &quot;The Nation&quot;, January 12, 2004
* Joyce Carol Oates on Arthur Miller
* Arthur Miller Biography
*Arthur Miller and Mccarthyism

Interviews
* 
* Miller interview, &quot;Humanities&quot;, March–April 2001

Obituaries
* &quot;The New York Times&quot; Obituary
* NPR obituary
* CNN obituary</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="0" end="19" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Asher Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133175" start="133" end="149" title="Theater in the United States" label="American theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837516" start="190" end="201" title="All My Sons" label="All My Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q820862" start="222" end="241" title="Death of a Salesman" label="Death of a Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183443" start="262" end="274" title="The Crucible" label="The Crucible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916798" start="299" end="321" title="A View from the Bridge" label="A View from the Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q645574" start="382" end="393" title="The Misfits (1961 film)" label="The Misfits"/>
<link wikidata="Q289214" start="644" end="668" title="Pulitzer Prize for Drama" label="Pulitzer Prize for Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="691" end="729" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="743" end="757" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589655" start="784" end="808" title="St. Louis Literary Award" label="St. Louis Literary Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q734774" start="818" end="840" title="Saint Louis University" label="Saint Louis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q268670" start="877" end="895" title="Praemium Imperiale" label="Praemium Imperiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q329157" start="915" end="939" title="Prince of Asturias Award" label="Prince of Asturias Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q277787" start="957" end="972" title="Jerusalem Prize" label="Jerusalem Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q742440" start="990" end="1020" title="Dorothy and Lillian Gish Prize" label="Dorothy and Lillian Gish Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="1085" end="1091" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1207" end="1213" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="1224" end="1237" title="Polish Jews" label="Polish-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q867431" start="1270" end="1285" title="Radomyśl Wielki" label="Radomyśl Wielki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396442" start="1287" end="1294" title="Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="1309" end="1324" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846284" start="1605" end="1618" title="Joan Copeland" label="Joan Copeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q655136" start="1634" end="1646" title="110th Street (Manhattan)" label="110th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q62460" start="1685" end="1705" title="Far Rockaway, Queens" label="Far Rockaway, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="1740" end="1765" title="Wall Street crash of 1929" label="Wall Street crash of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238884" start="1814" end="1833" title="Gravesend, Brooklyn" label="Gravesend, Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172548" start="1848" end="1863" title="Peter Applebome" label="Peter Applebome"/>
<link wikidata="Q13856437" start="1879" end="1886" title="Midwood, Brooklyn" label="Midwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669021" start="2110" end="2137" title="Abraham Lincoln High School (Brooklyn)" label="Abraham Lincoln High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="2210" end="2232" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="2336" end="2355" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49207" start="2360" end="2387" title="University of New Hampshire" label="University of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508992" start="2419" end="2445" title="League of American Writers" label="League of American Writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720246" start="2482" end="2504" title="Alexander Trachtenberg" label="Alexander Trachtenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052607" start="2508" end="2532" title="International Publishers" label="International Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q59531931" start="2534" end="2549" title="Franklin Folsom" label="Franklin Folsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872015" start="2551" end="2567" title="Louis Untermeyer" label="Louis Untermeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916247" start="2569" end="2580" title="I. F. Stone" label="I. F. Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43476863" start="2582" end="2591" title="Myra Page" label="Myra Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858736" start="2593" end="2605" title="Millen Brand" label="Millen Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q233701" start="2607" end="2622" title="Lillian Hellman" label="Lillian Hellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q186335" start="2627" end="2643" title="Dashiell Hammett" label="Dashiell Hammett"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="2673" end="2688" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752720" start="2700" end="2716" title="fellow travelers" label="fellow travelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="2774" end="2784" title="journalism" label="journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751250" start="2828" end="2846" title="The Michigan Daily" label="The Michigan Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523202" start="2878" end="2901" title="Gargoyle Humor Magazine" label="Gargoyle Humor Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16888310" start="2969" end="2979" title="No Villain" label="No Villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="3012" end="3019" title="English studies" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q570707" start="3046" end="3065" title="Hopwood Award" label="Avery Hopwood Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390747" start="3227" end="3249" title="Kenneth Thorpe Rowe" label="Professor Kenneth Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5897097" start="3769" end="3783" title="Honors at Dawn" label="Honors at Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440463" start="3880" end="3903" title="Federal Theatre Project" label="Federal Theatre Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="3907" end="3915" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="4059" end="4075" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="4086" end="4094" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q524435" start="4199" end="4217" title="Brooklyn Navy Yard" label="Brooklyn Navy Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="4244" end="4255" title="radio plays" label="radio plays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022995" start="4289" end="4292" title="CBS Radio" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="4575" end="4583" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749937" start="4665" end="4693" title="The Man Who Had All the Luck" label="The Man Who Had All the Luck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837516" start="4845" end="4856" title="All My Sons" label="All My Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="4925" end="4933" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="4957" end="4967" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821794" start="4969" end="4984" title="Tony Award for Best Author" label="for Best Author"/>
<link wikidata="Q352547" start="5076" end="5086" title="Ron Rifkin" label="Ron Rifkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q343916" start="5261" end="5276" title="Brooks Atkinson" label="Brooks Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5286" end="5304" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076302" start="5379" end="5399" title="Roxbury, Connecticut" label="Roxbury, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q820862" start="5452" end="5471" title="Death of a Salesman" label="Death of a Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913281" start="5653" end="5668" title="Morosco Theatre" label="Morosco Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q72717" start="5682" end="5692" title="Elia Kazan" label="Elia Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q348351" start="5707" end="5718" title="Lee J. Cobb" label="Lee J. Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022573" start="5722" end="5733" title="Willy Loman" label="Willy Loman"/>
<link wikidata="Q271890" start="5735" end="5750" title="Mildred Dunnock" label="Mildred Dunnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q351838" start="5761" end="5775" title="Arthur Kennedy" label="Arthur Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q493340" start="5789" end="5805" title="Cameron Mitchell (actor)" label="Cameron Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821794" start="5889" end="5915" title="Tony Award for Best Author" label="Tony Award for Best Author"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711507" start="5921" end="5962" title="New York Drama Critics&amp;#x27; Circle" label="New York Drama Circle Critics&amp;#x27; Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566604" start="5972" end="5986" title="1949 Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q93157" start="6134" end="6153" title="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Eugene O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="6587" end="6611" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="6683" end="6689" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q72717" start="6784" end="6794" title="Elia Kazan" label="Elia Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="6815" end="6853" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q378577" start="6895" end="6908" title="Group Theatre (New York City)" label="Group Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q734944" start="6920" end="6934" title="Clifford Odets" label="Clifford Odets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805151" start="6936" end="6951" title="Paula Strasberg" label="Paula Strasberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q233701" start="6953" end="6968" title="Lillian Hellman" label="Lillian Hellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156798" start="6970" end="6988" title="J. Edward Bromberg" label="J. Edward Bromberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q367053" start="6994" end="7007" title="John Garfield" label="John Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="7060" end="7075" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="7302" end="7322" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="7340" end="7360" title="Salem witch trials" label="witch trials of 1692"/>
<link wikidata="Q211372" start="7487" end="7504" title="On the Waterfront" label="On the Waterfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916798" start="7651" end="7673" title="A View from the Bridge" label="A View from the Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364673" start="7950" end="7963" title="stool-pigeons" label="stool-pigeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183443" start="7981" end="7993" title="The Crucible" label="The Crucible"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="8125" end="8163" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="8167" end="8198" title="Salem witch trials" label="the witch hunt in Salem in 1692"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728247" start="8392" end="8400" title="The Crucible (opera)" label="an opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695243" start="8404" end="8415" title="Robert Ward (composer)" label="Robert Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194583" start="8444" end="8459" title="One-act play" label="one-act version"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370860" start="8477" end="8488" title="Verse drama and dramatic verse" label="verse drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916798" start="8503" end="8525" title="A View from the Bridge" label="A View from the Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="8543" end="8551" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658201" start="8620" end="8643" title="A Memory of Two Mondays" label="A Memory of Two Mondays"/>
<link wikidata="Q676" start="8734" end="8739" title="prose" label="prose"/>
<link wikidata="Q49760" start="8753" end="8764" title="Peter Brook" label="Peter Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563739" start="8822" end="8832" title="A View from the Bridge (film)" label="Vu du pont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066909" start="9147" end="9155" title="United States passport" label="passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="9161" end="9199" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="9225" end="9233" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480815" start="9368" end="9385" title="Francis E. Walter" label="Francis E. Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165041" start="9864" end="9884" title="contempt of Congress" label="contempt of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864771" start="9952" end="9978" title="Hollywood blacklist" label="blacklisted from Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q245257" start="10282" end="10296" title="William Styron" label="William Styron"/>
<link wikidata="Q51537" start="10301" end="10313" title="Mike Nichols" label="Mike Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10422" end="10449" title="Catherine Roraback#Peter Reilly murder case" label="Barbara Gibbons murder case"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656359" start="10722" end="10754" title="A Death in Canaan" label="television film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123126" start="10784" end="10801" title="City Confidential" label="City Confidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q277561" start="10812" end="10827" title="A&amp;amp;E Network" label="A&amp;amp;E Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993434" start="11239" end="11263" title="Connecticut State Police" label="Connecticut State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q645574" start="11383" end="11394" title="The Misfits (1961 film)" label="The Misfits"/>
<link wikidata="Q51575" start="11422" end="11433" title="John Huston" label="John Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q728485" start="12381" end="12399" title="The Asphalt Jungle" label="The Asphalt Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q62962" start="12572" end="12586" title="Hypnotic" label="sleeping pills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761217" start="12734" end="12748" title="After the Fall (play)" label="After the Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053066" start="13004" end="13016" title="ANTA Theatre" label="ANTA Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q909592" start="13020" end="13042" title="Washington Square Park" label="Washington Square Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329873" start="13178" end="13190" title="The New Republic" label="New Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014560" start="13619" end="13636" title="Incident at Vichy" label="Incident at Vichy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206811" start="13700" end="13717" title="PEN International" label="PEN International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758127" start="13876" end="13885" title="The Price (play)" label="The Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q83516" start="14012" end="14042" title="1968 Democratic National Convention" label="Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q380550" start="14061" end="14076" title="Eugene McCarthy" label="Eugene McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="14126" end="14138" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528945" start="14178" end="14195" title="Soviet dissidents" label="dissident writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727991" start="14496" end="14540" title="The Creation of the World and Other Business" label="The Creation of the World and Other Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898049" start="14581" end="14597" title="Up from Paradise" label="Up from Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q529276" start="15125" end="15137" title="Studs Terkel" label="Studs Terkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="15447" end="15454" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790910" start="15665" end="15682" title="Death of a Salesman (1985 film)" label="a television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q42930" start="15692" end="15706" title="Dustin Hoffman" label="Dustin Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760703" start="16141" end="16165" title="The Ride Down Mt. Morgan" label="The Ride Down Mt. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746209" start="16186" end="16201" title="The Last Yankee" label="The Last Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973380" start="16226" end="16238" title="Broken Glass (play)" label="Broken Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q596984" start="16262" end="16279" title="The Crucible (1996 film)" label="a film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="16317" end="16333" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q223988" start="16335" end="16348" title="Paul Scofield" label="Paul Scofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q355163" start="16350" end="16363" title="Bruce Davison" label="Bruce Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q101797" start="16368" end="16380" title="Winona Ryder" label="Winona Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929093" start="16455" end="16483" title="Mr. Peters&amp;#x27; Connections" label="Mr. Peters&amp;#x27; Connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="16501" end="16513" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q313545" start="16713" end="16726" title="Brian Dennehy" label="Brian Dennehy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789030" start="16867" end="16889" title="National Medal of Arts" label="National Medal of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118960" start="16915" end="16943" title="PEN/Laura Pels Theater Award" label="PEN/Laura Pels Theater Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q478050" start="16998" end="17035" title="National Endowment for the Humanities" label="National Endowment for the Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175526" start="17057" end="17074" title="Jefferson Lecture" label="Jefferson Lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="17148" end="17158" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="17261" end="17295" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="U.S. presidential election of 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q14401887" start="17394" end="17408" title="Jay Nordlinger" label="Jay Nordlinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270178" start="17452" end="17463" title="George Will" label="George Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q742440" start="17564" end="17598" title="The Dorothy and Lillian Gish Prize" label="The Dorothy and Lillian Gish Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q498526" start="17794" end="17819" title="San Jose State University" label="San Jose State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258988" start="17844" end="17903" title="John Steinbeck Award" label="John Steinbeck &amp;quot;In the Souls of the People&amp;quot; Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971093" start="18120" end="18144" title="National Book Foundation" label="National Book Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q329157" start="18251" end="18292" title="Principe de Asturias Prize for Literature" label="Principe de Asturias Prize for Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q208414" start="18388" end="18404" title="lymphatic cancer" label="lymphatic cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q277787" start="18458" end="18473" title="Jerusalem Prize" label="Jerusalem Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q173436" start="18565" end="18583" title="Minimalism" label="minimalist painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450368" start="18728" end="18749" title="Finishing the Picture" label="Finishing the Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5583472" start="18771" end="18786" title="Goodman Theatre" label="Goodman Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="19243" end="19257" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="19597" end="19606" title="Hollywood (film industry)" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086136" start="19766" end="19786" title="Conversion to Judaism" label="converted to Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q265706" start="19929" end="19944" title="Susan Strasberg" label="Susan Strasberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="19976" end="19980" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="20091" end="20096" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="20366" end="20404" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557696" start="20670" end="20685" title="Mexican divorce" label="Mexican divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q112033" start="20768" end="20779" title="Inge Morath" label="Inge Morath"/>
<link wikidata="Q508184" start="20902" end="20909" title="Rebecca Miller" label="Rebecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="20971" end="20984" title="Down syndrome" label="Down syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070165" start="21050" end="21067" title="Institutionalisation" label="institutionalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569239" start="21127" end="21152" title="Southbury Training School" label="Southbury Training School"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="21360" end="21376" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q504775" start="21623" end="21637" title="bladder cancer" label="bladder cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="21642" end="21655" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076302" start="21672" end="21692" title="Roxbury, Connecticut" label="Roxbury, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="22562" end="22584" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="22786" end="22825" title="Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center" label="Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q467050" start="22895" end="22924" title="American Theater Hall of Fame" label="American Theater Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q284381" start="22976" end="22995" title="Four Freedoms Award" label="Four Freedoms Award"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23142" end="23163" title="Arthur Miller: Writer" label="Arthur Miller: Writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q685045" start="23184" end="23201" title="3769 Arthurmiller" label="3769 Arthurmiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="23234" end="23241" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q66823622" start="23253" end="23259" title="Blonde (2022 film)" label="Blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q104514" start="23291" end="23303" title="Adrien Brody" label="Adrien Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q408230" start="24150" end="24177" title="New York City Department of Education" label="New York City school system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153317" start="24249" end="24287" title="Common Core State Standards Initiative" label="Common Core State Standards Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q170572" start="24322" end="24334" title="Alec Baldwin" label="Alec Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q229234" start="24336" end="24348" title="Ellen Barkin" label="Ellen Barkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q205707" start="24350" end="24364" title="Bradley Cooper" label="Bradley Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q42930" start="24366" end="24380" title="Dustin Hoffman" label="Dustin Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34436" start="24382" end="24400" title="Scarlett Johansson" label="Scarlett Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q704433" start="24402" end="24414" title="Tony Kushner" label="Tony Kushner"/>
<link wikidata="Q80405" start="24416" end="24430" title="Julianne Moore" label="Julianne Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q174908" start="24432" end="24445" title="Michael Moore" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q58444" start="24447" end="24458" title="Liam Neeson" label="Liam Neeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q314342" start="24460" end="24476" title="David O. Russell" label="David O. Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q298368" start="24482" end="24496" title="Liev Schreiber" label="Liev Schreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q166389" start="24524" end="24540" title="Daniel Day-Lewis" label="Daniel Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="25172" end="25191" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="25199" end="25228" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111950" start="25642" end="25660" title="Christopher Bigsby" label="Christopher Bigsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583218" start="26075" end="26087" title="Alan M. Wald" label="Alan M. Wald"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="26162" end="26177" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988479" start="26278" end="26292" title="The New Masses" label="The New Masses"/>
<link wikidata="Q49081" start="26321" end="26341" title="Christopher Hitchens" label="Christopher Hitchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q154234" start="26376" end="26405" title="Clinton–Lewinsky scandal" label="Monica Lewinsky investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q219698" start="26413" end="26429" title="Salem witch hunt" label="Salem witch hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138625" start="26698" end="26706" title="Hitch-22" label="Hitch-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q44306" start="26832" end="26846" title="Salman Rushdie" label="Salman Rushdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q179274" start="26866" end="26871" title="fatwa" label="fatwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q191288" start="26888" end="26906" title="The Satanic Verses" label="The Satanic Verses"/>
<link wikidata="Q16888310" start="26956" end="26966" title="No Villain" label="No Villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783775" start="26988" end="27002" title="They Too Arise" label="They Too Arise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5897097" start="27057" end="27071" title="Honors at Dawn" label="Honors at Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749937" start="27389" end="27417" title="The Man Who Had All the Luck" label="The Man Who Had All the Luck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837516" start="27439" end="27450" title="All My Sons" label="All My Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q820862" start="27472" end="27491" title="Death of a Salesman" label="Death of a Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305319" start="27594" end="27616" title="An Enemy of the People" label="An Enemy of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183443" start="27632" end="27644" title="The Crucible" label="The Crucible"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916798" start="27666" end="27688" title="A View from the Bridge" label="A View from the Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658201" start="27710" end="27733" title="A Memory of Two Mondays" label="A Memory of Two Mondays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761217" start="27755" end="27769" title="After the Fall (play)" label="After the Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014560" start="27791" end="27808" title="Incident at Vichy" label="Incident at Vichy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758127" start="27830" end="27839" title="The Price (play)" label="The Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727991" start="27961" end="28005" title="The Creation of the World and Other Business" label="The Creation of the World and Other Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898049" start="28027" end="28043" title="Up from Paradise" label="Up from Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714176" start="28065" end="28094" title="The Archbishop&amp;#x27;s Ceiling" label="The Archbishop&amp;#x27;s Ceiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713450" start="28116" end="28134" title="The American Clock" label="The American Clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203418" start="28156" end="28172" title="Playing for Time (film)" label="Playing for Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358711" start="28211" end="28227" title="Elegy for a Lady" label="Elegy for a Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559425" start="28303" end="28326" title="Some Kind of Love Story" label="Some Kind of Love Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760703" start="28671" end="28695" title="The Ride Down Mt. Morgan" label="The Ride Down Mt. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746209" start="28717" end="28732" title="The Last Yankee" label="The Last Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973380" start="28754" end="28766" title="Broken Glass (play)" label="Broken Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6929093" start="28788" end="28816" title="Mr. Peters&amp;#x27; Connections" label="Mr. Peters&amp;#x27; Connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316526" start="28838" end="28856" title="Resurrection Blues" label="Resurrection Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450368" start="28878" end="28899" title="Finishing the Picture" label="Finishing the Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143771" start="29446" end="29459" title="The Guardsman" label="The Guardsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q296809" start="29482" end="29495" title="Ferenc Molnár" label="Ferenc Molnár"/>
<link wikidata="Q23758345" start="29576" end="29584" title="The Hook (screenplay)" label="The Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3731068" start="29606" end="29617" title="All My Sons (film)" label="All My Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348409" start="29639" end="29659" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Make Love" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Make Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q645574" start="29681" end="29692" title="The Misfits (1961 film)" label="The Misfits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790910" start="29714" end="29733" title="Death of a Salesman (1985 film)" label="Death of a Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382263" start="29755" end="29769" title="Everybody Wins (1990 film)" label="Everybody Wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q596984" start="29791" end="29803" title="The Crucible (1996 film)" label="The Crucible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463909" start="29851" end="29856" title="Focus (novel)" label="Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="29936" end="29943" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30039" end="30058" title="Homely Girl: A Life" label="Homely Girl: A Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q38415" start="30435" end="30445" title="Ernie Pyle" label="Ernie Pyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="30982" end="31001" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="31082" end="31092" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428855" start="31789" end="31807" title="Library of America" label="Library of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111950" start="31985" end="32004" title="Christopher Bigsby" label="Bigsby, Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="33723" end="33742" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="2313" wikidata="Q160061" url="?curid=2313" title="Anton Diabelli">
<text>Anton (or Antonio) Diabelli (5 September 17818 April 1858) was an Austrian music publisher, editor and composer. Best known in his time as a publisher, he is most familiar today as the composer of the waltz on which Ludwig van Beethoven wrote his set of thirty-three &quot;Diabelli Variations&quot;.

==Early life==
Diabelli was born in Mattsee in Austria, then in the Archbishopric of Salzburg. A musical child, he sang in the boys&#x27; choir at Salzburg Cathedral where he is believed to have taken music lessons with Michael Haydn. By the age of 19 Diabelli had already composed several important compositions including six masses.

Diabelli was trained to enter the priesthood and in 1800 joined the monastery at Raitenhaslach, Bavaria. He remained there until 1803, when Bavaria closed all its monasteries.

==Career==
In 1803 Diabelli moved to Vienna and began teaching piano and guitar and found work as a proofreader for a music publisher. During this period he learned the music publishing business while continuing to compose. In 1809 he composed his comic opera, &quot;Adam in der Klemme.&quot; In 1817 he started a music publishing business and in 1818 he formed a partnership with Pietro Cappi to create the music publishing firm of Cappi &amp; Diabelli.

Cappi &amp; Diabelli became well known by arranging popular pieces so they could be played by amateurs at home. A master of promotion, Diabelli selected widely-accessible music such as famous opera tune arrangements, dance music and popular new comic theatre songs.

The firm soon established a reputation in more serious music circles by championing the works of Franz Schubert. Diabelli recognized the composer&#x27;s potential and became the first to publish Schubert&#x27;s work with &quot;Erlkönig&quot; in 1821. Diabelli&#x27;s firm continued to publish Schubert&#x27;s work until 1823 when an argument between Cappi and Schubert terminated their business. The following year Diabelli and Cappi parted ways, Diabelli launching a new publishing house, Diabelli &amp; Co., in 1824. Following Schubert&#x27;s early death in 1828 Diabelli purchased a large portion of the composer&#x27;s massive musical estate from Schubert&#x27;s brother Ferdinand. As Schubert had hundreds of unpublished works, Diabelli&#x27;s firm was able to publish &quot;new&quot; Schubert works for more than 30 years after the composer&#x27;s death.

Diabelli&#x27;s publishing house expanded throughout his life, before he retired in 1851, leaving it under the control of Carl Anton Spina. When Diabelli died in 1858 Spina changed the firm&#x27;s name to “C.A. Spina Vormals Diabelli” and published much music by Johann Strauss II and Josef Strauss. In 1872 the firm was taken over by Friedrich Schreiber and in 1876 it merged with the firm of August Cranz who bought the company in 1879 and ran it under his name.

Diabelli died in Vienna at the age of 76.

==Compositions==

Diabelli composed a number of well-known Classical works, including an operetta called &quot;Adam in der Klemme&quot;, several masses, songs and numerous piano and classical guitar pieces. Numerically his guitar pieces form the largest part of his works. His pieces for piano four hands are popular.

Diabelli&#x27;s composition &quot;Pleasures of Youth: Six Sonatinas&quot; is a collection of six sonatinas depicting a struggle between unknown opposing forces. This is suggested by the sharp and frequent change in dynamics from &quot;forte&quot; to &quot;piano&quot;. When &quot;forte&quot; is indicated the pianist is meant to evoke a sense of wickedness, thus depicting the antagonist. In contrast the markings of &quot;piano&quot; represent the protagonist.

===Diabelli Variations===

The composition for which Diabelli is now best known was actually written as part of an adventuring story. In 1819, as a promotional idea, he decided to try to publish a volume of variations on a &quot;patriotic&quot; waltz he had penned expressly for this purpose, with one variation by every important Austrian composer living at the time, as well as several significant non-Austrians. The combined contributions would be published in an anthology called &quot;Vaterländischer Künstlerverein&quot;. Fifty-one composers responded with pieces, including Beethoven, Schubert, Archduke Rudolph of Austria, Franz Xaver Wolfgang Mozart (jun.), Moritz, Prince of Dietrichstein, Heinrich Eduard Josef Baron von Lannoy, Ignaz Franz Baron von Mosel, Carl Czerny, Johann Nepomuk Hummel, Ignaz Moscheles, Simon Sechter, and the eight-year-old Franz Liszt (although it seems Liszt was not invited personally, but his teacher Czerny arranged for him to be involved). Czerny was also enlisted to write a coda. Beethoven, however, instead of providing just one variation, provided 33, and his formed Part I of &quot;Vaterländischer Künstlerverein&quot;. They constitute what is generally regarded as one of the greatest of Beethoven&#x27;s piano pieces and as the greatest set of variations of their time, and are generally known simply as the &quot;Diabelli Variations&quot;, Op. 120. The other 50 variations were published as Part II of &quot;Vaterländischer Künstlerverein&quot;.

==Cultural references==
A sonatina of Diabelli&#x27;s, presumably Sonatina in F major, Op. 168, No. 1 (I: Moderato cantabile), provides the title and a motif for the French novella &quot;Moderato Cantabile&quot; by Marguerite Duras.

==See also==
*Romantic guitar

==References==
==Published music and further reading==
*Anton Diabelli&#x27;s guitar works – a thematic catalogue with an introduction; Doctoral Thesis by Jukka Savijoki (Sibelius Academy; 1996)
*Anton Diabelli&#x27;s Guitar Works: A Thematic Catalogue by Jukka Savijoki (Editions Orphée)
*Rischel &amp; Birket-Smith&#x27;s Collection of guitar music Det Kongelige Bibliotek, Denmark
*Boije Collection The Music Library of Sweden
*www.karadar.com/Dictionary/diabelli.html
* 
*Free scores at the Mutopia Project

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160061" start="0" end="5" title="Anton Diabelli" label="Anton"/>
<link wikidata="Q160061" start="10" end="17" title="Anton Diabelli" label="Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q160061" start="19" end="27" title="Anton Diabelli" label="Diabelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q193434" start="201" end="206" title="waltz" label="waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="216" end="236" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207965" start="273" end="292" title="Diabelli Variations" label="Diabelli Variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q877052" start="337" end="344" title="Mattsee" label="Mattsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q701614" start="369" end="394" title="Archbishopric of Salzburg" label="Archbishopric of Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776834" start="428" end="444" title="boys&amp;#x27; choir" label="boys&amp;#x27; choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q258908" start="448" end="466" title="Salzburg Cathedral" label="Salzburg Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q490381" start="521" end="534" title="Michael Haydn" label="Michael Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q256961" start="733" end="740" title="Electorate of Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="851" end="857" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q719120" start="887" end="893" title="classical guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1195" end="1207" title="Pietro Cappi" label="Pietro Cappi"/>
<link wikidata="Q379755" start="1312" end="1321" title="arrangement" label="arranging"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="1634" end="1648" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134417" start="1764" end="1772" title="Erlkönig (Schubert)" label="Erlkönig"/>
<link wikidata="Q688412" start="2212" end="2221" title="Ferdinand Schubert" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2521" end="2537" title="Carl Anton Spina" label="Carl Anton Spina"/>
<link wikidata="Q83309" start="2662" end="2679" title="Johann Strauss II" label="Johann Strauss II"/>
<link wikidata="Q312941" start="2684" end="2697" title="Josef Strauss" label="Josef Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2734" end="2753" title="Friedrich Schreiber" label="Friedrich Schreiber"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2793" end="2805" title="August Cranz" label="August Cranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q170384" start="2997" end="3005" title="operetta" label="operetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q217295" start="3053" end="3057" title="mass (music)" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q227484" start="3196" end="3212" title="piano four hands" label="piano four hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045984" start="3324" end="3332" title="sonatina" label="sonatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q113558" start="3462" end="3467" title="Dynamics (music)" label="forte"/>
<link wikidata="Q113558" start="3483" end="3488" title="Dynamics (music)" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q214981" start="3897" end="3906" title="variation (music)" label="variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q509440" start="4180" end="4210" title="Vaterländischer Künstlerverein" label="Vaterländischer Künstlerverein"/>
<link wikidata="Q93373" start="4292" end="4319" title="Archduke Rudolf of Austria (1788–1831)" label="Archduke Rudolph of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q156023" start="4321" end="4348" title="Franz Xaver Wolfgang Mozart" label="Franz Xaver Wolfgang Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947966" start="4357" end="4388" title="Moritz, Prince of Dietrichstein" label="Moritz, Prince of Dietrichstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597107" start="4390" end="4428" title="Eduard de Lannoy" label="Heinrich Eduard Josef Baron von Lannoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426886" start="4430" end="4457" title="Ignaz von Mosel" label="Ignaz Franz Baron von Mosel"/>
<link wikidata="Q215333" start="4459" end="4470" title="Carl Czerny" label="Carl Czerny"/>
<link wikidata="Q151953" start="4472" end="4493" title="Johann Nepomuk Hummel" label="Johann Nepomuk Hummel"/>
<link wikidata="Q159551" start="4495" end="4510" title="Ignaz Moscheles" label="Ignaz Moscheles"/>
<link wikidata="Q582713" start="4512" end="4525" title="Simon Sechter" label="Simon Sechter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="4550" end="4561" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q852466" start="4708" end="4712" title="coda (music)" label="coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207965" start="5053" end="5072" title="Diabelli Variations" label="Diabelli Variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045984" start="5213" end="5221" title="sonatina" label="sonatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276817" start="5374" end="5392" title="Moderato Cantabile" label="Moderato Cantabile"/>
<link wikidata="Q153248" start="5402" end="5418" title="Marguerite Duras" label="Marguerite Duras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902353" start="5435" end="5450" title="Romantic guitar" label="Romantic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542831" start="5947" end="5962" title="Mutopia Project" label="Mutopia Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
