<doc id="5363" wikidata="Q7889" url="?curid=5363" title="Video game">
<text>A video game or computer game is an electronic game that involves interaction with a user interface or input device (such as a joystick, controller, keyboard, or motion sensing device) to generate visual feedback from a display device, most commonly shown in a video format on a television set, computer monitor, flat-panel display or touchscreen on handheld devices, or a virtual reality headset. Most modern video games are audiovisual, with audio complement delivered through speakers or headphones, and sometimes also with other types of sensory feedback (e.g., haptic technology that provides tactile sensations). Some video games also allow microphone and webcam inputs for in-game chatting and livestreaming.

Video games are typically categorized according to their hardware platform, which traditionally includes arcade video games, console games, and computer games (which includes LAN games, online games, and browser games). More recently, the video game industry has expanded onto mobile gaming through mobile devices (such as smartphones and tablet computers), virtual and augmented reality systems, and remote cloud gaming. Video games are also classified into a wide range of genres based on their style of gameplay and target audience.

The first video game prototypes in the 1950s and 1960s were simple extensions of electronic games using video-like output from large, room-sized mainframe computers. The first consumer video game was the arcade video game &quot;Computer Space&quot; in 1971, which took inspiration from the earlier 1962 computer game &quot;Spacewar!&quot;. In 1972 came the now-iconic video game &quot;Pong&quot; and the first home console, the Magnavox Odyssey. The industry grew quickly during the &quot;golden age&quot; of arcade video games from the late 1970s to early 1980s but suffered from the crash of the North American video game market in 1983 due to loss of publishing control and saturation of the market. Following the crash, the industry matured, was dominated by Japanese companies such as Nintendo, Sega, and Sony, and established practices and methods around the development and distribution of video games to prevent a similar crash in the future, many of which continue to be followed. In the 2000s, the core industry centered on &quot;AAA&quot; games, leaving little room for riskier experimental games. Coupled with the availability of the Internet and digital distribution, this gave room for independent video game development (or &quot;indie games&quot;) to gain prominence into the 2010s. Since then, the commercial importance of the video game industry has been increasing. The emerging Asian markets and proliferation of smartphone games in particular are altering player demographics towards casual gaming and increasing monetization by incorporating games as a service.

Today, video game development requires numerous skills, vision, teamwork, and liaisons between different parties, including developers, publishers, distributors, retailers, hardware manufacturers, and other marketers, to successfully bring a game to its consumers. , the global video game market had estimated annual revenues of across hardware, software, and services, which is three times the size of the global music industry and four times that of the film industry in 2019, making it a formidable heavyweight across the modern entertainment industry. The video game market is also a major influence behind the electronics industry, where personal computer component, console, and peripheral sales, as well as consumer demands for better game performance, have been powerful driving factors for hardware design and innovation.

==Origins==


Early video games use interactive electronic devices with various display formats. The earliest example is from 1947—a &quot;cathode-ray tube amusement device&quot; was filed for a patent on 25 January 1947, by Thomas T. Goldsmith Jr. and Estle Ray Mann, and issued on 14 December 1948, as U.S. Patent 2455992. Inspired by radar display technology, it consists of an analog device allowing a user to control the parabolic arc of a dot on the screen to simulate a missile being fired at targets, which are paper drawings fixed to the screen. Other early examples include Christopher Strachey&#x27;s draughts game, the Nimrod computer at the 1951 Festival of Britain; &quot;OXO&quot;, a tic-tac-toe computer game by Alexander S. Douglas for the EDSAC in 1952; &quot;Tennis for Two&quot;, an electronic interactive game engineered by William Higinbotham in 1958; and &quot;Spacewar!&quot;, written by Massachusetts Institute of Technology students Martin Graetz, Steve Russell, and Wayne Wiitanen&#x27;s on a DEC PDP-1 computer in 1962. Each game has different means of display: NIMROD has a panel of lights to play the game of Nim, &quot;OXO&quot; has a graphical display to play tic-tac-toe, &quot;Tennis for Two&quot; has an oscilloscope to display a side view of a tennis court, and &quot;Spacewar!&quot; has the DEC PDP-1&#x27;s vector display to have two spaceships battle each other.

These inventions laid the foundation for modern video games. In 1966, while working at Sanders Associates, Ralph H. Baer devised a system to play a basic table tennis game on a television screen. With the company&#x27;s approval, Baer created the prototype known as the &quot;Brown Box&quot;. Sanders patented Baer&#x27;s innovations and licensed them to Magnavox, which commercialized the technology as the first home video game console, the Magnavox Odyssey, released in 1972. Separately, Nolan Bushnell and Ted Dabney, inspired by seeing &quot;Spacewar!&quot; running at Stanford University, devised a similar version running in a smaller coin-operated arcade cabinet using a less expensive computer. This was released as &quot;Computer Space&quot;, the first arcade video game, in 1971. Bushnell and Dabney went on to form Atari, Inc., and with Allan Alcorn, created their second arcade game in 1972, the hit ping pong-style &quot;Pong&quot;, which was directly inspired by the table tennis game on the Odyssey. Atari made a home version of &quot;Pong&quot;, which was released by Christmas 1975. The success of the Odyssey and &quot;Pong&quot;, both as an arcade game and home machine, launched the video game industry. Both Baer and Bushnell have been titled &quot;Father of Video Games&quot; for their contributions.

==Terminology==
The term &quot;video game&quot; was developed to describe electronic games played on a video display rather than on a teletype printer, audio speaker, or similar device. This also distinguished from handheld electronic games such as &quot;Merlin,&quot; which commonly used LED lights for indicators not in combination for imaging purposes.

&quot;Computer game&quot; may also be used as a descriptor, as all these types of games essentially require the use of a computer processor; in some cases, it is used interchangeably with &quot;video game&quot;. Particularly in the United Kingdom and Western Europe, this is common due to the historic relevance of domestically produced microcomputers. Other terms used include digital game, for example, by the Australian Bureau of Statistics. The term &quot;computer game&quot; can also refer to PC games, which are played primarily on personal computers or other flexible hardware systems, to distinguish them from console games, arcade games, or mobile games. 

Other terms, such as &quot;television game&quot;, &quot;telegame&quot;, or &quot;TV game&quot;, had been used in the 1970s and early 1980s, particularly for home gaming consoles that rely on connection to a television set. However, these terms were also used interchangeably with &quot;video game&quot; in the 1970s, primarily due to &quot;video&quot; and &quot;television&quot; being synonymous. In Japan, where consoles like the Odyssey were first imported and then made within the country by the large television manufacturers such as Toshiba and Sharp Corporation, such games are known as &quot;TV games&quot;, &quot;TV geemu&quot;, or &quot;terebi geemu&quot;. The term &quot;TV game&quot; is still commonly used into the 21st century. &quot;Electronic game&quot; may also be used to refer to video games, but this also incorporates devices like early handheld electronic games that lack any video output.

The first appearance of the term &quot;video game&quot; emerged around 1973. The Oxford English Dictionary cited a 10 November 1973 &quot;BusinessWeek&quot; article as the first printed use of the term. Though Bushnell believed the term came from a vending magazine review of &quot;Computer Space&quot; in 1971, a review of the major vending magazines &quot;Vending Times&quot; and &quot;Cashbox&quot; showed that the term may have come even earlier, appearing first in a letter dated July 10, 1972. In the letter, Bushnell uses the term &quot;video game&quot; twice. Per video game historian Keith Smith, the sudden appearance suggested that the term had been proposed and readily adopted by those in the field. Around March 1973, Ed Adlum, who ran &quot;Cashbox&quot;″s coin-operated section until 1972 and then later founded &quot;RePlay Magazine&quot;, covering the coin-op amusement field, in 1975, used the term in an article in March 1973. In a September 1982 issue of &quot;RePlay&quot;, Adlum is credited with first naming these games as &quot;video games&quot;: &quot;RePlay&#x27;s Eddie Adlum worked at &#x27;Cash Box&#x27; when &#x27;TV games&#x27; first came out. The personalities in those days were Bushnell, his sales manager Pat Karns, and a handful of other &#x27;TV game&#x27; manufacturers like Henry Leyser and the McEwan brothers. It seemed awkward to call their products &#x27;TV games&#x27;, so borrowing a word from &quot;Billboard&quot;″s description of movie jukeboxes, Adlum started to refer to this new breed of amusement machine as &#x27;video games.&#x27; The phrase stuck.&quot; Adlum explained in 1985 that up until the early 1970s, amusement arcades typically had non-video arcade games such as pinball machines and electro-mechanical games. With the arrival of video games in arcades during the early 1970s, there was initially some confusion in the arcade industry over what term should be used to describe the new games. He &quot;wrestled with descriptions of this type of game,&quot; alternating between &quot;TV game&quot; and &quot;television game&quot; but &quot;finally woke up one day&quot; and said, &quot;What the hell... video game!&quot;

===Definition===
While many games readily fall into a clear, well-understood definition of video games, new genres and innovations in game development have raised the question of what are the essential factors of a video game that separate the medium from other forms of entertainment.

The introduction of interactive films in the 1980s with games like &quot;Dragon&#x27;s Lair&quot;, featured games with full motion video played off a form of media but only limited user interaction. This had required a means to distinguish these games from more traditional board games that happen to also use external media, such as the &quot;Clue VCR Mystery Game&quot; which required players to watch VCR clips between turns. To distinguish between these two, video games are considered to require some interactivity that affects the visual display.

Most video games tend to feature some type of victory or winning conditions, such as a scoring mechanism or a final boss fight. The introduction of walking simulators (adventure games that allow for exploration but lack any objectives) like &quot;Gone Home&quot;, and empathy games (video games that tend to focus on emotion) like &quot;That Dragon, Cancer&quot; brought the idea of games that did not have any such type of winning condition and raising the question of whether these were actually games. These are still commonly justified as video games as they provide a game world that the player can interact with by some means.

The lack of any industry definition for a video game by 2021 was an issue during the case &quot;Epic Games v. Apple&quot; which dealt with video games offered on Apple&#x27;s iOS App Store. Among concerns raised were games like &quot;Fortnite Creative&quot; and &quot;Roblox&quot; which created metaverses of interactive experiences, and whether the larger game and the individual experiences themselves were games or not in relation to fees that Apple charged for the App Store. Judge Yvonne Gonzalez Rogers, recognizing that there was yet an industry standard definition for a video game, established for her ruling that &quot;At a bare minimum, video games appear to require some level of interactivity or involvement between the player and the medium&quot; compared to passive entertainment like film, music, and television, and &quot;videogames are also generally graphically rendered or animated, as opposed to being recorded live or via motion capture as in films or television&quot;. Rogers still concluded that what is a video game &quot;appears highly eclectic and diverse&quot;.

===Video game terminology===
The gameplay experience varies radically between video games, but many common elements exist. Most games will launch into a title screen and give the player a chance to review options such as the number of players before starting a game. Most games are divided into levels which the player must work the avatar through, scoring points, collecting power-ups to boost the avatar&#x27;s innate attributes, all while either using special attacks to defeat enemies or moves to avoid them. This information is relayed to the player through a type of on-screen user interface such as a heads-up display atop the rendering of the game itself. Taking damage will deplete their avatar&#x27;s health, and if that falls to zero or if the avatar otherwise falls into an impossible-to-escape location, the player will lose one of their lives. Should they lose all their lives without gaining an extra life or &quot;1-UP&quot;, then the player will reach the &quot;game over&quot; screen. Many levels as well as the game&#x27;s finale end with a type of boss character the player must defeat to continue on. In some games, intermediate points between levels will offer save points where the player can create a saved game on storage media to restart the game should they lose all their lives or need to stop the game and restart at a later time. These also may be in the form of a passage that can be written down and reentered at the title screen.

Product flaws include software bugs which can manifest as glitches which may be exploited by the player; this is often the foundation of speedrunning a video game. These bugs, along with cheat codes, Easter eggs, and other hidden secrets that were intentionally added to the game can also be exploited. On some consoles, cheat cartridges allow players to execute these cheat codes, and user-developed trainers allow similar bypassing for computer software games. Both of which might make the game easier, give the player additional power-ups, or change the appearance of the game.

==Components==

To distinguish from electronic games, a video game is generally considered to require a platform, the hardware which contains computing elements, to process player interaction from some type of input device and displays the results to a video output display.

===Platform===

Video games require a platform, a specific combination of electronic components or computer hardware and associated software, to operate. The term system is also commonly used. These platforms may include multiple brandsheld by platform holders, such as Nintendo or Sony, seeking to gain larger market shares. Games are typically designed to be played on one or a limited number of platforms, and exclusivity to a platform or brand is used by platform holders as a competitive edge in the video game market. However, games may be developed for alternative platforms than intended, which are described as ports or conversions. These also may be remasters - where most of the original game&#x27;s source code is reused and art assets, models, and game levels are updated for modern systems – and remakes, where in addition to asset improvements, significant reworking of the original game and possibly from scratch is performed.

The list below is not exhaustive and excludes other electronic devices capable of playing video games such as PDAs and graphing calculators.

;PC games
:PC games involve a player interacting with a personal computer (PC) connected to a video monitor. Personal computers are not dedicated game platforms, so there may be differences running the same game on different hardware. Also, the openness allows some features to developers like reduced software cost, increased flexibility, increased innovation, emulation, creation of modifications or mods, open hosting for online gaming (in which a person plays a video game with people who are in a different household) and others. A gaming computer is a PC or laptop intended specifically for gaming, typically using high-performance, high-cost components. In addition to personal computer gaming, there also exist games that work on mainframe computers and other similarly shared systems, with users logging in remotely to use the computer.
;Home console
:A console game is played on a home console, a specialized electronic device that connects to a common television set or composite video monitor. Home consoles are specifically designed to play games using a dedicated hardware environment, giving developers a concrete hardware target for development and assurances of what features will be available, simplifying development compared to PC game development. Usually consoles only run games developed for it, or games from other platform made by the same company, but never games developed by its direct competitor, even if the same game is available on different platforms. It often comes with a specific game controller. Major console platforms include Xbox, PlayStation and Nintendo.
;Handheld console
:A handheld game console is a small, self-contained electronic device that is portable and can be held in a user&#x27;s hands. It features the console, a small screen, speakers and buttons, joystick or other game controllers in a single unit. Like consoles, handhelds are dedicated platforms, and share almost the same characteristics. Handheld hardware usually is less powerful than PC or console hardware. Some handheld games from the late 1970s and early 1980s could only play one game. In the 1990s and 2000s, a number of handheld games used cartridges, which enabled them to be used to play many different games. The handheld console has waned in the 2010s as mobile device gaming has become a more dominant factor.
;Arcade video game
: An arcade video game generally refers to a game played on an even more specialized type of electronic device that is typically designed to play only one game and is encased in a special, large coin-operated cabinet which has one built-in console, controllers (joystick, buttons, etc.), a CRT screen, and audio amplifier and speakers. Arcade games often have brightly painted logos and images relating to the theme of the game. While most arcade games are housed in a vertical cabinet, which the user typically stands in front of to play, some arcade games use a tabletop approach, in which the display screen is housed in a table-style cabinet with a see-through table top. With table-top games, the users typically sit to play. In the 1990s and 2000s, some arcade games offered players a choice of multiple games. In the 1980s, video arcades were businesses in which game players could use a number of arcade video games. In the 2010s, there are far fewer video arcades, but some movie theaters and family entertainment centers still have them.
;Browser game
:A browser game takes advantages of standardizations of technologies for the functionality of web browsers across multiple devices providing a cross-platform environment. These games may be identified based on the website that they appear, such as with Miniclip games. Others are named based on the programming platform used to develop them, such as Java and Flash games.
;Mobile game
:With the introduction of smartphones and tablet computers standardized on the iOS and Android operating systems, mobile gaming has become a significant platform. These games may use unique features of mobile devices that are not necessary present on other platforms, such as accelerometers, global positioning information and camera devices to support augmented reality gameplay.
;Cloud gaming
:Cloud gaming requires a minimal hardware device, such as a basic computer, console, laptop, mobile phone or even a dedicated hardware device connected to a display with good Internet connectivity that connects to hardware systems by the cloud gaming provider. The game is computed and rendered on the remote hardware, using a number of predictive methods to reduce the network latency between player input and output on their display device. For example, the Xbox Cloud Gaming and PlayStation Now platforms use dedicated custom server blade hardware in cloud computing centers.
;Virtual reality
: Virtual reality (VR) games generally require players to use a special head-mounted unit that provides stereoscopic screens and motion tracking to immerse a player within virtual environment that responds to their head movements. Some VR systems include control units for the player&#x27;s hands as to provide a direct way to interact with the virtual world. VR systems generally require a separate computer, console, or other processing device that couples with the head-mounted unit.
;Emulation
:An emulator enables games from a console or otherwise different system to be run in a type of virtual machine on a modern system, simulating the hardware of the original and allows old games to be played. While emulators themselves have been found to be legal in United States case law, the act of obtaining the game software that one does not already own may violate copyrights. However, there are some official releases of emulated software from game manufacturers, such as Nintendo with its Virtual Console or Nintendo Switch Online offerings.
;Backward compatibility
:Backward compatibility is similar in nature to emulation in that older games can be played on newer platforms, but typically directly though hardware and built-in software within the platform. The PlayStation 2 popularized the trend by having the capability of playing past generation games from the PlayStation via inserting the original game media into the newer console, while Nintendo&#x27;s Wii could play GameCube titles as well in the same manner.

===Game media===

Early arcade games, home consoles, and handheld games were dedicated hardware units with the game&#x27;s logic built into the electronic componentry of the hardware. Since then, most video game platforms are considered programmable, having means to read and play multiple games distributed on different types of media or formats. Physical formats include ROM cartridges, magnetic storage including magnetic-tape data storage and floppy discs, optical media formats including CD-ROM and DVDs, and flash memory cards. Furthermore digital distribution over the Internet or other communication methods as well as cloud gaming alleviate the need for any physical media. In some cases, the media serves as the direct read-only memory for the game, or it may be the form of installation media that is used to write the main assets to the player&#x27;s platform&#x27;s local storage for faster loading periods and later updates.

Games can be extended with new content and software patches through either expansion packs which are typically available as physical media, or as downloadable content nominally available via digital distribution. These can be offered freely or can be used to monetize a game following its initial release. Several games offer players the ability to create user-generated content to share with others to play. Other games, mostly those on personal computers, can be extended with user-created modifications or mods that alter or add onto the game; these often are unofficial and were developed by players from reverse engineering of the game, but other games provide official support for modding the game.

===Input device===
Video game can use several types of input devices to translate human actions to a game. Most common are the use of game controllers like gamepads and joysticks for most consoles, and as accessories for personal computer systems along keyboard and mouse controls. Common controls on the most recent controllers include face buttons, shoulder triggers, analog sticks, and directional pads (&quot;d-pads&quot;). Consoles typically include standard controllers which are shipped or bundled with the console itself, while peripheral controllers are available as a separate purchase from the console manufacturer or third-party vendors. Similar control sets are built into handheld consoles and onto arcade cabinets. Newer technology improvements have incorporated additional technology into the controller or the game platform, such as touchscreens and motion detection sensors that give more options for how the player interacts with the game. Specialized controllers may be used for certain genres of games, including racing wheels, light guns and dance pads. Digital cameras and motion detection can capture movements of the player as input into the game, which can, in some cases, effectively eliminate the control, and on other systems such as virtual reality, are used to enhance immersion into the game.

===Display and output===
By definition, all video games are intended to output graphics to an external video display, such as cathode-ray tube televisions, newer liquid-crystal display (LCD) televisions and built-in screens, projectors or computer monitors, depending on the type of platform the game is played on. Features such as color depth, refresh rate, frame rate, and screen resolution are a combination of the limitations of the game platform and display device and the program efficiency of the game itself. The game&#x27;s output can range from fixed displays using LED or LCD elements, text-based games, two-dimensional and three-dimensional graphics, and augmented reality displays.

The game&#x27;s graphics are often accompanied by sound produced by internal speakers on the game platform or external speakers attached to the platform, as directed by the game&#x27;s programming. This often will include sound effects tied to the player&#x27;s actions to provide audio feedback, as well as background music for the game.

Some platforms support additional feedback mechanics to the player that a game can take advantage of. This is most commonly haptic technology built into the game controller, such as causing the controller to shake in the player&#x27;s hands to simulate a shaking earthquake occurring in game.

==Classifications==
Video games are frequently classified by a number of factors related to how one plays them.

===Genre===

A video game, like most other forms of media, may be categorized into genres. However, unlike film or television which use visual or narrative elements, video games are generally categorized into genres based on their gameplay interaction, since this is the primary means which one interacts with a video game. The narrative setting does not impact gameplay; a shooter game is still a shooter game, regardless of whether it takes place in a fantasy world or in outer space. An exception is the horror game genre, used for games that are based on narrative elements of horror fiction, the supernatural, and psychological horror.

Genre names are normally self-describing in terms of the type of gameplay, such as action game, role playing game, or shoot &#x27;em up, though some genres have derivations from influential works that have defined that genre, such as roguelikes from &quot;Rogue&quot;, Grand Theft Auto clones from &quot;Grand Theft Auto III&quot;, and battle royale games from the film &quot;Battle Royale&quot;. The names may shift over time as players, developers and the media come up with new terms; for example, first-person shooters were originally called &quot;Doom clones&quot; based on the 1993 game. A hierarchy of game genres exist, with top-level genres like &quot;shooter game&quot; and &quot;action game&quot; that broadly capture the game&#x27;s main gameplay style, and several subgenres of specific implementation, such as within the shooter game first-person shooter and third-person shooter. Some cross-genre types also exist that fall until multiple top-level genres such as action-adventure game.

===Mode===

A video game&#x27;s mode describes how many players can use the game at the same type. This is primarily distinguished by single-player video games and multiplayer video games. Within the latter category, multiplayer games can be played in a variety of ways, including locally at the same device, on separate devices connected through a local network such as LAN parties, or online via separate Internet connections. Most multiplayer games are based on competitive gameplay, but many offer cooperative and team-based options as well as asymmetric gameplay. Online games use server structures that can also enable massively multiplayer online games (MMOs) to support hundreds of players at the same time.

A small number of video games are zero-player games, in which the player has very limited interaction with the game itself. These are most commonly simulation games where the player may establish a starting state and then let the game proceed on its own, watching the results as a passive observer, such as with many computerized simulations of Conway&#x27;s Game of Life.

===Types===
Most video games are intended for entertainment purposes. Different game types include:

; Core games
: Core or hard-core games refer to the typical perception of video games, developed for entertainment purposes. These games typically require a fair amount of time to learn and master, in contrast to casual games, and thus are most appealing to gamers rather than a broader audience. Most of the AAA video game industry is based around the delivery of core games.

; Casual games
: In contrast to core games, casual games are designed for ease of accessibility, simple to understand gameplay and quick to grasp rule sets, and aimed at mass market audience. They frequently support the ability to jump in and out of play on demand, such as during commuting or lunch breaks. Numerous browser and mobile games fall into the casual game area, and casual games often are from genres with low intensity game elements such as match three, hidden object, time management, and puzzle games. Causal games frequently use social-network game mechanics, where players can enlist the help of friends on their social media networks for extra turns or moves each day. Popular casual games include &quot;Tetris&quot; and &quot;Candy Crush Saga&quot;. More recent, starting in the late 2010s, are hyper-casual games which use even more simplistic rules for short but infinitely replayable games, such as &quot;Flappy Bird&quot;.
; Educational games
: Education software has been used in homes and classrooms to help teach children and students, and video games have been similarly adapted for these reasons, all designed to provide a form of interactivity and entertainment tied to game design elements. There are a variety of differences in their designs and how they educate the user. These are broadly split between edutainment games that tend to focus on the entertainment value and rote learning but are unlikely to engage in critical thinking, and educational video games that are geared towards problem solving through motivation and positive reinforcement while downplaying the entertainment value. Examples of educational games include &quot;The Oregon Trail&quot; and the &quot;Carmen Sandiego&quot; series. Further, games not initially developed for educational purposes have found their way into the classroom after release, such as that feature open worlds or virtual sandboxes like &quot;Minecraft&quot;, or offer critical thinking skills through puzzle video games like &quot;SpaceChem&quot;.
;Serious games
: Further extending from educational games, serious games are those where the entertainment factor may be augmented, overshadowed, or even eliminated by other purposes for the game. Game design is used to reinforce the non-entertainment purpose of the game, such as using video game technology for the game&#x27;s interactive world, or gamification for reinforcement training. Educational games are a form of serious games, but other types of games include fitness games that incorporate significant physical exercise to help keep the player fit (such as &quot;Wii Fit&quot;), simulator games that resemble flight simulators to pilot aircraft (such as &quot;Microsoft Flight Simulator&quot;), advergames that are built around the advertising of a product (such as &quot;Pepsiman&quot;), and newsgames aimed at conveying a specific advocacy message (such as &quot;NarcoGuerra&quot;).
;Art games
:Although video games have been considered an art form on their own, games may be developed to try to purposely communicate a story or message, using the medium as a work of art. These art or arthouse games are designed to generate emotion and empathy from the player by challenging societal norms and offering critique through the interactivity of the video game medium. They may not have any type of win condition and are designed to let the player explore through the game world and scenarios. Most art games are indie games in nature, designed based on personal experiences or stories through a single developer or small team. Examples of art games include &quot;Passage&quot;, &quot;Flower&quot;, and &quot;That Dragon, Cancer&quot;.

===Content rating===
Video games can be subject to national and international content rating requirements. Like with film content ratings, video game ratings typing identify the target age group that the national or regional ratings board believes is appropriate for the player, ranging from all-ages, to a teenager-or-older, to mature, to the infrequent adult-only games. Most content review is based on the level of violence, both in the type of violence and how graphic it may be represented, and sexual content, but other themes such as drug and alcohol use and gambling that can influence children may also be identified. A primary identifier based on a minimum age is used by nearly all systems, along with additional descriptors to identify specific content that players and parents should be aware of.

The regulations vary from country to country but generally are voluntary systems upheld by vendor practices, with penalty and fines issued by the ratings body on the video game publisher for misuse of the ratings. Among the major content rating systems include:
* Entertainment Software Rating Board (ESRB) that oversees games released in the United States. ESRB ratings are voluntary and rated along a E (Everyone), E10+ (Everyone 10 and older), T (Teen), M (Mature), and AO (Adults Only). Attempts to mandate video games ratings in the U.S. subsequently led to the landmark Supreme Court case, &quot;Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association&quot; in 2011 which ruled video games were a protected form of art, a key victory for the video game industry.
* Pan European Game Information (PEGI) covering the United Kingdom, most of the European Union and other European countries, replacing previous national-based systems. The PEGI system uses content rated based on minimum recommended ages, which include 3+, 8+, 12+, 16+, and 18+.
* Australian Classification Board (ACB) oversees the ratings of games and other works in Australia, using ratings of G (General), PG (Parental Guidance), M (Mature), MA15+ (Mature Accompanied), R18+ (Restricted), and X (Restricted for pornographic material). ACB can also deny to give a rating to game (RC – Refused Classification). The ACB&#x27;s ratings are enforceable by law, and importantly, games cannot be imported or purchased digitally in Australia if they have failed to gain a rating or were given the RC rating, leading to a number of notable banned games.
* Computer Entertainment Rating Organization (CERO) rates games for Japan. Their ratings include A (all ages), B (12 and older), C (15 and over), D (17 and over), and Z (18 and over).
* Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle (USK) rates games for Germany. Their ratings include 0, 6, 12, 16, and 18.

Additionally, the major content system provides have worked to create the International Age Rating Coalition (IARC), a means to streamline and align the content ratings system between different region, so that a publisher would only need to complete the content ratings review for one provider, and use the IARC transition to affirm the content rating for all other regions.

Certain nations have even more restrictive rules related to political or ideological content. Within Germany, until 2018, the Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle (&quot;Entertainment Software Self-Regulation&quot;) would refuse to classify, and thus allow sale, of any game depicting Nazi imagery, and thus often requiring developers to replace such imagery with fictional ones. This ruling was relaxed in 2018 to allow for such imagery for &quot;social adequacy&quot; purposes that applied to other works of art. China&#x27;s video game segment is mostly isolated from the rest of the world due to the government&#x27;s censorship, and all games published there must adhere to strict government review, disallowing content such as smearing the image of the Chinese Communist Party. Foreign games published in China often require modification by developers and publishers to meet these requirements.

==Development==


Video game development and authorship, much like any other form of entertainment, is frequently a cross-disciplinary field. Video game developers, as employees within this industry are commonly referred to, primarily include programmers and graphic designers. Over the years, this has expanded to include almost every type of skill that one might see prevalent in the creation of any movie or television program, including sound designers, musicians, and other technicians; as well as skills that are specific to video games, such as the game designer. All of these are managed by producers.

In the early days of the industry, it was more common for a single person to manage all of the roles needed to create a video game. As platforms have become more complex and powerful in the type of material they can present, larger teams have been needed to generate all of the art, programming, cinematography, and more. This is not to say that the age of the &quot;one-man shop&quot; is gone, as this is still sometimes found in the casual gaming and handheld markets, where smaller games are prevalent due to technical limitations such as limited RAM or lack of dedicated 3D graphics rendering capabilities on the target platform (e.g., some PDAs).

Video games are programmed like any other piece of computer software. Prior to the mid-1970s, arcade and home consoles were programmed by assembling discrete electro-mechanical components on circuit boards, which limited games to relatively simple logic. By 1975, low-cost microprocessors were available at volume to be used for video game hardware, which allowed game developers to program more detailed games, widening the scope of what was possible. Ongoing improvements in computer hardware technology have expanded what has become possible to create in video games, coupled with convergence of common hardware between console, computer, and arcade platforms to simplify the development process. Today, game developers have a number of commercial and open source tools available for use to make games, often which are across multiple platforms to support portability, or may still opt to create their own for more specialized features and direct control of the game. Today, many games are built around a game engine that handles the bulk of the game&#x27;s logic, gameplay, and rendering. These engines can be augmented with specialized engines for specific features, such as a physics engine that simulates the physics of objects in real-time. A variety of middleware exists to help developers access other features, such as playback of videos within games, network-oriented code for games that communicate via online services, matchmaking for online games, and similar features. These features can be used from a developer&#x27;s programming language of choice, or they may opt to also use game development kits that minimize the amount of direct programming they have to do but can also limit the amount of customization they can add into a game. Like all software, video games usually undergo quality testing before release to assure there are no bugs or glitches in the product, though frequently developers will release patches and updates.

With the growth of the size of development teams in the industry, the problem of cost has increased. Development studios need the best talent, while publishers reduce costs to maintain profitability on their investment. Typically, a video game console development team ranges from 5 to 50 people, and some exceed 100. In May 2009, &quot;Assassin&#x27;s Creed II&quot; was reported to have a development staff of 450. The growth of team size combined with greater pressure to get completed projects into the market to begin recouping production costs has led to a greater occurrence of missed deadlines, rushed games, and the release of unfinished products.

While amateur and hobbyist game programming had existed since the late 1970s with the introduction of home computers, a newer trend since the mid-2000s is indie game development. Indie games are made by small teams outside any direct publisher control, their games being smaller in scope than those from the larger &quot;AAA&quot; game studios, and are often experiments in gameplay and art style. Indie game development is aided by the larger availability of digital distribution, including the newer mobile gaming market, and readily-available and low-cost development tools for these platforms.

===Game theory and studies===
Although departments of computer science have been studying the technical aspects of video games for years, theories that examine games as an artistic medium are a relatively recent development in the humanities. The two most visible schools in this emerging field are ludology and narratology. Narrativists approach video games in the context of what Janet Murray calls &quot;Cyberdrama&quot;. That is to say, their major concern is with video games as a storytelling medium, one that arises out of interactive fiction. Murray puts video games in the context of the Holodeck, a fictional piece of technology from &quot;Star Trek&quot;, arguing for the video game as a medium in which the player is allowed to become another person, and to act out in another world. This image of video games received early widespread popular support, and forms the basis of films such as &quot;Tron&quot;, &quot;eXistenZ&quot; and &quot;The Last Starfighter&quot;.

Ludologists break sharply and radically from this idea. They argue that a video game is first and foremost a game, which must be understood in terms of its rules, interface, and the concept of play that it deploys. Espen J. Aarseth argues that, although games certainly have plots, characters, and aspects of traditional narratives, these aspects are incidental to gameplay. For example, Aarseth is critical of the widespread attention that narrativists have given to the heroine of the game &quot;Tomb Raider&quot;, saying that &quot;the dimensions of Lara Croft&#x27;s body, already analyzed to death by film theorists, are irrelevant to me as a player, because a different-looking body would not make me play differently... When I play, I don&#x27;t even see her body, but see through it and past it.&quot; Simply put, ludologists reject traditional theories of art because they claim that the artistic and socially relevant qualities of a video game are primarily determined by the underlying set of rules, demands, and expectations imposed on the player.

While many games rely on emergent principles, video games commonly present simulated story worlds where emergent behavior occurs within the context of the game. The term &quot;emergent narrative&quot; has been used to describe how, in a simulated environment, storyline can be created simply by &quot;what happens to the player.&quot; However, emergent behavior is not limited to sophisticated games. In general, any place where event-driven instructions occur for AI in a game, emergent behavior will exist. For instance, take a racing game in which cars are programmed to avoid crashing, and they encounter an obstacle in the track: the cars might then maneuver to avoid the obstacle causing the cars behind them to slow or maneuver to accommodate the cars in front of them and the obstacle. The programmer never wrote code to specifically create a traffic jam, yet one now exists in the game.

===Intellectual property for video games===

Most commonly, video games are protected by copyright, though both patents and trademarks have been used as well.

Though local copyright regulations vary to the degree of protection, video games qualify as copyrighted visual-audio works, and enjoy cross-country protection under the Berne Convention. This typically only applies to the underlying code, as well as to the artistic aspects of the game such as its writing, art assets, and music. Gameplay itself is generally not considered copyrightable; in the United States among other countries, video games are considered to fall into the idea–expression distinction in that it is how the game is presented and expressed to the player that can be copyrighted, but not the underlying principles of the game.

Because gameplay is normally ineligible for copyright, gameplay ideas in popular games are often replicated and built upon in other games. At times, this repurposing of gameplay can be seen as beneficial and a fundamental part of how the industry has grown by building on the ideas of others. For example &quot;Doom&quot; (1993) and &quot;Grand Theft Auto III&quot; (2001) introduced gameplay that created popular new game genres, the first-person shooter and the &quot;Grand Theft Auto&quot; clone, respectively, in the few years after their release. However, at times and more frequently at the onset of the industry, developers would intentionally create video game clones of successful games and game hardware with few changes, which led to the flooded arcade and dedicated home console market around 1978. Cloning is also a major issue with countries that do not have strong intellectual property protection laws, such as within China. The lax oversight by China&#x27;s government and the difficulty for foreign companies to take Chinese entities to court had enabled China to support a large grey market of cloned hardware and software systems. The industry remains challenged to distinguish between creating new games based on refinements of past successful games to create a new type of gameplay, and intentionally creating a clone of a game that may simply swap out art assets.

==Industry==

===History===
The early history of the video game industry, following the first game hardware releases and through 1983, had little structure. Video games quickly took off during the golden age of arcade video games from the late 1970s to early 1980s, but the newfound industry was mainly composed of game developers with little business experience. This led to numerous companies forming simply to create clones of popular games to try to capitalize on the market. Due to loss of publishing control and oversaturation of the market, the North American home video game market crashed in 1983, dropping from revenues of around in 1983 to by 1985. Many of the North American companies created in the prior years closed down. Japan&#x27;s growing game industry was briefly shocked by this crash but had sufficient longevity to withstand the short-term effects, and Nintendo helped to revitalize the industry with the release of the Nintendo Entertainment System in North America in 1985. Along with it, Nintendo established a number of core industrial practices to prevent unlicensed game development and control game distribution on their platform, methods that continue to be used by console manufacturers today.

The industry remained more conservative following the 1983 crash, forming around the concept of publisher-developer dichotomies, and by the 2000s, leading to the industry centralizing around low-risk, triple-A games and studios with large development budgets of at least or more. The advent of the Internet brought digital distribution as a viable means to distribute games, and contributed to the growth of more riskier, experimental independent game development as an alternative to triple-A games in the late 2000s and which has continued to grow as a significant portion of the video game industry.

===Industry roles===
Video games have a large network effect that draw on many different sectors that tie into the larger video game industry. While video game developers are a significant portion of the industry, other key participants in the market include:
* Publishers: Companies generally that oversee bringing the game from the developer to market. This often includes performing the marketing, public relations, and advertising of the game. Publishers frequently pay the developers ahead of time to make their games and will be involved in critical decisions about the direction of the game&#x27;s progress, and then pay the developers additional royalties or bonuses based on sales performances. Other smaller, boutique publishers may simply offer to perform the publishing of a game for a small fee and a portion of the sales, and otherwise leave the developer with the creative freedom to proceed. A range of other publisher-developer relationships exist between these points.
* Distributors: Publishers often are able to produce their own game media and take the role of distributor, but there are also third-party distributors that can mass-produce game media and distribute to retailers. Digital storefronts like Steam and the iOS App Store also serve as distributors and retailers in the digital space.
* Retailers: Physical storefronts, which include large online retailers, department and electronic stores, and specialty video game stores, sell games, consoles, and other accessories to consumers. This has also including a trade-in market in certain regions, allowing players to turn in used games for partial refunds or credit towards other games. However, with the uprising of digital marketplaces and e-commerce revolution, retailers have been performing worse than in the past.
* Hardware manufacturers: The video game console manufacturers produce console hardware, often through a value chain system that include numerous component suppliers and contract manufacturer that assemble the consoles. Further, these console manufacturers typically require a license to develop for their platform and may control the production of some games, such as Nintendo does with the use of game cartridges for its systems. In exchange, the manufacturers may help promote games for their system and may seek console exclusivity for certain games. For games on personal computers, a number of manufacturers are devoted to high-performance &quot;gaming computer&quot; hardware, particularly in the graphics card area; several of the same companies overlap with component supplies for consoles. A range of third-party manufacturers also exist to provide equipment and gear for consoles post-sale, such as additional controllers for console or carrying cases and gear for handheld devices.
* Journalism: While journalism around video games used to be primarily print-based, and focused more on post-release reviews and gameplay strategy, the Internet has brought a more proactive press that use web journalism, covering games in the months prior to release as well as beyond, helping to build excitement for games ahead of release.
* Influencers: With the rising importance of social media, video game companies have found that the opinions of influencers using streaming media to play through their games has had a significant impact on game sales, and have turned to use influencers alongside traditional journalism as a means to build up attention to their game before release.
* Esports: Esports is a major function of several multiplayer games with numerous professional leagues established since the 2000s, with large viewership numbers, particularly out of southeast Asia since the 2010s.
* Trade and advocacy groups: Trade groups like the Entertainment Software Association were established to provide a common voice for the industry in response to governmental and other advocacy concerns. They frequently set up the major trade events and conventions for the industry such as E3.
* Gamers: Proactive hobbyists who are players and consumers of video games. While their representation in the industry is primarily seen through game sales, many companies follow gamers&#x27; comments on social media or on user reviews and engage with them to work to improve their products in addition to other feedback from other parts of the industry. Demographics of the larger player community also impact parts of the market; while once dominated by younger men, the market shifted in the mid-2010s towards women and older players who generally preferred mobile and causal games, leading to further growth in those sectors.

===Major regional markets===

The industry itself grew out from both the United States and Japan in the 1970s and 1980s before having a larger worldwide contribution. Today, the video game industry is predominantly led by major companies in North America (primarily the United States and Canada), Europe, and southeast Asia including Japan, South Korea, and China. Hardware production remains an area dominated by Asian companies either directly involved in hardware design or part of the production process, but digital distribution and indie game development of the late 2000s has allowed game developers to flourish nearly anywhere and diversify the field.

===Game sales===
According to the market research firm Newzoo, the global video game industry drew estimated revenues of over in 2020. Mobile games accounted for the bulk of this, with a 48% share of the market, followed by console games at 28% and personal computer games at 23%.

Sales of different types of games vary widely between countries due to local preferences. Japanese consumers tend to purchase much more handheld games than console games and especially PC games, with a strong preference for games catering to local tastes. Another key difference is that, though having declined in the West, arcade games remain an important sector of the Japanese gaming industry. In South Korea, computer games are generally preferred over console games, especially MMORPG games and real-time strategy games. Computer games are also popular in China.

==Effects on society==
===Culture===
Video game culture is a worldwide new media subculture formed around video games and game playing. As computer and video games have increased in popularity over time, they have had a significant influence on popular culture. Video game culture has also evolved over time hand in hand with internet culture as well as the increasing popularity of mobile games. Many people who play video games identify as gamers, which can mean anything from someone who enjoys games to someone who is passionate about it. As video games become more social with multiplayer and online capability, gamers find themselves in growing social networks. Gaming can both be entertainment as well as competition, as a new trend known as electronic sports is becoming more widely accepted. In the 2010s, video games and discussions of video game trends and topics can be seen in social media, politics, television, film and music. The COVID-19 pandemic during 2020–2021 gave further visibility to video games as a pastime to enjoy with friends and family online as a means of social distancing.

=== Art ===

Since the mid-2000s there has been debate whether video games qualify as art, primarily as the form&#x27;s interactivity interfered with the artistic intent of the work and that they are designed for commercial appeal. A significant debate on the matter came after film critic Roger Ebert published an essay &quot;Video Games can never be art&quot;, which challenged the industry to prove him and other critics wrong. The view that video games were an art form was cemented in 2011 when the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in the landmark case &quot;Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association&quot; that video games were a protected form of speech with artistic merit. Since then, video game developers have come to use the form more for artistic expression, including the development of art games, and the cultural heritage of video games as works of arts, beyond their technical capabilities, have been part of major museum exhibits, including &quot;The Art of Video Games&quot; at the Smithsonian American Art Museum and toured at other museums from 2012 to 2016.
Video games will inspire sequels and other video games within the same franchise, but also have influenced works outside of the video game medium. Numerous television shows (both animated and live-action), films, comics and novels have been created based on existing video game franchises. Because video games are an interactive medium there has been trouble in converting them to these passive forms of media, and typically such works have been critically panned or treated as children&#x27;s media. For example, until 2019, no video game film had ever been received a &quot;Fresh&quot; rating on Rotten Tomatoes, but the releases of &quot;Detective Pikachu&quot; (2019) and &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot; (2020), both receiving &quot;Fresh&quot; ratings, shows signs of the film industry having found an approach to adapt video games for the large screen. That said, some early video game-based films have been highly successful at the box office, such as 1995&#x27;s &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; and 2001&#x27;s &quot;Lara Croft: Tomb Raider&quot;.

More recently since the 2000s, there has also become a larger appreciation of video game music, which ranges from chiptunes composed for limited sound-output devices on early computers and consoles, to fully-scored compositions for most modern games. Such music has frequently served as a platform for covers and remixes, and concerts featuring video game soundtracks performed by bands or orchestras, such as &quot;Video Games Live&quot;, have also become popular. Video games also frequently incorporate licensed music, particularly in the area of rhythm games, furthering the depth of which video games and music can work together.

Further, video games can serve as a virtual environment under full control of a producer to create new works. With the capability to render 3D actors and settings in real-time, a new type of work machinima (short for &quot;machine cinema&quot;) grew out from using video game engines to craft narratives. As video game engines gain higher fidelity, they have also become part of the tools used in more traditional filmmaking. Unreal Engine has been used as a backbone by Industrial Light &amp; Magic for their StageCraft technology for shows like &quot;The Mandalorian&quot;.

Separately, video games are also frequently used as part of the promotion and marketing for other media, such as for films, anime, and comics. However, these licensed games in the 1990s and 2000s often had a reputation for poor quality, developed without any input from the intellectual property rights owners, and several of them are considered among lists of games with notably negative reception, such as &quot;Superman 64&quot;. More recently, with these licensed games being developed by triple-A studios or through studios directly connected to the licensed property owner, there has been a significant improvement in the quality of these games, with an early trendsetting example of &quot;&quot;.

===Beneficial uses===

Besides their entertainment value, appropriately-designed video games have been seen to provide value in education across several ages and comprehension levels. Learning principles found in video games have been identified as possible techniques with which to reform the U.S. education system. It has been noticed that gamers adopt an attitude while playing that is of such high concentration, they do not realize they are learning, and that if the same attitude could be adopted at school, education would enjoy significant benefits. Students are found to be &quot;learning by doing&quot; while playing video games while fostering creative thinking.

Video games are also believed to be beneficial to the mind and body. It has been shown that action video game players have better hand–eye coordination and visuo-motor skills, such as their resistance to distraction, their sensitivity to information in the peripheral vision and their ability to count briefly presented objects, than nonplayers. Researchers found that such enhanced abilities could be acquired by training with action games, involving challenges that switch attention between different locations, but not with games requiring concentration on single objects. A 2018 systematic review found evidence that video gaming training had positive effects on cognitive and emotional skills in the adult population, especially with young adults. A 2019 systematic review also added support for the claim that video games are beneficial to the brain, although the beneficial effects of video gaming on the brain differed by video games types.

Organisers of video gaming events, such as the organisers of the &quot;D-Lux&quot; video game festival in Dumfries, Scotland, have emphasised the positive aspects video games can have on mental health. Organisers, mental health workers and mental health nurses at the event emphasised the relationships and friendships that can be built around video games and how playing games can help people learn about others as a precursor to discussing the person&#x27;s mental health. A study in 2020 from Oxford University also suggested that playing video games can be a benefit to a person&#x27;s mental health. The report of 3,274 gamers, all over the age of 18, focused on the games Animal Crossing: New Horizons and Plants vs Zombies: Battle for Neighborville and used actual play-time data. The report found that those that played more games tended to report greater &quot;wellbeing&quot;. Also in 2020, computer science professor Regan Mandryk of the University of Saskatchewan said her research also showed that video games can have health benefits such as reducing stress and improving mental health. The university&#x27;s research studied all age groups – &quot;from pre-literate children through to older adults living in long term care homes&quot; – with a main focus on 18 to 55-year-olds.

A study of gamers attitudes towards gaming which was reported about in 2018 found that millennials use video games as a key strategy for coping with stress. In the study of 1,000 gamers, 55% said that it &quot;helps them to unwind and relieve stress ... and half said they see the value in gaming as a method of escapism to help them deal with daily work pressures&quot;.

===Controversies===

Video games have caused controversy since the 1970s. Parents and children&#x27;s advocates regularly raise concerns that violent video games can influence young players into performing those violent acts in real life, and events such as the Columbine High School massacre in 1999 in which some claimed the perpetrators specifically alluded to using video games to plot out their attack, raised further fears. Medical experts and mental health professionals have also raised concerned that video games may be addictive, and the World Health Organization has included &quot;gaming disorder&quot; in the 11th revision of its International Statistical Classification of Diseases. Other health experts, including the American Psychiatric Association, have stated that there is insufficient evidence that video games can create violent tendencies or lead to addictive behavior, though agree that video games typically use a compulsion loop in their core design that can create dopamine that can help reinforce the desire to continue to play through that compulsion loop and potentially lead into violent or addictive behavior. Even with case law establishing that video games qualify as a protected art form, there has been pressure on the video game industry to keep their products in check to avoid over-excessive violence particularly for games aimed at younger children. The potential addictive behavior around games, coupled with increased used of post-sale monetization of video games, has also raised concern among parents, advocates, and government officials about gambling tendencies that may come from video games, such as controversy around the use of loot boxes in many high-profile games.

Numerous other controversies around video games and its industry have arisen over the years, among the more notable incidents include the 1993 United States Congressional hearings on violent games like &quot;Mortal Kombat&quot; which lead to the formation of the ESRB ratings system, numerous legal actions taken by attorney Jack Thompson over violent games such as &quot;Grand Theft Auto III&quot; and &quot;Manhunt&quot; from 2003 to 2007, the outrage over the &quot;No Russian&quot; level from &quot;Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2&quot; in 2009 which allowed the player to shoot a number of innocent non-player characters at an airport, and the Gamergate harassment campaign in 2014 that highlighted misogyny from a portion of the player demographic. The industry as a whole has also dealt with issues related to gender, racial, and LGBTQ+ discrimination and mischaracterization of these minority groups in video games. A further issue in the industry is related to working conditions, as development studios and publishers frequently use &quot;crunch time&quot;, required extended working hours, in the weeks and months ahead of a game&#x27;s release to assure on-time delivery.

==Collecting and preservation==
Players of video games often maintain collections of games. More recently there has been interest in retrogaming, focusing on games from the first decades. Games in retail packaging in good shape have become collectors items for the early days of the industry, with some rare publications having gone for over . Separately, there is also concern about the preservation of video games, as both game media and the hardware to play them degrade over time. Further, many of the game developers and publishers from the first decades no longer exist, so records of their games have disappeared. Archivists and preservations have worked within the scope of copyright law to save these games as part of the cultural history of the industry.

There are many video game museums around the world, including the National Videogame Museum in Frisco, Texas, which serves as the largest museum wholly dedicated to the display and preservation of the industry&#x27;s most important artifacts. Europe hosts video game museums such as the Computer Games Museum in Berlin and the Museum of Soviet Arcade Machines in Moscow and Saint-Petersburg. The Museum of Art and Digital Entertainment in Oakland, California is a dedicated video game museum focusing on playable exhibits of console and computer games. The Video Game Museum of Rome is also dedicated to preserving video games and their history. The International Center for the History of Electronic Games at The Strong in Rochester, New York contains one of the largest collections of electronic games and game-related historical materials in the world, including a exhibit which allows guests to play their way through the history of video games. The Smithsonian Institution in Washington, DC has three video games on permanent display: &quot;Pac-Man&quot;, &quot;Dragon&#x27;s Lair&quot;, and &quot;Pong&quot;.

The Museum of Modern Art has added a total of 20 video games and one video game console to its permanent Architecture and Design Collection since 2012. In 2012, the Smithsonian American Art Museum ran an exhibition on &quot;The Art of Video Games&quot;. However, the reviews of the exhibit were mixed, including questioning whether video games belong in an art museum.

==See also==
* Lists of video games
* List of accessories to video games by system
* Outline of video games
==Notes==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* &quot;The Ultimate History of Video Games, Volume 2: Nintendo, Sony, Microsoft, and the Billion-Dollar Battle to Shape Modern Gaming&quot; by Steven L. Kent, Crown, 2021, 
==External links==

* Video games bibliography by the French video game research association &quot;Ludoscience&quot;
* The Virtual Museum of Computing (VMoC) (archived 10 October 2014)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="2" end="12" title="Video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="16" end="29" title="Video game" label="computer game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249149" start="36" end="51" title="electronic game" label="electronic game"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="85" end="99" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q864114" start="103" end="115" title="input device" label="input device"/>
<link wikidata="Q178805" start="127" end="135" title="joystick" label="joystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q865422" start="137" end="147" title="game controller" label="controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q250" start="149" end="157" title="computer keyboard" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659787" start="162" end="176" title="motion sensing" label="motion sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q558363" start="197" end="203" title="visual" label="visual"/>
<link wikidata="Q183635" start="204" end="212" title="feedback" label="feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q327065" start="220" end="234" title="display device" label="display device"/>
<link wikidata="Q34508" start="261" end="266" title="video" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="279" end="293" title="television set" label="television set"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="295" end="311" title="computer monitor" label="computer monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q125171" start="313" end="331" title="flat-panel display" label="flat-panel display"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="335" end="346" title="touchscreen" label="touchscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="350" end="365" title="handheld device" label="handheld device"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600329" start="373" end="396" title="virtual reality headset" label="virtual reality headset"/>
<link wikidata="Q758901" start="426" end="437" title="audiovisual" label="audiovisual"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="444" end="449" title="Sound" label="audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="479" end="487" title="loudspeaker" label="speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="491" end="501" title="headphones" label="headphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030571" start="566" end="583" title="haptic technology" label="haptic technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q328835" start="598" end="605" title="Touch" label="tactile"/>
<link wikidata="Q46384" start="647" end="657" title="microphone" label="microphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q29576" start="662" end="668" title="webcam" label="webcam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631847" start="680" end="696" title="voice chat in online gaming" label="in-game chatting"/>
<link wikidata="Q36038264" start="701" end="714" title="video game livestreaming" label="livestreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q241317" start="774" end="791" title="hardware platform" label="hardware platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q192851" start="822" end="839" title="arcade video game" label="arcade video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561427" start="842" end="854" title="console game" label="console game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485157" start="861" end="875" title="PC game" label="computer games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="892" end="900" title="network game" label="LAN game"/>
<link wikidata="Q116634" start="903" end="914" title="online game" label="online game"/>
<link wikidata="Q848991" start="921" end="933" title="browser game" label="browser game"/>
<link wikidata="Q941594" start="956" end="975" title="video game industry" label="video game industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121542" start="994" end="1007" title="mobile gaming" label="mobile gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="1016" end="1029" title="mobile device" label="mobile device"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="1040" end="1051" title="smartphones" label="smartphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="1056" end="1072" title="tablet computers" label="tablet computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="1075" end="1082" title="virtual reality" label="virtual"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="1087" end="1104" title="augmented reality" label="augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102629" start="1125" end="1137" title="cloud gaming" label="cloud gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q659563" start="1192" end="1198" title="video game genre" label="genres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331296" start="1223" end="1231" title="gameplay" label="gameplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604680" start="1236" end="1251" title="target audience" label="target audience"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="1399" end="1418" title="mainframe computers" label="mainframe computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122324" start="1482" end="1496" title="Computer Space" label="Computer Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q782919" start="1577" end="1586" title="Spacewar!" label="Spacewar!"/>
<link wikidata="Q216293" start="1639" end="1643" title="Pong" label="Pong"/>
<link wikidata="Q17589470" start="1664" end="1676" title="home video game console" label="home console"/>
<link wikidata="Q744987" start="1682" end="1698" title="Magnavox Odyssey" label="Magnavox Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421269" start="1737" end="1781" title="golden age of arcade video games" label="&amp;quot;golden age&amp;quot; of arcade video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q643802" start="1839" end="1892" title="1983 video game crash" label="crash of the North American video game market in 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="2044" end="2052" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="2054" end="2058" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q18594" start="2064" end="2068" title="Sony Interactive Entertainment" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245021" start="2294" end="2297" title="AAA (video game industry)" label="AAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="2400" end="2408" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009126" start="2413" end="2433" title="digital distribution of video games" label="digital distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762504" start="2454" end="2488" title="independent video game development" label="independent video game development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762504" start="2499" end="2509" title="indie game" label="indie game"/>
<link wikidata="Q941594" start="2598" end="2617" title="video game industry" label="video game industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050023" start="2759" end="2772" title="casual games" label="casual gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909641" start="2788" end="2800" title="video game monetization" label="monetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999294" start="2818" end="2836" title="games as a service" label="games as a service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061635" start="2846" end="2868" title="video game development" label="video game development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073839" start="2895" end="2901" title="foresight (psychology)" label="vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q626225" start="2903" end="2911" title="teamwork" label="teamwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145523" start="2917" end="2924" title="Collaboration" label="liaison"/>
<link wikidata="Q210167" start="2963" end="2973" title="video game developers" label="developers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137109" start="2975" end="2985" title="video game publishers" label="publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q867147" start="2987" end="2999" title="distribution (marketing)" label="distributors"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="3001" end="3009" title="retailer" label="retailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358364" start="3012" end="3020" title="Electronic hardware" label="hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="3253" end="3267" title="music industry" label="music industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415395" start="3295" end="3308" title="film industry" label="film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="3371" end="3393" title="entertainment industry" label="entertainment industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358497" start="3454" end="3474" title="electronics industry" label="electronics industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="3482" end="3499" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389317" start="3810" end="3843" title="cathode-ray tube amusement device" label="cathode-ray tube amusement device"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432016" start="3896" end="3919" title="Thomas T. Goldsmith Jr." label="Thomas T. Goldsmith Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="4008" end="4013" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q93122" start="4255" end="4275" title="Christopher Strachey" label="Christopher Strachey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293" start="4283" end="4291" title="draughts" label="draughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974600" start="4302" end="4308" title="Nimrod (computer)" label="Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663784" start="4330" end="4349" title="Festival of Britain" label="Festival of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q731466" start="4357" end="4360" title="OXO (video game)" label="OXO"/>
<link wikidata="Q210339" start="4370" end="4381" title="tic-tac-toe" label="tic-tac-toe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417239" start="4399" end="4419" title="A.S. Douglas" label="Alexander S. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q863565" start="4428" end="4433" title="EDSAC" label="EDSAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q858294" start="4449" end="4463" title="Tennis for Two" label="Tennis for Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q970611" start="4516" end="4535" title="William Higinbotham" label="William Higinbotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q782919" start="4555" end="4564" title="Spacewar!" label="Spacewar!"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="4583" end="4620" title="MIT" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634274" start="4645" end="4658" title="Steve Russell (computer scientist)" label="Steve Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758866" start="4695" end="4700" title="PDP-1" label="PDP-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q724409" start="4810" end="4813" title="Nim" label="Nim"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="4999" end="5002" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="5043" end="5053" title="Spacecraft" label="spaceships"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416135" start="5161" end="5179" title="Sanders Associates" label="Sanders Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q70997" start="5181" end="5194" title="Ralph H. Baer" label="Ralph H. Baer"/>
<link wikidata="Q630670" start="5429" end="5437" title="Magnavox" label="Magnavox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="5493" end="5511" title="video game console" label="video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q744987" start="5517" end="5533" title="Magnavox Odyssey" label="Magnavox Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q335039" start="5565" end="5579" title="Nolan Bushnell" label="Nolan Bushnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982507" start="5584" end="5594" title="Ted Dabney" label="Ted Dabney"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="5648" end="5667" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349717" start="5730" end="5744" title="arcade cabinet" label="arcade cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122324" start="5805" end="5819" title="Computer Space" label="Computer Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q192851" start="5837" end="5854" title="arcade video game" label="arcade video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409231" start="5901" end="5912" title="Atari, Inc." label="Atari, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q537592" start="5923" end="5935" title="Allan Alcorn" label="Allan Alcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="5958" end="5969" title="arcade game" label="arcade game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="5987" end="5996" title="ping pong" label="ping pong"/>
<link wikidata="Q216293" start="6009" end="6013" title="Pong" label="Pong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249149" start="6473" end="6488" title="electronic game" label="electronic game"/>
<link wikidata="Q327065" start="6502" end="6515" title="Display device" label="video display"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="6533" end="6549" title="teletype printer" label="teletype printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="6551" end="6564" title="loudspeaker" label="audio speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797918" start="6614" end="6638" title="handheld electronic game" label="handheld electronic game"/>
<link wikidata="Q458660" start="6654" end="6660" title="Merlin (console)" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q123347" start="7168" end="7199" title="Australian Bureau of Statistics" label="Australian Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485157" start="7254" end="7262" title="PC games" label="PC games"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="7294" end="7311" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561427" start="7374" end="7386" title="console game" label="console game"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="7389" end="7400" title="arcade game" label="arcade game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121542" start="7406" end="7417" title="mobile game" label="mobile game"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="7579" end="7598" title="video game console" label="home gaming console"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="7629" end="7643" title="television set" label="television set"/>
<link wikidata="Q49125" start="7960" end="7967" title="Toshiba" label="Toshiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q53227" start="7972" end="7989" title="Sharp Corporation" label="Sharp Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="8415" end="8440" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q833195" start="8472" end="8484" title="BusinessWeek" label="BusinessWeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919619" start="8692" end="8705" title="Vending Times" label="Vending Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q656903" start="8722" end="8729" title="Cashbox (magazine)" label="Cashbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="9781" end="9790" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q260676" start="10000" end="10017" title="amusement arcades" label="amusement arcades"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="10042" end="10054" title="arcade games" label="arcade games"/>
<link wikidata="Q653928" start="10063" end="10070" title="pinball" label="pinball"/>
<link wikidata="Q107377911" start="10084" end="10107" title="electro-mechanical game" label="electro-mechanical game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635956" start="10827" end="10843" title="interactive film" label="interactive film"/>
<link wikidata="Q21152446" start="10880" end="10898" title="Dragon&amp;#x27;s Lair" label="Dragon&amp;#x27;s Lair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473699" start="10926" end="10943" title="full motion video" label="full motion video"/>
<link wikidata="Q468388" start="11477" end="11481" title="boss (video game)" label="boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q33183362" start="11509" end="11526" title="walking simulator" label="walking simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="11529" end="11543" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581572" start="11608" end="11617" title="Gone Home" label="Gone Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q14930380" start="11629" end="11641" title="empathy game" label="empathy game"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267891" start="11698" end="11717" title="That Dragon, Cancer" label="That Dragon, Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q98839064" start="12091" end="12110" title="Epic Games v. Apple" label="Epic Games v. Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q368215" start="12170" end="12183" title="App Store (iOS)" label="iOS App Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q62019963" start="12229" end="12246" title="Fortnite Creative" label="Fortnite Creative"/>
<link wikidata="Q692989" start="12263" end="12269" title="Roblox" label="Roblox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632041" start="12290" end="12299" title="metaverse" label="metaverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8062452" start="12481" end="12503" title="Yvonne Gonzalez Rogers" label="Yvonne Gonzalez Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q441606" start="13239" end="13251" title="title screen" label="title screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="13381" end="13387" title="Level (video games)" label="levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q522344" start="13435" end="13449" title="Score (game)" label="scoring points"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107094" start="13462" end="13470" title="power-up" label="power-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146" start="13669" end="13683" title="user interface" label="user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464529" start="13694" end="13710" title="Heads-up display (video games)" label="heads-up display"/>
<link wikidata="Q668136" start="13797" end="13803" title="Health (game terminology)" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557866" start="13937" end="13942" title="Life (video games)" label="lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557866" start="13996" end="14026" title="extra life" label="extra life or &amp;quot;1-UP&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q513471" start="14065" end="14074" title="game over" label="game over"/>
<link wikidata="Q468388" start="14154" end="14158" title="boss (video games)" label="boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565379" start="14269" end="14279" title="save point" label="save point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565379" start="14311" end="14321" title="saved game" label="saved game"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="14572" end="14584" title="software bug" label="software bug"/>
<link wikidata="Q543281" start="14608" end="14614" title="glitch" label="glitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062122" start="14630" end="14639" title="Exploit (online gaming)" label="exploited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500337" start="14687" end="14695" title="speedrun" label="speedrun"/>
<link wikidata="Q127260993" start="14737" end="14748" title="cheat codes" label="cheat codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q330574" start="14750" end="14761" title="Easter egg (media)" label="Easter eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q127260993" start="14871" end="14886" title="cheat cartridge" label="cheat cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15122700" start="14951" end="14959" title="trainer (games)" label="trainers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11653" start="15482" end="15502" title="electronic component" label="electronic component"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="15507" end="15524" title="computer hardware" label="computer hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="15540" end="15548" title="operating system" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023663" start="15652" end="15667" title="platform holder" label="platform holder"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="16028" end="16033" title="Port (video gaming)" label="ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="16462" end="16465" title="Personal digital assistant" label="PDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541580" start="16471" end="16490" title="graphing calculator" label="graphing calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485157" start="16505" end="16512" title="PC game" label="PC game"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="16550" end="16567" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q327065" start="16588" end="16601" title="video monitor" label="video monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q865493" start="16896" end="16900" title="mod (video gaming)" label="mods"/>
<link wikidata="Q116634" start="16919" end="16932" title="online game" label="online gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q185270" start="17031" end="17046" title="gaming computer" label="gaming computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="17232" end="17250" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561427" start="17357" end="17369" title="console game" label="console game"/>
<link wikidata="Q17589470" start="17385" end="17397" title="home video game console" label="home console"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="17457" end="17471" title="television set" label="television set"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156766" start="17475" end="17498" title="Composite monitor" label="composite video monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q865422" start="18010" end="18025" title="game controller" label="game controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q15281614" start="18059" end="18063" title="Xbox" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323662" start="18065" end="18076" title="PlayStation" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q948162" start="18081" end="18089" title="Nintendo video game consoles" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q941818" start="18112" end="18133" title="handheld game console" label="handheld game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q178805" start="18299" end="18307" title="joystick" label="joystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q865422" start="18317" end="18332" title="game controller" label="game controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q192851" start="18854" end="18871" title="arcade video game" label="arcade video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349717" start="19058" end="19065" title="arcade cabinet" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="19139" end="19149" title="CRT screen" label="CRT screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q260676" start="19680" end="19692" title="video arcade" label="video arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q848991" start="19914" end="19926" title="browser game" label="browser game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="20005" end="20016" title="web browser" label="web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q174666" start="20054" end="20068" title="cross-platform" label="cross-platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355060" start="20164" end="20172" title="Miniclip" label="Miniclip"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="20261" end="20265" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="20270" end="20275" title="Adobe Flash" label="Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="20322" end="20332" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="20338" end="20353" title="tablet computer" label="tablet computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="20375" end="20378" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="20383" end="20390" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121542" start="20410" end="20423" title="mobile gaming" label="mobile gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q192940" start="20572" end="20585" title="accelerometer" label="accelerometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="20588" end="20618" title="GPS" label="global positioning information"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="20649" end="20666" title="augmented reality" label="augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102629" start="20692" end="20704" title="Cloud gaming" label="Cloud gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q436417" start="21061" end="21076" title="network latency" label="network latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q64487188" start="21151" end="21168" title="Xbox Cloud Gaming" label="Xbox Cloud Gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q15614041" start="21173" end="21188" title="PlayStation Now" label="PlayStation Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q595710" start="21220" end="21232" title="server blade" label="server blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q483639" start="21245" end="21260" title="cloud computing" label="cloud computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="21289" end="21304" title="Virtual reality" label="Virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333980" start="21359" end="21376" title="Head-mounted display" label="head-mounted unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="21391" end="21411" title="Stereoscopy" label="stereoscopic screens"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324728" start="21416" end="21431" title="positional tracking" label="motion tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196126" start="21789" end="21797" title="Video game console emulator" label="emulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q192726" start="21880" end="21895" title="virtual machine" label="virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q821067" start="22280" end="22295" title="Virtual Console" label="Virtual Console"/>
<link wikidata="Q30943865" start="22299" end="22321" title="Nintendo Switch Online" label="Nintendo Switch Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="22358" end="22380" title="Backward compatibility" label="Backward compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="22555" end="22568" title="PlayStation 2" label="PlayStation 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="22658" end="22669" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079" start="22754" end="22757" title="Wii" label="Wii"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="22769" end="22777" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q633454" start="23187" end="23200" title="ROM cartridge" label="ROM cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364527" start="23203" end="23219" title="magnetic storage" label="magnetic storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502645" start="23230" end="23256" title="magnetic-tape data storage" label="magnetic-tape data storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="23261" end="23272" title="floppy disc" label="floppy disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q234870" start="23275" end="23288" title="optical media" label="optical media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="23307" end="23313" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="23318" end="23321" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="23328" end="23340" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q269415" start="23360" end="23380" title="digital distribution" label="digital distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102629" start="23441" end="23453" title="cloud gaming" label="cloud gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q836862" start="23599" end="23617" title="Installation (computer programs)" label="installation media"/>
<link wikidata="Q208218" start="23797" end="23813" title="Patch (computing)" label="software patches"/>
<link wikidata="Q107466928" start="23829" end="23843" title="expansion pack" label="expansion pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066707" start="23900" end="23920" title="downloadable content" label="downloadable content"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909641" start="24013" end="24021" title="Video game monetization" label="monetize"/>
<link wikidata="Q579716" start="24110" end="24132" title="user-generated content" label="user-generated content"/>
<link wikidata="Q865493" start="24233" end="24259" title="mod (video games)" label="user-created modifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q269608" start="24363" end="24382" title="reverse engineering" label="reverse engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q273140" start="24616" end="24623" title="gamepad" label="gamepad"/>
<link wikidata="Q178805" start="24629" end="24637" title="joystick" label="joystick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629760" start="24830" end="24842" title="analog stick" label="analog stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445850" start="24849" end="24886" title="d-pad" label="directional pads (&amp;quot;d-pads&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="25310" end="25321" title="touchscreen" label="touchscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659787" start="25327" end="25343" title="motion detection" label="motion detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492573" start="25494" end="25506" title="racing wheel" label="racing wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055974" start="25509" end="25518" title="light gun" label="light gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365323" start="25524" end="25533" title="dance pad" label="dance pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q62927" start="25536" end="25550" title="Digital camera" label="Digital camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="25912" end="25928" title="cathode-ray tube" label="cathode-ray tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="25948" end="25970" title="liquid-crystal display" label="liquid-crystal display"/>
<link wikidata="Q311666" start="26011" end="26020" title="projector" label="projector"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290" start="26025" end="26041" title="computer monitor" label="computer monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q690110" start="26118" end="26129" title="color depth" label="color depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q949326" start="26131" end="26143" title="refresh rate" label="refresh rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q119565" start="26145" end="26155" title="frame rate" label="frame rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12538706" start="26161" end="26178" title="screen resolution" label="screen resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823737" start="26383" end="26398" title="text-based game" label="text-based game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194763" start="26401" end="26416" title="2D computer graphics" label="two-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="26421" end="26438" title="3D computer graphics" label="three-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="26453" end="26470" title="augmented reality" label="augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030571" start="26946" end="26963" title="haptic technology" label="haptic technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="27312" end="27318" title="genres" label="genres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4282636" start="27603" end="27615" title="shooter game" label="shooter game"/>
<link wikidata="Q11338014" start="27736" end="27747" title="horror game" label="horror game"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="27810" end="27824" title="horror fiction" label="horror fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="27830" end="27842" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q604725" start="27848" end="27868" title="psychological horror" label="psychological horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q270948" start="27954" end="27965" title="action game" label="action game"/>
<link wikidata="Q744038" start="27967" end="27984" title="computer role playing game" label="role playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044478" start="27989" end="28006" title="shoot &amp;#x27;em up" label="shoot &amp;#x27;em up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143132" start="28105" end="28114" title="roguelike" label="roguelike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140407" start="28127" end="28132" title="Rogue (video game)" label="Rogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093436" start="28140" end="28162" title="Grand Theft Auto clone" label="Grand Theft Auto clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q149106" start="28175" end="28195" title="Grand Theft Auto III" label="Grand Theft Auto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q30607131" start="28207" end="28225" title="battle royale game" label="battle royale game"/>
<link wikidata="Q864592" start="28247" end="28260" title="Battle Royale (film)" label="Battle Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="28372" end="28392" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q189784" start="28450" end="28463" title="Doom (1993 video game)" label="the 1993 game"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="28719" end="28739" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q380266" start="28744" end="28764" title="third-person shooter" label="third-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q343568" start="28850" end="28871" title="action-adventure game" label="action-adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q208850" start="29008" end="29032" title="single-player video game" label="single-player video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="29038" end="29060" title="multiplayer video game" label="multiplayer video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q185220" start="29245" end="29256" title="LAN party" label="LAN parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758804" start="29376" end="29410" title="Cooperative video game" label="cooperative and team-based options"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="29422" end="29441" title="asymmetric gameplay" label="asymmetric gameplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q116634" start="29443" end="29454" title="Online game" label="Online game"/>
<link wikidata="Q862490" start="29499" end="29532" title="massively multiplayer online game" label="massively multiplayer online game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834370" start="29625" end="29641" title="zero-player game" label="zero-player game"/>
<link wikidata="Q244615" start="29936" end="29962" title="Conway&amp;#x27;s Game of Life" label="Conway&amp;#x27;s Game of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050023" start="30488" end="30499" title="casual game" label="casual game"/>
<link wikidata="Q984966" start="30614" end="30625" title="mass market" label="mass market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802107" start="30898" end="30909" title="match three" label="match three"/>
<link wikidata="Q25377002" start="30911" end="30924" title="hidden object" label="hidden object"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822231" start="30926" end="30941" title="Time Management (video game genre)" label="time management"/>
<link wikidata="Q54767" start="30947" end="30953" title="Puzzle video game" label="puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041225" start="30989" end="31008" title="social-network game" label="social-network game"/>
<link wikidata="Q71910" start="31166" end="31172" title="Tetris" label="Tetris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768018" start="31189" end="31205" title="Candy Crush Saga" label="Candy Crush Saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q96381517" start="31258" end="31275" title="hyper-casual game" label="hyper-casual game"/>
<link wikidata="Q15707420" start="31371" end="31382" title="Flappy Bird" label="Flappy Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074158" start="31412" end="31430" title="Education software" label="Education software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153173" start="31780" end="31791" title="Educational entertainment" label="edutainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q843894" start="31892" end="31909" title="critical thinking" label="critical thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224999" start="31915" end="31937" title="educational video game" label="educational video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q30611746" start="32112" end="32128" title="The Oregon Trail (series)" label="The Oregon Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043579" start="32149" end="32164" title="Carmen Sandiego (video game series)" label="Carmen Sandiego"/>
<link wikidata="Q867123" start="32319" end="32329" title="open world" label="open world"/>
<link wikidata="Q25397095" start="32334" end="32351" title="sandbox game" label="virtual sandboxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49740" start="32363" end="32372" title="Minecraft" label="Minecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q54767" start="32422" end="32439" title="puzzle video game" label="puzzle video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492558" start="32452" end="32461" title="SpaceChem" label="SpaceChem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506693" start="32528" end="32540" title="serious game" label="serious game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067402" start="32820" end="32832" title="gamification" label="gamification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016457" start="32941" end="32954" title="exergaming" label="fitness games"/>
<link wikidata="Q840121" start="33045" end="33052" title="Wii Fit" label="Wii Fit"/>
<link wikidata="Q214932" start="33091" end="33107" title="flight simulator" label="flight simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q430945" start="33142" end="33168" title="Microsoft Flight Simulator" label="Microsoft Flight Simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q11064557" start="33177" end="33186" title="advergame" label="advergame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071939" start="33254" end="33262" title="Pepsiman (video game)" label="Pepsiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q10336582" start="33275" end="33283" title="newsgame" label="newsgame"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267688" start="33347" end="33358" title="NarcoGuerra" label="NarcoGuerra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739535" start="33563" end="33584" title="art game" label="art or arthouse games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762504" start="33894" end="33904" title="indie game" label="indie game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055753" start="34045" end="34052" title="Passage (video game)" label="Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825218" start="34066" end="34072" title="Flower (video game)" label="Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267891" start="34090" end="34109" title="That Dragon, Cancer" label="That Dragon, Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165090" start="34196" end="34210" title="content rating" label="content rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597163" start="34583" end="34590" title="Graphic violence" label="graphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191458" start="35193" end="35228" title="Entertainment Software Rating Board" label="Entertainment Software Rating Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="35505" end="35518" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q49675" start="35531" end="35575" title="Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association" label="Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q192916" start="35689" end="35718" title="Pan European Game Information" label="Pan European Game Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q874754" start="35968" end="35999" title="Australian Classification Board" label="Australian Classification Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052465" start="36503" end="36533" title="List of banned video games in Australia" label="number of notable banned games"/>
<link wikidata="Q634333" start="36537" end="36579" title="Computer Entertainment Rating Organization" label="Computer Entertainment Rating Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q157754" start="36721" end="36758" title="Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle" label="Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208129" start="36909" end="36943" title="International Age Rating Coalition" label="International Age Rating Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q157754" start="37337" end="37374" title="Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle" label="Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="37497" end="37501" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030806" start="37727" end="37758" title="Video games in China" label="China&amp;#x27;s video game segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="37971" end="37994" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q210167" start="38256" end="38276" title="Video game developer" label="Video game developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q863368" start="38357" end="38368" title="game programmer" label="programmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q185925" start="38373" end="38387" title="graphic design" label="graphic design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937950" start="38555" end="38567" title="sound design" label="sound design"/>
<link wikidata="Q858057" start="38670" end="38683" title="game designer" label="game designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702296" start="38713" end="38722" title="game producer" label="producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="39275" end="39278" title="random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="39370" end="39374" title="personal digital assistant" label="PDAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="39394" end="39404" title="Computer programming" label="programmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="39651" end="39665" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39162" start="40133" end="40144" title="open source" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q193564" start="40386" end="40397" title="game engine" label="game engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q62505" start="40560" end="40574" title="physics engine" label="physics engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q146768" start="40640" end="40650" title="middleware" label="middleware"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042618" start="40741" end="40762" title="Netcode" label="network-oriented code"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786307" start="40811" end="40822" title="Matchmaking (video games)" label="matchmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q68201416" start="40974" end="40994" title="game development kit" label="game development kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188522" start="41179" end="41194" title="Software testing" label="quality testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q179550" start="41233" end="41237" title="Software bug" label="bugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q543281" start="41241" end="41247" title="glitch" label="glitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q208218" start="41308" end="41327" title="Patch (computing)" label="patches and updates"/>
<link wikidata="Q211735" start="41667" end="41691" title="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed II" label="Assassin&amp;#x27;s Creed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762504" start="42143" end="42165" title="indie game development" label="indie game development"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245021" start="42309" end="42312" title="AAA (video game industry)" label="AAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q675281" start="42886" end="42894" title="ludology" label="ludology"/>
<link wikidata="Q382451" start="42899" end="42910" title="narratology" label="narratology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2761470" start="42969" end="42981" title="Janet Murray" label="Janet Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143118" start="43117" end="43136" title="interactive fiction" label="interactive fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069486" start="43184" end="43192" title="Holodeck" label="Holodeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="43237" end="43246" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q626483" start="43495" end="43499" title="Tron" label="Tron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050838" start="43513" end="43521" title="eXistenZ" label="eXistenZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888138" start="43538" end="43558" title="The Last Starfighter" label="The Last Starfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058394" start="43782" end="43798" title="Espen J. Aarseth" label="Espen J. Aarseth"/>
<link wikidata="Q270503" start="44065" end="44076" title="Tomb Raider" label="Tomb Raider"/>
<link wikidata="Q223684" start="44120" end="44130" title="Lara Croft" label="Lara Croft"/>
<link wikidata="Q28793" start="44173" end="44187" title="film theory" label="film theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q215772" start="44653" end="44672" title="Emergence" label="emergent principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="45093" end="45095" title="Artificial intelligence" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297822" start="45614" end="45623" title="copyright" label="copyright"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="45637" end="45643" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="45649" end="45658" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q217398" start="45854" end="45870" title="Berne Convention" label="Berne Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988110" start="46162" end="46189" title="idea–expression distinction" label="idea–expression distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q189784" start="46642" end="46646" title="Doom (1993 video game)" label="Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q149106" start="46670" end="46690" title="Grand Theft Auto III" label="Grand Theft Auto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="46766" end="46786" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093436" start="46795" end="46829" title="Grand Theft Auto clone" label="&amp;quot;Grand Theft Auto&amp;quot; clone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121120" start="47258" end="47270" title="Intellectual property in China" label="within China"/>
<link wikidata="Q428088" start="47429" end="47440" title="grey market" label="grey market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421269" start="47916" end="47948" title="golden age of arcade video games" label="golden age of arcade video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288281" start="48139" end="48145" title="video game clone" label="clones"/>
<link wikidata="Q643802" start="48309" end="48324" title="1983 video game crash" label="crashed in 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="48595" end="48603" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="48662" end="48691" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q16245021" start="49147" end="49155" title="AAA (video game industry)" label="triple-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762504" start="49381" end="49409" title="independent game development" label="independent game development"/>
<link wikidata="Q649124" start="49596" end="49610" title="network effect" label="network effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137109" start="49812" end="49822" title="Video game publisher" label="Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="49940" end="49949" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q867147" start="50539" end="50551" title="Distribution (marketing)" label="Distributors"/>
<link wikidata="Q337535" start="50776" end="50781" title="Steam (service)" label="Steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q368215" start="50790" end="50803" title="App Store (iOS)" label="iOS App Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="51272" end="51293" title="E-commerce" label="e-commerce revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="51380" end="51398" title="video game console" label="video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408259" start="51520" end="51541" title="contract manufacturer" label="contract manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q185270" start="52002" end="52017" title="gaming computer" label="gaming computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122591" start="52346" end="52356" title="Video game journalism" label="Journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906862" start="52688" end="52699" title="Influencers" label="Influencers"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="52731" end="52743" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="52816" end="52831" title="streaming media" label="streaming media"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="53037" end="53044" title="Esports" label="Esports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210800" start="53301" end="53335" title="Entertainment Software Association" label="Entertainment Software Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621486" start="53480" end="53514" title="List of gaming conventions" label="major trade events and conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q336168" start="53540" end="53542" title="E3" label="E3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276395" start="53546" end="53551" title="Gamer" label="Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q941818" start="55254" end="55267" title="handheld game" label="handheld game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561427" start="55274" end="55286" title="console game" label="console game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485157" start="55303" end="55310" title="PC game" label="PC game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421269" start="55420" end="55440" title="Golden age of video arcade games" label="declined in the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="55442" end="55453" title="arcade game" label="arcade game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927929" start="55489" end="55513" title="Video gaming in Japan" label="Japanese gaming industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927934" start="55515" end="55529" title="Video gaming in South Korea" label="In South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="55601" end="55607" title="Massively multiplayer online role-playing game" label="MMORPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="55618" end="55636" title="real-time strategy" label="real-time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q683794" start="55758" end="55767" title="new media" label="new media"/>
<link wikidata="Q863590" start="56013" end="56029" title="internet culture" label="internet culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="56269" end="56280" title="Multiplayer video game" label="multiplayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q116634" start="56285" end="56302" title="Online game" label="online capability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="56338" end="56352" title="social network" label="social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="56436" end="56453" title="Esports" label="electronic sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="56577" end="56589" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q88634378" start="56633" end="56650" title="Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the video game industry" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314010" start="56774" end="56791" title="social distancing" label="social distancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="57084" end="57095" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="57298" end="57316" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q49675" start="57350" end="57394" title="Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association" label="Brown v. Entertainment Merchants Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739535" start="57590" end="57598" title="art game" label="art game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409523" start="57754" end="57776" title="The Art of Video Games" label="The Art of Video Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192305" start="57790" end="57821" title="Smithsonian American Art Museum" label="Smithsonian American Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042244" start="58025" end="58041" title="List of television series based on video games" label="television shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459147" start="58075" end="58080" title="List of films based on video games" label="films"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154855" start="58082" end="58088" title="List of comics based on video games" label="comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630852" start="58093" end="58099" title="List of novels based on video games" label="novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="58467" end="58482" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47492499" start="58510" end="58527" title="Detective Pikachu (film)" label="Detective Pikachu"/>
<link wikidata="Q29906232" start="58551" end="58569" title="Sonic the Hedgehog (film)" label="Sonic the Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q819196" start="58845" end="58858" title="Mortal Kombat (1995 film)" label="Mortal Kombat"/>
<link wikidata="" start="58887" end="58910" title="Lara Croft: Tomb Raider" label="Lara Croft: Tomb Raider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062702" start="58997" end="59013" title="video game music" label="video game music"/>
<link wikidata="Q135637" start="59033" end="59042" title="chiptunes" label="chiptunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715209" start="59335" end="59351" title="Video Games Live" label="Video Games Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632782" start="59469" end="59480" title="rhythm game" label="rhythm game"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="59751" end="59760" title="machinima" label="machinima"/>
<link wikidata="Q608276" start="59981" end="59994" title="Unreal Engine" label="Unreal Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q746676" start="60026" end="60054" title="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic" label="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104150370" start="60065" end="60075" title="StageCraft" label="StageCraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q56876444" start="60108" end="60123" title="The Mandalorian" label="The Mandalorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518540" start="60249" end="60254" title="List of video games based on films" label="films"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545106" start="60256" end="60261" title="List of video games based on anime or manga" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644658" start="60267" end="60273" title="List of video games based on comics" label="comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644674" start="60484" end="60530" title="List of video games notable for negative reception" label="lists of games with notably negative reception"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530979" start="60546" end="60557" title="Superman 64" label="Superman 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q565578" start="61642" end="61663" title="hand–eye coordination" label="hand–eye coordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q852401" start="61668" end="61686" title="Motor coordination" label="visuo-motor skills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030775" start="61716" end="61727" title="distraction" label="distraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431287" start="61769" end="61786" title="peripheral vision" label="peripheral vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q652035" start="62568" end="62576" title="Dumfries" label="Dumfries"/>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="62649" end="62662" title="mental health" label="mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="62958" end="62975" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="" start="63140" end="63169" title="Animal Crossing: New Horizons" label="Animal Crossing: New Horizons"/>
<link wikidata="" start="63174" end="63217" title="Plants vs Zombies: Battle for Neighborville" label="Plants vs Zombies: Battle for Neighborville"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="63363" end="63379" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q48542381" start="63390" end="63403" title="Regan Mandryk" label="Regan Mandryk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514848" start="63411" end="63437" title="University of Saskatchewan" label="University of Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500368" start="63527" end="63533" title="Psychological stress" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q277633" start="63844" end="63855" title="millennials" label="millennials"/>
<link wikidata="Q85813246" start="64272" end="64291" title="Violence and video games" label="violent video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q473845" start="64392" end="64422" title="Columbine High School massacre" label="Columbine High School massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058933" start="64640" end="64668" title="Video game addiction" label="video games may be addictive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="64678" end="64703" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q50018" start="64773" end="64825" title="International Statistical Classification of Diseases" label="International Statistical Classification of Diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q466524" start="64863" end="64895" title="American Psychiatric Association" label="American Psychiatric Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q30686626" start="65069" end="65084" title="compulsion loop" label="compulsion loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="65122" end="65130" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="65718" end="65726" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086874" start="65808" end="65816" title="loot box" label="loot box"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750920" start="65986" end="66027" title="1993 congressional hearings on video games" label="1993 United States Congressional hearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q241163" start="66056" end="66069" title="Mortal Kombat" label="Mortal Kombat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193017" start="66173" end="66186" title="Jack Thompson (activist)" label="Jack Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q149106" start="66220" end="66240" title="Grand Theft Auto III" label="Grand Theft Auto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q853344" start="66257" end="66264" title="Manhunt (video game)" label="Manhunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732733" start="66317" end="66327" title="No Russian" label="No Russian"/>
<link wikidata="" start="66351" end="66381" title="Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2" label="Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18114445" start="66496" end="66525" title="Gamergate (harassment campaign)" label="Gamergate harassment campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="66684" end="66690" title="LGBT" label="LGBTQ+"/>
<link wikidata="Q56739547" start="66896" end="66907" title="crunch time (video gaming)" label="crunch time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125949" start="67165" end="67176" title="retrogaming" label="retrogaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217614" start="67864" end="67889" title="National Videogame Museum (United States)" label="National Videogame Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q128269" start="67893" end="67906" title="Frisco, Texas" label="Frisco, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q825232" start="68085" end="68106" title="Computerspielemuseum Berlin" label="Computer Games Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895567" start="68125" end="68157" title="Museum of Soviet Arcade Machines" label="Museum of Soviet Arcade Machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940761" start="68194" end="68233" title="Museum of Art and Digital Entertainment" label="Museum of Art and Digital Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="68237" end="68256" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402919" start="68355" end="68380" title="Video Game Museum of Rome" label="Video Game Museum of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049056" start="68448" end="68504" title="International Center for the History of Electronic Games" label="International Center for the History of Electronic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767051" start="68508" end="68518" title="The Strong" label="The Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="68522" end="68541" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="68752" end="68775" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="68918" end="68938" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q13301727" start="68960" end="69001" title="List of video games in the Museum of Modern Art" label="20 video games and one video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192305" start="69079" end="69110" title="Smithsonian American Art Museum" label="Smithsonian American Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409523" start="69138" end="69160" title="The Art of Video Games" label="The Art of Video Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137743" start="69299" end="69319" title="Lists of video games" label="Lists of video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604741" start="69322" end="69366" title="List of accessories to video games by system" label="List of accessories to video games by system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112805" start="69369" end="69391" title="Outline of video games" label="Outline of video games"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5367" wikidata="Q79064" url="?curid=5367" title="Cambrian">
<text>The Cambrian ( ) is the first geological period of the Paleozoic Era, and the Phanerozoic Eon. The Cambrian lasted 51.95 million years from the end of the preceding Ediacaran period 538.8 Ma (million years ago) to the beginning of the Ordovician Period 486.85 Ma.

Most of the continents lay in the southern hemisphere surrounded by the vast Panthalassa Ocean. The assembly of Gondwana during the Ediacaran and early Cambrian led to the development of new convergent plate boundaries and continental-margin arc magmatism along its margins that helped drive up global temperatures. Laurentia lay across the equator, separated from Gondwana by the opening Iapetus Ocean.

The Cambrian was a time of greenhouse climate conditions, with high levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide and low levels of oxygen in the atmosphere and seas. Upwellings of anoxic deep ocean waters into shallow marine environments led to extinction events, whilst periods of raised oxygenation led to increased biodiversity.

The Cambrian marked a profound change in life on Earth; prior to the Period, the majority of living organisms were small, unicellular and poorly preserved. Complex, multicellular organisms gradually became more common during the Ediacaran, but it was not until the Cambrian that the rapid diversification of lifeforms, known as the Cambrian explosion, produced the first representatives of most modern animal phyla. The Period is also unique in its unusually high proportion of lagerstätte deposits, sites of exceptional preservation where &quot;soft&quot; parts of organisms are preserved as well as their more resistant shells.

By the end of the Cambrian, myriapods, arachnids, and hexapods started adapting to the land, along with the first plants.

== Etymology and history ==
The term &quot;Cambrian&quot; is derived from the Latin version of &quot;Cymru&quot;, the Welsh name for Wales, where rocks of this age were first studied. It was named by Adam Sedgwick in 1835, who divided it into three groups; the Lower, Middle, and Upper. He defined the boundary between the Cambrian and the overlying Silurian, together with Roderick Murchison, in their joint paper &quot;On the Silurian and Cambrian Systems, Exhibiting the Order in which the Older Sedimentary Strata Succeed each other in England and Wales&quot;. This early agreement did not last.

Due to the scarcity of fossils, Sedgwick used rock types to identify Cambrian strata. He was also slow in publishing further work. The clear fossil record of the Silurian, however, allowed Murchison to correlate rocks of a similar age across Europe and Russia, and on these he published extensively. As increasing numbers of fossils were identified in older rocks, he extended the base of the Silurian downwards into the Sedgwick&#x27;s &quot;Upper Cambrian&quot;, claiming all fossilised strata for &quot;his&quot; Silurian series. Matters were complicated further when, in 1852, fieldwork carried out by Sedgwick and others revealed an unconformity within the Silurian, with a clear difference in fauna between the two. This allowed Sedgwick to now claim a large section of the Silurian for &quot;his&quot; Cambrian and gave the Cambrian an identifiable fossil record. The dispute between the two geologists and their supporters, over the boundary between the Cambrian and Silurian, would extend beyond the life times of both Sedgwick and Murchison. It was not resolved until 1879, when Charles Lapworth proposed the disputed strata belong to its own system, which he named the Ordovician.

The term &quot;Cambrian&quot; for the oldest period of the Paleozoic was officially agreed in 1960, at the 21st International Geological Congress. It only includes Sedgwick&#x27;s &quot;Lower Cambrian series&quot;, but its base has been extended into much older rocks.

== Geology ==

=== Stratigraphy ===
Systems, series and stages can be defined globally or regionally. For global stratigraphic correlation, the ICS ratify rock units based on a Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) from a single formation (a stratotype) identifying the lower boundary of the unit. Currently the boundaries of the Cambrian System, three series and six stages are defined by global stratotype sections and points.

==== Ediacaran-Cambrian boundary ====
The lower boundary of the Cambrian was originally held to represent the first appearance of complex life, represented by trilobites. The recognition of small shelly fossils before the first trilobites, and Ediacara biota substantially earlier, has led to calls for a more precisely defined base to the Cambrian Period.

Despite the long recognition of its distinction from younger Ordovician rocks and older Precambrian rocks, it was not until 1994 that the Cambrian system/period was internationally ratified. After decades of careful consideration, a continuous sedimentary sequence at Fortune Head, Newfoundland was settled upon as a formal base of the Cambrian Period, which was to be correlated worldwide by the earliest appearance of &quot;Treptichnus pedum&quot;. Discovery of this fossil a few metres below the GSSP led to the refinement of this statement, and it is the &quot;T. pedum&quot; ichnofossil assemblage that is now formally used to correlate the base of the Cambrian.

This formal designation allowed radiometric dates to be obtained from samples across the globe that corresponded to the base of the Cambrian. An early date of 570 Ma quickly gained favour, though the methods used to obtain this number are now considered to be unsuitable and inaccurate. A more precise analysis using modern radiometric dating yields a date of 538.8 ± 0.6 Ma. The ash horizon in Oman from which this date was recovered corresponds to a marked fall in the abundance of carbon-13 that correlates to equivalent excursions elsewhere in the world, and to the disappearance of distinctive Ediacaran fossils (&quot;Namacalathus&quot;, &quot;Cloudina&quot;). Nevertheless, there are arguments that the dated horizon in Oman does not correspond to the Ediacaran-Cambrian boundary, but represents a facies change from marine to evaporite-dominated strata – which would mean that dates from other sections, ranging from 544 to 542 Ma, are more suitable.

*Most Russian paleontologists define the lower boundary of the Cambrian at the base of the Tommotian Stage, characterized by diversification and global distribution of organisms with mineral skeletons and the appearance of the first Archaeocyath bioherms.
==== Terreneuvian ====
The Terreneuvian is the lowermost series/epoch of the Cambrian, lasting from 538.8 ± 0.6 Ma to c. 521 Ma. It is divided into two stages: the Fortunian stage, 538.8 ± 0.6 Ma to c. 529 Ma; and the unnamed Stage 2, c. 529 Ma to c. 521 Ma. The name Terreneuvian was ratified by the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS) in 2007, replacing the previous &quot;Cambrian Series 1&quot;. The GSSP defining its base is at Fortune Head on the Burin Peninsula, eastern Newfoundland, Canada (see Ediacaran - Cambrian boundary above). The Terreneuvian is the only series in the Cambrian to contain no trilobite fossils. Its lower part is characterised by complex, sediment-penetrating Phanerozoic-type trace fossils, and its upper part by small shelly fossils.

==== Cambrian Series 2 ====
The second series/epoch of the Cambrian is currently unnamed and known as Cambrian Series 2. It lasted from c. 521 Ma to c. 506.5 Ma. Its two stages are also unnamed and known as Cambrian Stage 3, c. 521 Ma to c. 514.5 Ma, and Cambrian Stage 4, c. 514.5 Ma to c. 506.5 Ma. The base of Series 2 does not yet have a GSSP, but it is expected to be defined in strata marking the first appearance of trilobites in Gondwana. There was a rapid diversification of metazoans during this epoch, but their restricted geographic distribution, particularly of the trilobites and archaeocyaths, have made global correlations difficult, hence ongoing efforts to establish a GSSP.

==== Miaolingian ====

The Miaolingian is the third series/epoch of the Cambrian, lasting from c. 506.5 Ma to c. 497 Ma, and roughly identical to the middle Cambrian in older literature. It is divided into three stages: the Wuliuan c. 506.5 Ma to 504.5 Ma; the Drumian c. 504.5 Ma to c. 500.5 Ma; and the Guzhangian c. 500.5 Ma to c. 497 Ma. The name replaces Cambrian Series 3 and was ratified by the IUGS in 2018. It is named after the Miaoling Mountains in southeastern Guizhou Province, South China, where the GSSP marking its base is found. This is defined by the first appearance of the oryctocephalid trilobite &quot;Oryctocephalus indicus&quot;. Secondary markers for the base of the Miaolingian include the appearance of many acritarchs forms, a global marine transgression, and the disappearance of the polymerid trilobites, &quot;Bathynotus&quot; or &quot;Ovatoryctocara.&quot; Unlike the Terreneuvian and Series 2, all the stages of the Miaolingian are defined by GSSPs&quot;.&quot;

The olenellids, eodiscids, and most redlichiids trilobites went extinct at the boundary between Series 2 and the Miaolingian. This is considered the oldest mass extinction of trilobites.

==== Furongian ====
The Furongian, c. 497 Ma to 486.85 ± 1.5 Ma, is the fourth and uppermost series/epoch of the Cambrian. The name was ratified by the IUGS in 2003 and replaces Cambrian Series 4 and the traditional &quot;Upper Cambrian&quot;. The GSSP for the base of the Furongian is in the Wuling Mountains, in northwestern Hunan Province, China. It coincides with the first appearance of the agnostoid trilobite &quot;Glyptagnostus reticulatus&quot;, and is near the beginning of a large positive δ13C isotopic excursion.

The Furongian is divided into three stages: the Paibian, c. 497 Ma to c. 494 Ma, and the Jiangshanian c. 494.2 Ma to c. 491 Ma, which have defined GSSPs; and the unnamed Cambrian Stage 10, c. 491 Ma to 486.85 ± 1.5 Ma.

==== Cambrian–Ordovician boundary ====
The GSSP for the Cambrian–Ordovician boundary is at Green Point, western Newfoundland, Canada, and is dated at 486.85 Ma. It is defined by the appearance of the conodont &quot;Iapetognathus fluctivagus&quot;. Where these conodonts are not found the appearance of planktonic graptolites or the trilobite &quot;Jujuyaspis borealis&quot; can be used. The boundary also corresponds with the peak of the largest positive variation in the δ13C curve during the boundary time interval and with a global marine transgression.

=== Impact structures ===
Major meteorite impact structures include: the early Cambrian (c. 535 Ma) Neugrund crater in the Gulf of Finland, Estonia, a complex meteorite crater about 20 km in diameter, with two inner ridges of about 7 km and 6 km diameter, and an outer ridge of 8 km that formed as the result of an impact of an asteroid 1 km in diameter; the 5 km diameter Gardnos crater (500±10 Ma) in Buskerud, Norway, where post-impact sediments indicate the impact occurred in a shallow marine environment with rock avalanches and debris flows occurring as the crater rim was breached not long after impact; the 24 km diameter Presqu&#x27;ile crater (500 Ma or younger) Quebec, Canada; the 19 km diameter Glikson crater (c. 508 Ma) in Western Australia; the 5 km diameter Mizarai crater (500±10 Ma) in Lithuania; and the 3.2 km diameter Newporte structure (c. 500 Ma or slightly younger) in North Dakota, U.S.A.

== Paleogeography ==
Reconstructing the position of the continents during the Cambrian is based on palaeomagnetic, palaeobiogeographic, tectonic, geological and palaeoclimatic data. However, these have different levels of uncertainty and can produce contradictory locations for the major continents. This, together with the ongoing debate around the existence of the Neoproterozoic supercontinent of Pannotia, means that while most models agree the continents lay in the southern hemisphere, with the vast Panthalassa Ocean covering most of northern hemisphere, the exact distribution and timing of the movements of the Cambrian continents varies between models.
Most models show Gondwana stretching from the south polar region to north of the equator. Early in the Cambrian, the south pole corresponded with the western South American sector and as Gondwana rotated anti-clockwise, by the middle of the Cambrian, the south pole lay in the northwest African region.

Laurentia lay across the equator, separated from Gondwana by the Iapetus Ocean. Proponents of Pannotia have Laurentia and Baltica close to the Amazonia region of Gondwana with a narrow Iapetus Ocean that only began to open once Gondwana was fully assembled c. 520 Ma. Those not in favour of the existence of Pannotia show the Iapetus opening during the Late Neoproterozoic, with up to c. 6,500 km (c. 4038 miles) between Laurentia and West Gondwana at the beginning of the Cambrian.

Of the smaller continents, Baltica lay between Laurentia and Gondwana, the Ran Ocean (an arm of the Iapetus) opening between it and Gondwana. Siberia lay close to the western margin of Gondwana and to the north of Baltica. Annamia and South China formed a single continent situated off north central Gondwana. The location of North China is unclear. It may have lain along the northeast Indian sector of Gondwana or already have been a separate continent.

=== Laurentia ===
During the Cambrian, Laurentia lay across or close to the equator.  It drifted south and rotated c. 20° anticlockwise during the middle Cambrian, before drifting north again in the late Cambrian.

After the Late Neoproterozoic (or mid-Cambrian) rifting of Laurentia from Gondwana and the subsequent opening of the Iapetus Ocean, Laurentia was largely surrounded by passive margins with much of the continent covered by shallow seas.

As Laurentia separated from Gondwana, a sliver of continental terrane rifted from Laurentia with the narrow Taconic seaway opening between them. The remains of this terrane are now found in southern Scotland, Ireland, and Newfoundland. Intra-oceanic subduction either to the southeast of this terrane in the Iapetus, or to its northwest in the Taconic seaway, resulted in the formation of an island arc. This accreted to the terrane in the late Cambrian, triggering southeast-dipping subduction beneath the terrane itself and consequent closure of the marginal seaway. The terrane collided with Laurentia in the Early Ordovician.

Towards the end of the early Cambrian, rifting along Laurentia&#x27;s southeastern margin led to the separation of Cuyania (now part of Argentina) from the Ouachita embayment with a new ocean established that continued to widen through the Cambrian and Early Ordovician.

=== Gondwana ===
Gondwana was a massive continent, three times the size of any of the other Cambrian continents. Its continental land area extended from the south pole to north of the equator. Around it were extensive shallow seas and numerous smaller land areas.

The cratons that formed Gondwana came together during the Neoproterozoic to early Cambrian. A narrow ocean separated Amazonia from Gondwana until c. 530 Ma and the Arequipa-Antofalla block united with the South American sector of Gondwana in the early Cambrian. The Kuunga Orogeny between northern (Congo Craton, Madagascar and India) and southern Gondwana (Kalahari Craton and East Antarctica), which began c. 570 Ma, continued with parts of northern Gondwana over-riding southern Gondwana and was accompanied by metamorphism and the intrusion of granites.

Subduction zones, active since the Neoproterozoic, extended around much of Gondwana&#x27;s margins, from northwest Africa southwards round South America, South Africa, East Antarctica, and the eastern edge of West Australia. Shorter subduction zones existed north of Arabia and India.

The Famatinian continental arc stretched from central Peru in the north to central Argentina in the south. Subduction beneath this proto-Andean margin began by the late Cambrian.

Along the northern margin of Gondwana, between northern Africa and the Armorican Terranes of southern Europe, the continental arc of the Cadomian Orogeny continued from the Neoproterozoic in response to the oblique subduction of the Iapetus Ocean. This subduction extended west along the Gondwanan margin and by c. 530 Ma may have evolved into a major transform fault system.

At c. 511 Ma the continental flood basalts of the Kalkarindji large igneous province (LIP) began to erupt. These covered an area of &gt; 2.1 × 106 km2 across northern, central and Western Australia regions of Gondwana making it one of the largest, as well as the earliest, LIPs of the Phanerozoic. The timing of the eruptions suggests they played a role in the early to middle Cambrian mass extinction.

==== Ganderia, East and West Avalonia, Carolinia and Meguma Terranes ====
The terranes of Ganderia, East and West Avalonia, Carolinia and Meguma lay in polar regions during the early Cambrian, and high-to-mid southern latitudes by the mid to late Cambrian. They are commonly shown as an island arc-transform fault system along the northwestern margin of Gondwana north of northwest Africa and Amazonia, which rifted from Gondwana during the Ordovician. However, some models show these terranes as part of a single independent microcontinent, Greater Avalonia, lying to the west of Baltica and aligned with its eastern (Timanide) margin, with the Iapetus to the north and the Ran Ocean to the south.
=== Baltica ===
During the Cambrian, Baltica rotated more than 60° anti-clockwise and began to drift northwards. This rotation was accommodated by major strike-slip movements in the Ran Ocean between it and Gondwana.

Baltica lay at mid-to-high southerly latitudes, separated from Laurentia by the Iapetus and from Gondwana by the Ran Ocean. It was composed of two continents, Fennoscandia and Sarmatia, separated by shallow seas. The sediments deposited in these unconformably overlay Precambrian basement rocks. The lack of coarse-grained sediments indicates low lying topography across the centre of the craton.

Along Baltica&#x27;s northeastern margin subduction and arc magmatism associated with the Ediacaran Timanian Orogeny was coming to an end. In this region the early to middle Cambrian was a time of non-deposition and followed by late Cambrian rifting and sedimentation.

Its southeastern margin was also a convergent boundary, with the accretion of island arcs and microcontinents to the craton, although the details are unclear.

=== Siberia ===
Siberia began the Cambrian close to western Gondwana and north of Baltica. It drifted northwestwards to close to the equator as the Ægir Ocean opened between it and Baltica. Much of the continent was covered by shallow seas with extensive archaeocyathan reefs. The then northern third of the continent (present day south; Siberia has rotated 180° since the Cambrian) adjacent to its convergent margin was mountainous.

From the Late Neoproterozoic to the Ordovician, a series of island arcs accreted to Siberia&#x27;s then northeastern margin, accompanied by extensive arc and back-arc volcanism. These now form the Altai-Sayan terranes. Some models show a convergent plate margin extending from Greater Avalonia, through the Timanide margin of Baltica, forming the Kipchak island arc offshore of southeastern Siberia and curving round to become part of the Altai-Sayan convergent margin.

Along the then western margin, Late Neoproterozoic to early Cambrian rifting was followed by the development of a passive margin.

To the then north, Siberia was separated from the Central Mongolian terrane by the narrow and slowly opening Mongol-Okhotsk Ocean. The Central Mongolian terrane&#x27;s northern margin with the Panthalassa was convergent, whilst its southern margin facing the Mongol-Okhotsk Ocean was passive.

=== Central Asia ===
During the Cambrian, the terranes that would form Kazakhstania later in the Paleozoic were a series of island arc and accretionary complexes that lay along an intra-oceanic convergent plate margin to the south of North China.

To the south of these the Tarim microcontinent lay between Gondwana and Siberia. Its northern margin was passive for much of the Paleozoic, with thick sequences of platform carbonates and fluvial to marine sediments resting unconformably on Precambrian basement. Along its southeast margin was the Altyn Cambro–Ordovician accretionary complex, whilst to the southwest a subduction zone was closing the narrow seaway between the North West Kunlun region of Tarim and the South West Kunlun terrane.

=== North China ===

North China lay at equatorial to tropical latitudes during the early Cambrian, although its exact position is unknown. Some models show that it lies below the equatorial latitudes. Much of the craton was covered by shallow seas, with land in the northwest and southeast.

Northern North China was a passive margin until the onset of subduction and the development of the Bainaimiao arc in the late Cambrian. To its south was a convergent margin with a southwest dipping subduction zone, beyond which lay the North Qinling terrane (now part of the Qinling Orogenic Belt), together with Qilian-Qaidam, Altyn belts, and South West Kunlun terranes.

=== South China and Annamia ===
South China and Annamia formed a single continent. Strike-slip movement between it and Gondwana accommodated its steady drift northwards from offshore the Indian sector of Gondwana to near the western Australian sector. This northward drift is evidenced by the progressive increase in limestones and increasing faunal diversity.

The northern margin South China, including the South Qinling block, was a passive margin.

Along the southeastern margin, lower Cambrian volcanics indicate the accretion of an island arc along the Song Ma suture zone. Also, early in the Cambrian, the eastern margin of South China changed from passive to active, with the development of oceanic volcanic island arcs that now form part of the Japanese terrane.

== Climate ==
The distribution of climate-indicating sediments, including the wide latitudinal distribution of tropical carbonate platforms, archaeocyathan reefs and bauxites, and arid zone evaporites and calcrete deposits, show the Cambrian was a time of greenhouse climate conditions. During the late Cambrian the distribution of trilobite provinces also indicate only a moderate pole-to-equator temperature gradient. There is evidence of glaciation at high latitudes on Avalonia. However, it is unclear whether these sediments are early Cambrian or actually late Neoproterozoic in age.

Calculations of global average temperatures (GAT) vary depending on which techniques are used. Whilst some measurements show GAT over c. models that combine multiple sources give GAT of c. in the Terreneuvian increasing to c. for the rest of the Cambrian. The warm climate was linked to elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. Assembly of Gondwana led to the reorganisation of the tectonic plates with the development of new convergent plate margins and continental-margin arc magmatism that helped drive climatic warming. The eruptions of the Kalkarindji LIP basalts during Stage 4 and into the early Miaolingian, also released large quantities of carbon dioxide, methane and sulphur dioxide into the atmosphere leading to rapid climatic changes and elevated sea surface temperatures.

There is uncertainty around the maximum sea surface temperatures. These are calculated using δ18O values from marine rocks, and there is an ongoing debate about the levels δ18O in Cambrian seawater relative to the rest of the Phanerozoic. Estimates for tropical sea surface temperatures vary from c. , to c. . Modern average tropical sea surface temperatures are .

Atmospheric oxygen levels rose steadily rising from the Neoproterozoic due to the increase in photosynthesising organisms. Cambrian levels varied between c. 3% and 14% (present day levels are c. 21%). Low levels of atmospheric oxygen and the warm climate resulted in lower dissolved oxygen concentrations in marine waters and widespread anoxia in deep ocean waters.

There is a complex relationship between oxygen levels, the biogeochemistry of ocean waters, and the evolution of life. Newly evolved burrowing organisms exposed anoxic sediments to the overlying oxygenated seawater. This bioturbation decreased the burial rates of organic carbon and sulphur, which over time reduced atmospheric and oceanic oxygen levels, leading to widespread anoxic conditions. Periods of higher rates of continental weathering led to increased delivery of nutrients to the oceans, boosting productivity of phytoplankton and stimulating metazoan evolution. However, rapid increases in nutrient supply led to eutrophication, where rapid growth in phytoplankton numbers result in the depletion of oxygen in the surrounding waters.

Pulses of increased oxygen levels are linked to increased biodiversity; raised oxygen levels supported the increasing metabolic demands of organisms, and increased ecological niches by expanding habitable areas of seafloor. Conversely, incursions of oxygen-deficient water, due to changes in sea level, ocean circulation, upwellings from deeper waters and/or biological productivity, produced anoxic conditions that limited habitable areas, reduced ecological niches and resulted in extinction events both regional and global.

Overall, these dynamic, fluctuating environments, with global and regional anoxic incursions resulting in extinction events, and periods of increased oceanic oxygenation stimulating biodiversity, drove evolutionary innovation.

== Geochemistry ==
During the Cambrian, variations in isotope ratios were more frequent and more pronounced than later in the Phanerozoic, with at least 10 carbon isotope (δ13C) excursions (significant variations in global isotope ratios) recognised. These excursions record changes in the biogeochemistry of the oceans and atmosphere, which are due to processes such as the global rates of continental arc magmatism, rates of weathering and nutrients levels entering the marine environment, sea level changes, and biological factors including the impact of burrowing fauna on oxygen levels.

=== Isotope excursions ===

==== Base of Cambrian ====
The basal Cambrian δ13C excursion (BACE), together with low δ238U and raised δ34S indicates a period of widespread shallow marine anoxia, which occurs at the same time as the extinction of the Ediacaran acritarchs. It was followed by the rapid appearance and diversification of bilaterian animals.

==== Cambrian Stages 2 and 3 ====
During the early Cambrian, 87Sr/86Sr rose in response to enhanced continental weathering. This increased the input of nutrients into the oceans and led to higher burial rates of organic matter. Over long timescales, the extra oxygen released by organic carbon burial is balanced by a decrease in the rates of pyrite (FeS2) burial (a process which also releases oxygen), leading to stable levels of oxygen in the atmosphere. However, during the early Cambrian, a series of linked δ13C and δ34S excursions indicate high burial rates of both organic carbon and pyrite in biologically productive yet anoxic ocean floor waters. The oxygen-rich waters produced by these processes spread from the deep ocean into shallow marine environments, extending the habitable regions of the seafloor. These pulses of oxygen are associated with the radiation of the small shelly fossils and the Cambrian arthropod radiation isotope excursion (CARE). The increase in oxygenated waters in the deep ocean ultimately reduced the levels of organic carbon and pyrite burial, leading to a decrease in oxygen production and the re-establishment of anoxic conditions. This cycle was repeated several times during the early Cambrian.
==== Cambrian Stage 4 to early Miaolingian ====
The beginning of the eruptions of the Kalkarindji LIP basalts during Stage 4 and the early Miaolingian released large quantities of carbon dioxide, methane and sulphur dioxide into the atmosphere. The changes these wrought are reflected by three large and rapid δ13C excursions. Increased temperatures led to a global sea level rise that flooded continental shelves and interiors with anoxic waters from the deeper ocean and drowned carbonate platforms of archaeocyathan reefs, resulting in the widespread accumulation of black organic-rich shales. Known as the Sinsk anoxic extinction event, this triggered the first major extinction of the Phanerozoic, the 513 – 508 Ma Botoman-Toyonian Extinction (BTE), which included the loss of the archaeocyathids and hyoliths and saw a major drop in biodiversity. The rise in sea levels is also evidenced by a global decrease in 87Sr/86Sr. The flooding of continental areas decreased the rates of continental weathering, reducing the input of 87Sr to the oceans and lowering the 87Sr/86Sr of seawater.

The base of the Miaolingian is marked by the Redlichiid–Olenellid extinction carbon isotope event (ROECE), which coincides with the main phase of Kalkarindji volcanism.

During the Miaolingian, orogenic events along the Australian-Antarctic margin of Gondwana led to an increase in weathering and an influx of nutrients into the ocean, raising the level of productivity and organic carbon burial. These can be seen in the steady increase in 87Sr/86Sr and δ13C.

==== Early Furongian ====
Continued erosion of the deeper levels of the Gondwanan mountain belts led to a peak in 87Sr/86Sr and linked positive δ13C and δ34S excursions, known as the Steptoean positive carbon isotope excursion (SPICE). This indicates similar geochemical conditions to Stages 2 and 3 of the early Cambrian existed, with the expansion of seafloor anoxia enhancing the burial rates of organic matter and pyrite. This increase in the extent of anoxic seafloor conditions led to the extinction of the marjumiid and damesellid trilobites, whilst the increase in oxygen levels that followed helped drive the radiation of plankton.

87Sr/86Sr fell sharply near the top of the Jiangshanian Stage, and through Stage 10 as the Gondwanan mountains were eroded down and rates of weathering decreased.

=== Magnesium/calcium isotope ratios in seawater ===
The mineralogy of inorganic marine carbonates has varied through the Phanerozoic, controlled by the Mg2+/Ca2+ values of seawater. High Mg2+/Ca2+ result in calcium carbonate precipitation dominated by aragonite and high-magnesium calcite, known as aragonite seas, and low ratios result in calcite seas where low-magnesium calcite is the primary calcium carbonate precipitate. The shells and skeletons of biomineralising organisms reflect the dominant form of calcite.

During the late Ediacaran to early Cambrian increasing oxygen levels led to a decrease in ocean acidity and an increase in the concentration of calcium in sea water. However, there was not a simple transition from aragonite to calcite seas, rather a protracted and variable change through the Cambrian. Aragonite and high-magnesium precipitation continued from the Ediacaran into Cambrian Stage 2. Low-magnesium calcite skeletal hard parts appear in Cambrian Age 2, but inorganic precipitation of aragonite also occurred at this time. Mixed aragonite–calcite seas continued through the middle and late Cambrian, with fully calcite seas not established until the early Ordovician.

These variations and slow decrease in Mg2+/Ca2+ of seawater were due to low oxygen levels, high continental weathering rates and the geochemistry of the Cambrian seas. In conditions of low oxygen and high iron levels, iron substitutes for magnesium in authigenic clay minerals deposited on the ocean floor, slowing the removal rates of magnesium from seawater. The enrichment of ocean waters in silica, prior to the radiation of siliceous organisms, and the limited bioturbation of the anoxic ocean floor increased the rates of deposition, relative to the rest of the Phanerozoic, of these clays. This, together with the high input of magnesium into the oceans via enhanced continental weathering, delayed the reduction in Mg2+/Ca2+ and facilitated continued aragonite precipitation.

The conditions that favoured the deposition of authigenic clays were also ideal for the formation of &quot;lagerstätten&quot;, with the minerals in the clays replacing the soft body parts of Cambrian organisms.

== Flora ==
The Cambrian flora was little different from the Ediacaran. The principal taxa were the marine macroalgae &quot;Fuxianospira&quot;, &quot;Sinocylindra&quot;, and &quot;Marpolia&quot;. No calcareous macroalgae are known from the period.

No land plant (embryophyte) fossils are known from the Cambrian. However, biofilms and microbial mats were well developed on Cambrian tidal flats and beaches 500 mya, and microbes forming microbial Earth ecosystems, comparable with modern soil crust of desert regions, contributing to soil formation. Although molecular clock estimates suggest terrestrial plants may have first emerged during the Middle or Late Cambrian, the consequent large-scale removal of the greenhouse gas CO2 from the atmosphere through sequestration did not begin until the Ordovician.

== Oceanic life ==
The Cambrian explosion was a period of rapid multicellular growth. Most animal life during the Cambrian was aquatic. Trilobites were once assumed to be the dominant life form at that time, but this has proven to be incorrect. Arthropods were by far the most dominant animals in the ocean, but trilobites were only a minor part of the total arthropod diversity. What made them so apparently abundant was their heavy armor reinforced by calcium carbonate (CaCO3), which fossilized far more easily than the fragile chitinous exoskeletons of other arthropods, leaving numerous preserved remains.

The period marked a steep change in the diversity and composition of Earth&#x27;s biosphere. The Ediacaran biota suffered a mass extinction at the start of the Cambrian Period, which corresponded with an increase in the abundance and complexity of burrowing behaviour. This behaviour had a profound and irreversible effect on the substrate which transformed the seabed ecosystems. Before the Cambrian, the sea floor was covered by microbial mats. By the end of the Cambrian, burrowing animals had destroyed the mats in many areas through bioturbation. As a consequence, many of those organisms that were dependent on the mats became extinct, while the other species adapted to the changed environment that now offered new ecological niches. Around the same time there was a seemingly rapid appearance of representatives of all the mineralized phyla, including the Bryozoa, which were once thought to have only appeared in the Lower Ordovician. However, many of those phyla were represented only by stem-group forms; and since mineralized phyla generally have a benthic origin, they may not be a good proxy for (more abundant) non-mineralized phyla.

While the early Cambrian showed such diversification that it has been named the Cambrian Explosion, this changed later in the period, when there occurred a sharp drop in biodiversity. About 515 Ma, the number of species going extinct exceeded the number of new species appearing. Five million years later, the number of genera had dropped from an earlier peak of about 600 to just 450. Also, the speciation rate in many groups was reduced to between a fifth and a third of previous levels. 500 Ma, oxygen levels fell dramatically in the oceans, leading to hypoxia, while the level of poisonous hydrogen sulfide simultaneously increased, causing another extinction. The later half of Cambrian was surprisingly barren and showed evidence of several rapid extinction events; the stromatolites which had been replaced by reef building sponges known as Archaeocyatha, returned once more as the archaeocyathids became extinct. This declining trend did not change until the Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event.

Some Cambrian organisms ventured onto land, producing the trace fossils &quot;Protichnites&quot; and &quot;Climactichnites&quot;. Fossil evidence suggests that euthycarcinoids, an extinct group of arthropods, produced at least some of the &quot;Protichnites&quot;. Fossils of the track-maker of &quot;Climactichnites&quot; have not been found; however, fossil trackways and resting traces suggest a large, slug-like mollusc.

In contrast to later periods, the Cambrian fauna was somewhat restricted; free-floating organisms were rare, with the majority living on or close to the sea floor; and mineralizing animals were rarer than in future periods, in part due to the unfavourable ocean chemistry.

Many modes of preservation are unique to the Cambrian, and some preserve soft body parts, resulting in an abundance of . These include Sirius Passet, the Sinsk Algal Lens, the Maotianshan Shales, the Emu Bay Shale, and the Burgess Shale.

==Symbol==
The United States Federal Geographic Data Committee uses a &quot;barred capital C&quot; character to represent the Cambrian Period.
The Unicode character is .

==Gallery==
== See also ==
* Cambrian–Ordovician extinction event – circa 488 Ma
* Dresbachian extinction event—circa 499 Ma
* End Botomian extinction event—circa 513 Ma
* List of fossil sites &quot;(with link directory)&quot;
* Type locality (geology), the locality where a particular rock type, stratigraphic unit, fossil or mineral species is first identified
== References ==
== Further reading ==
*
*
* 
*
*

== External links ==
* Biostratigraphy – includes information on Cambrian trilobite biostratigraphy
* Sam Gon&#x27;s trilobite pages (contains numerous Cambrian trilobites)
* Examples of Cambrian Fossils
* Paleomap Project
* Report on the web on Amthor and others from &quot;Geology&quot; vol. 31
* Weird Life on the Mats
* Chronostratigraphy scale v.2018/08 | Cambrian</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="4" end="12" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="30" end="47" title="geological period" label="geological period"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="55" end="64" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101313" start="78" end="93" title="Phanerozoic Eon" label="Phanerozoic Eon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188654" start="165" end="174" title="Ediacaran" label="Ediacaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="235" end="245" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q208378" start="342" end="359" title="Panthalassa" label="Panthalassa Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="377" end="385" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255282" start="456" end="483" title="Convergent boundary" label="convergent plate boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426043" start="488" end="520" title="Volcanic arc" label="continental-margin arc magmatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q858071" start="581" end="590" title="Laurentia" label="Laurentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q581244" start="654" end="667" title="Iapetus Ocean" label="Iapetus Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604174" start="697" end="707" title="Greenhouse and icehouse Earth" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="760" end="774" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="793" end="799" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q568324" start="842" end="848" title="Anoxic waters" label="anoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="980" end="992" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="1036" end="1049" title="Life" label="life on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q36468" start="1117" end="1128" title="Unicellular organism" label="unicellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q36458" start="1160" end="1182" title="multicellular organism" label="multicellular organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q32919" start="1327" end="1345" title="Cambrian explosion" label="Cambrian explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="1404" end="1409" title="Phylum" label="phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122699" start="1473" end="1484" title="lagerstätte" label="lagerstätte"/>
<link wikidata="Q25823" start="1654" end="1663" title="Myriapoda" label="myriapods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358" start="1665" end="1673" title="arachnid" label="arachnid"/>
<link wikidata="Q105146" start="1680" end="1688" title="Hexapoda" label="hexapods"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1740" end="1746" title="Embryophytes#Phylogeny, evolutionary history and classification" label="plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q125922018" start="1850" end="1855" title="Cymru" label="Cymru"/>
<link wikidata="Q350891" start="1949" end="1962" title="Adam Sedgwick" label="Adam Sedgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q361900" start="2123" end="2141" title="Roderick Murchison" label="Roderick Murchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q932471" start="3439" end="3455" title="Charles Lapworth" label="Charles Lapworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q579663" start="3655" end="3688" title="International Union of Geological Sciences" label="International Geological Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q403523" start="3849" end="3856" title="System (stratigraphy)" label="Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q312468" start="3858" end="3864" title="Series (stratigraphy)" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123245" start="3869" end="3875" title="Stage (stratigraphy)" label="stages"/>
<link wikidata="Q37402" start="3990" end="4034" title="Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point" label="Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q736917" start="4056" end="4065" title="Geological formation" label="formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911158" start="4069" end="4079" title="stratotype" label="stratotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q17170" start="4416" end="4425" title="trilobite" label="trilobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058746" start="4447" end="4467" title="small shelly fossils" label="small shelly fossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q723846" start="4501" end="4515" title="Ediacara biota" label="Ediacara biota"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="4676" end="4686" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="4703" end="4714" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="4897" end="4909" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q841634" start="5041" end="5058" title="Treptichnus pedum" label="Treptichnus pedum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770822" start="5768" end="5777" title="carbon-13" label="carbon-13"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104445" start="5908" end="5920" title="Namacalathus" label="Namacalathus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104453" start="5934" end="5942" title="Cloudina" label="Cloudina"/>
<link wikidata="Q742139" start="6089" end="6095" title="facies" label="facies"/>
<link wikidata="Q510821" start="6477" end="6489" title="Archaeocyatha" label="Archaeocyath"/>
<link wikidata="Q515287" start="6527" end="6539" title="Terreneuvian" label="Terreneuvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="6564" end="6569" title="Geologic time scale" label="epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424618" start="6664" end="6673" title="Fortunian" label="Fortunian"/>
<link wikidata="Q579663" start="6801" end="6843" title="International Union of Geological Sciences" label="International Union of Geological Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q853800" start="7223" end="7235" title="trace fossil" label="trace fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025303" start="7385" end="7402" title="Cambrian Series 2" label="Cambrian Series 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025307" start="7490" end="7506" title="Cambrian Stage 3" label="Cambrian Stage 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025308" start="7538" end="7554" title="Cambrian Stage 4" label="Cambrian Stage 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="7667" end="7673" title="Stratum" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="7720" end="7728" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="7767" end="7776" title="Animal" label="metazoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q510821" start="7877" end="7890" title="Archaeocyatha" label="archaeocyaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025304" start="8004" end="8015" title="Miaolingian" label="Miaolingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025311" start="8201" end="8208" title="Wuliuan" label="Wuliuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43712" start="8238" end="8245" title="Drumian" label="Drumian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="8450" end="8466" title="Guizhou" label="Guizhou Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q21075902" start="8570" end="8584" title="Oryctocephalidae" label="oryctocephalid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105305" start="8601" end="8623" title="Oryctocephalus indicus" label="Oryctocephalus indicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q342747" start="8712" end="8721" title="acritarch" label="acritarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q301920" start="8739" end="8759" title="marine transgression" label="marine transgression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224061" start="8977" end="8987" title="Olenelloidea" label="olenellids"/>
<link wikidata="Q989966" start="8989" end="8998" title="Eodiscidae" label="eodiscids"/>
<link wikidata="Q134807" start="9009" end="9020" title="Redlichiida" label="redlichiids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269670" start="9185" end="9194" title="Furongian" label="Furongian"/>
<link wikidata="Q840300" start="9454" end="9470" title="Wuling Mountains" label="Wuling Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="9488" end="9502" title="Hunan" label="Hunan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278929" start="9662" end="9666" title="Δ13C" label="δ13C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060764" start="9736" end="9743" title="Paibian" label="Paibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33062" start="9777" end="9789" title="Jiangshanian" label="Jiangshanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025305" start="9858" end="9875" title="Cambrian Stage 10" label="Cambrian Stage 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116110" start="9999" end="10010" title="Green Point, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Green Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="10020" end="10032" title="Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q586245" start="10108" end="10116" title="conodont" label="conodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983403" start="10123" end="10148" title="Iapetognathus fluctivagus" label="Iapetognathus fluctivagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25367" start="10210" end="10218" title="plankton" label="plankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q332403" start="10221" end="10231" title="graptolite" label="graptolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17170" start="10240" end="10249" title="trilobite" label="trilobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742055" start="10566" end="10581" title="Neugrund crater" label="Neugrund crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686" start="10589" end="10604" title="Gulf of Finland" label="Gulf of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q164971" start="10839" end="10853" title="Gardnos crater" label="Gardnos crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q50618" start="10869" end="10877" title="Buskerud" label="Buskerud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924824" start="10981" end="10996" title="Rockslide" label="rock avalanches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817963" start="11001" end="11012" title="debris flow" label="debris flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002229" start="11097" end="11119" title="Presqu&amp;#x27;île crater" label="Presqu&amp;#x27;ile crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="11140" end="11146" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569620" start="11175" end="11189" title="Glikson crater" label="Glikson crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6884607" start="11242" end="11256" title="Mizarai crater" label="Mizarai crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725882" start="11307" end="11325" title="Newporte crater" label="Newporte structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="11361" end="11373" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q853422" start="11482" end="11496" title="Paleomagnetism" label="palaeomagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q52106" start="11498" end="11517" title="Biogeography" label="palaeobiogeographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="11519" end="11527" title="Tectonics" label="tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191069" start="11544" end="11558" title="Paleoclimatology" label="palaeoclimatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208078" start="11783" end="11791" title="Pannotia" label="Pannotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208378" start="11889" end="11900" title="Panthalassa" label="Panthalassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="12063" end="12071" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q858071" start="12350" end="12359" title="Laurentia" label="Laurentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q581244" start="12415" end="12428" title="Iapetus Ocean" label="Iapetus Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q805735" start="12472" end="12479" title="Baltica" label="Baltica"/>
<link wikidata="Q926051" start="12976" end="12983" title="Siberia (continent)" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050273" start="13069" end="13080" title="South China Craton" label="South China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990126" start="13160" end="13171" title="North China Craton" label="North China"/>
<link wikidata="Q473935" start="13554" end="13558" title="rift" label="rift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918464" start="13674" end="13688" title="passive margin" label="passive margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q509037" start="13805" end="13812" title="terrane" label="terrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378271" start="13851" end="13865" title="Taconic orogeny" label="Taconic seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="13993" end="14003" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515058" start="14135" end="14145" title="island arc" label="island arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553430" start="14152" end="14160" title="Accretion (geology)" label="accreted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197094" start="14489" end="14496" title="Cuyania" label="Cuyania"/>
<link wikidata="Q61138" start="14530" end="14538" title="Ouachita County, Arkansas" label="Ouachita"/>
<link wikidata="Q191110" start="14915" end="14921" title="craton" label="craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740899" start="15028" end="15036" title="Amazonian Craton" label="Amazonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789062" start="15075" end="15093" title="Arequipa-Antofalla" label="Arequipa-Antofalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="15116" end="15129" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888603" start="15177" end="15191" title="Kuunga orogeny" label="Kuunga Orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q659596" start="15210" end="15222" title="Congo Craton" label="Congo Craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="15224" end="15234" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2317328" start="15239" end="15244" title="Geology of India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991901" start="15269" end="15284" title="Kalahari Craton" label="Kalahari Craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q13028475" start="15289" end="15304" title="East Antarctic Shield" label="East Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="15425" end="15437" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q61041319" start="15446" end="15455" title="Igneous intrusion" label="intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="15459" end="15466" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="15470" end="15486" title="Subduction" label="Subduction zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="15624" end="15636" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13028475" start="15638" end="15653" title="East Antarctic Shield" label="East Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030132" start="15737" end="15743" title="Arabian-Nubian Shield" label="Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21044242" start="15760" end="15770" title="Famatinian orogeny" label="Famatinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579756" start="15771" end="15786" title="continental arc" label="continental arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q22672204" start="15893" end="15899" title="Andean orogeny" label="Andean"/>
<link wikidata="Q688887" start="16007" end="16025" title="Armorican terrane" label="Armorican Terranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q598454" start="16073" end="16089" title="Cadomian Orogeny" label="Cadomian Orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q110264021" start="16143" end="16161" title="oblique subduction" label="oblique subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q664573" start="16288" end="16303" title="transform fault" label="transform fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410264" start="16330" end="16355" title="Flood basalt" label="continental flood basalts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17974" start="16363" end="16374" title="Kalkarindji" label="Kalkarindji"/>
<link wikidata="Q792425" start="16375" end="16397" title="large igneous province" label="large igneous province"/>
<link wikidata="Q55814" start="16699" end="16714" title="Extinction event" label="mass extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816130" start="16807" end="16815" title="Ganderia" label="Ganderia"/>
<link wikidata="Q510087" start="16831" end="16839" title="Avalonia" label="Avalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044926" start="16841" end="16850" title="Carolina terrane" label="Carolinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575782" start="16855" end="16861" title="Meguma terrane" label="Meguma"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="16935" end="16943" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094611" start="17243" end="17257" title="Continental fragment" label="microcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q22159854" start="17336" end="17344" title="Timanide Orogen" label="Timanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q580133" start="17793" end="17805" title="Baltic Shield" label="Fennoscandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659014" start="17810" end="17818" title="Sarmatian Craton" label="Sarmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="17851" end="17859" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q876798" start="17880" end="17893" title="Unconformity" label="unconformably"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143968" start="17914" end="17922" title="Basement (geology)" label="basement"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="17987" end="17997" title="topography" label="topography"/>
<link wikidata="Q22159854" start="18132" end="18148" title="Timanide Orogen" label="Timanian Orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255282" start="18337" end="18356" title="convergent boundary" label="convergent boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q510821" start="18717" end="18737" title="Archaeocyatha" label="archaeocyathan reefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839004" start="19055" end="19063" title="Back-arc region" label="back-arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242791" start="19094" end="19105" title="Altai-Sayan region" label="Altai-Sayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85786116" start="19608" end="19628" title="Mongol-Okhotsk Ocean" label="Mongol-Okhotsk Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283292" start="19864" end="19876" title="Kazakhstania" label="Kazakhstania"/>
<link wikidata="Q419990" start="19932" end="19954" title="Accretionary wedge" label="accretionary complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q691831" start="20205" end="20224" title="Carbonate platform" label="platform carbonates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434465" start="20229" end="20236" title="Fluvial sediment processes" label="fluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q682334" start="20339" end="20344" title="Altyn-Tagh" label="Altyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q187871" start="20480" end="20486" title="Kunlun Mountains" label="Kunlun"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997242" start="21107" end="21128" title="Qinling orogenic belt" label="Qinling Orogenic Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="21523" end="21532" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="21549" end="21554" title="fauna" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535380" start="21960" end="21976" title="Geology of Japan" label="Japanese terrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="22145" end="22152" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q491689" start="22169" end="22178" title="evaporite" label="evaporite"/>
<link wikidata="Q558947" start="22184" end="22192" title="Caliche" label="calcrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q17170" start="22311" end="22320" title="trilobite" label="trilobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="22877" end="22891" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="23133" end="23139" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="23238" end="23245" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="23250" end="23265" title="Sulfur dioxide" label="sulphur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q344117" start="23453" end="23457" title="Δ18O" label="δ18O"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="23820" end="23834" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q568324" start="24063" end="24069" title="Anoxic waters" label="anoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q864379" start="24152" end="24167" title="biogeochemistry" label="biogeochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q864907" start="24314" end="24326" title="bioturbation" label="bioturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="24376" end="24383" title="Sulfur" label="sulphur"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="24528" end="24538" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="24618" end="24631" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="24719" end="24733" title="eutrophication" label="eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="24959" end="24968" title="Metabolism" label="metabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="25005" end="25021" title="ecological niche" label="ecological niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q659662" start="25651" end="25665" title="Isotopic ratio" label="isotope ratios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278929" start="25769" end="25773" title="Δ13C" label="δ13C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="26305" end="26310" title="Uranium" label="δ238U"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325416" start="26322" end="26326" title="Δ34S" label="δ34S"/>
<link wikidata="Q5173" start="26523" end="26532" title="bilateria" label="bilateria"/>
<link wikidata="Q938" start="26605" end="26614" title="Strontium" label="87Sr/86Sr"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="26887" end="26893" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="27464" end="27473" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q921087" start="28590" end="28598" title="Hyolitha" label="hyoliths"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611164" start="29521" end="29564" title="Steptoean positive carbon isotope excursion" label="Steptoean positive carbon isotope excursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16625194" start="29865" end="29875" title="Damesellidae" label="damesellid"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="30352" end="30369" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23775" start="30397" end="30406" title="aragonite" label="aragonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="30426" end="30433" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783732" start="30444" end="30457" title="aragonite sea" label="aragonite sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018792" start="30485" end="30496" title="calcite sea" label="calcite sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q784609" start="31598" end="31622" title="Authigenesis" label="authigenic clay minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122699" start="32238" end="32250" title="lagerstätten" label="lagerstätten"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32467" end="32479" title="Fuxianospira" label="Fuxianospira"/>
<link wikidata="Q130548430" start="32493" end="32505" title="Sinocylindra" label="Sinocylindra"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104047" start="32523" end="32531" title="Marpolia" label="Marpolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192154" start="32595" end="32605" title="land plant" label="land plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q192154" start="32607" end="32618" title="embryophyte" label="embryophyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="32796" end="32805" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190811" start="32831" end="32841" title="cryptobiotic soil" label="soil crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q192154" start="32936" end="32954" title="Embryophyta" label="terrestrial plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="33056" end="33070" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q161219" start="33685" end="33691" title="chitin" label="chitin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42762" start="33848" end="33857" title="biosphere" label="biosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q723846" start="33863" end="33878" title="Ediacaran biota" label="Ediacaran biota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025316" start="34056" end="34105" title="Cambrian substrate revolution" label="profound and irreversible effect on the substrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q468469" start="34128" end="34134" title="seabed" label="seabed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964349" start="34197" end="34210" title="microbial mat" label="microbial mat"/>
<link wikidata="Q38348" start="34609" end="34614" title="phylum" label="phyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q148134" start="34630" end="34637" title="Bryozoa" label="Bryozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q39350" start="35312" end="35322" title="speciation" label="speciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641506" start="35472" end="35479" title="hypoxia (environmental)" label="hypoxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="35510" end="35526" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q176739" start="35692" end="35704" title="stromatolite" label="stromatolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q510821" start="35764" end="35777" title="Archaeocyatha" label="Archaeocyatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599717" start="35883" end="35924" title="Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event" label="Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251819" start="36005" end="36017" title="Protichnites" label="Protichnites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133382" start="36034" end="36049" title="Climactichnites" label="Climactichnites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5414519" start="36087" end="36101" title="euthycarcinoid" label="euthycarcinoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953597" start="36333" end="36337" title="slug" label="slug"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="36343" end="36350" title="mollusc" label="mollusc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076133" start="36609" end="36624" title="ocean chemistry" label="ocean chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q427909" start="36762" end="36775" title="Sirius Passet" label="Sirius Passet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811179" start="36803" end="36821" title="Maotianshan Shales" label="Maotianshan Shales"/>
<link wikidata="Q94767" start="36827" end="36840" title="Emu Bay Shale" label="Emu Bay Shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440229" start="36895" end="36928" title="Federal Geographic Data Committee" label="Federal Geographic Data Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="37013" end="37020" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050953" start="37066" end="37102" title="Cambrian–Ordovician extinction event" label="Cambrian–Ordovician extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q277055" start="37120" end="37131" title="Dresbachian" label="Dresbachian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375752" start="37164" end="37176" title="End-Botomian mass extinction" label="End Botomian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828615" start="37209" end="37229" title="List of fossil sites" label="List of fossil sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973416" start="37266" end="37289" title="Type locality (geology)" label="Type locality (geology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q864826" start="37535" end="37550" title="biostratigraphy" label="biostratigraphy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5370" wikidata="Q714737" url="?curid=5370" title="Theory of categories">
<text>In ontology, the theory of categories concerns itself with the &quot;categories of being&quot;: the highest &quot;genera&quot; or &quot;kinds of entities&quot;. To investigate the categories of being, or simply categories, is to determine the most fundamental and the broadest classes of entities. A distinction between such categories, in making the categories or applying them, is called an ontological distinction. Various systems of categories have been proposed, they often include categories for substances, properties, relations, states of affairs or events. A representative question within the theory of categories might articulate itself, for example, in a query like, &quot;Are universals prior to particulars?&quot;

==Early development==
The process of abstraction required to discover the number and names of the categories of being has been undertaken by many philosophers since Aristotle and involves the careful inspection of each concept to ensure that there is no higher category or categories under which that concept could be subsumed. The scholars of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries developed Aristotle&#x27;s ideas. For example, Gilbert of Poitiers divides Aristotle&#x27;s ten categories into two sets, primary and secondary, according to whether they inhere in the subject or not:
*Primary categories: Substance, Relation, Quantity and Quality
*Secondary categories: Place, Time, Situation, Condition, Action, Passion
Furthermore, following Porphyry’s likening of the classificatory hierarchy to a tree, they concluded that the major classes could be subdivided to form subclasses, for example, Substance could be divided into Genus and Species, and Quality could be subdivided into Property and Accident, depending on whether the property was necessary or contingent. An alternative line of development was taken by Plotinus in the second century who by a process of abstraction reduced Aristotle&#x27;s list of ten categories to five: Substance, Relation, Quantity, Motion and Quality. Plotinus further suggested that the latter three categories of his list, namely Quantity, Motion and Quality correspond to three different kinds of relation and that these three categories could therefore be subsumed under the category of Relation. This was to lead to the supposition that there were only two categories at the top of the hierarchical tree, namely Substance and Relation. Many supposed that relations only exist in the mind. Substance and Relation, then, are closely commutative with Matter and Mind--this is expressed most clearly in the dualism of René Descartes.

===Vaisheshika===
===Stoic===
===Aristotle===
One of Aristotle’s early interests lay in the classification of the natural world, how for example the genus &quot;animal&quot; could be first divided into &quot;two-footed animal&quot; and then into &quot;wingless, two-footed animal&quot;. He realised that the distinctions were being made according to the qualities the animal possesses, the quantity of its parts and the kind of motion that it exhibits. To fully complete the proposition &quot;this animal is ...&quot; Aristotle stated in his work on the Categories that there were ten kinds of predicate where ...

&quot;... each signifies either substance or quantity or quality or relation or where or when or being-in-a-position or having or acting or being acted upon&quot;.

He realised that predicates could be simple or complex. The simple kinds consist of a subject and a predicate linked together by the &quot;categorical&quot; or inherent type of relation. For Aristotle the more complex kinds were limited to propositions where the predicate is compounded of two of the above categories for example &quot;this is a horse running&quot;. More complex kinds of proposition were only discovered after Aristotle by the Stoic, Chrysippus, who developed the &quot;hypothetical&quot; and &quot;disjunctive&quot; types of syllogism and these were terms which were to be developed through the Middle Ages and were to reappear in Kant&#x27;s system of categories.

&quot;Category&quot; came into use with Aristotle&#x27;s essay &quot;Categories&quot;, in which he discussed univocal and equivocal terms, predication, and ten categories:
*Substance, essence (&quot;ousia&quot;) – examples of primary substance: this man, this horse; secondary substance (species, genera): man, horse
*Quantity (&quot;poson&quot;, how much), discrete or continuous – examples: two cubits long, number, space, (length of) time.
*Quality (&quot;poion&quot;, of what kind or description) – examples: white, black, grammatical, hot, sweet, curved, straight.
*Relation (&quot;pros ti&quot;, toward something) – examples: double, half, large, master, knowledge.
*Place (&quot;pou&quot;, where) – examples: in a marketplace, in the Lyceum
*Time (&quot;pote&quot;, when) – examples: yesterday, last year
*Position, posture, attitude (&quot;keisthai&quot;, to lie) – examples: sitting, lying, standing
*State, condition (&quot;echein&quot;, to have or be) – examples: shod, armed
*Action (&quot;poiein&quot;, to make or do) – examples: to lance, to heat, to cool (something)
*Affection, passion (&quot;paschein&quot;, to suffer or undergo) – examples: to be lanced, to be heated, to be cooled

===Plotinus===
Plotinus in writing his &quot;Enneads&quot; around AD 250 recorded that &quot;Philosophy at a very early age investigated the number and character of the existents ... some found ten, others less ... to some the genera were the first principles, to others only a generic classification of existents.&quot; He realised that some categories were reducible to others saying &quot;Why are not Beauty, Goodness and the virtues, Knowledge and Intelligence included among the primary genera?&quot; He concluded that such transcendental categories and even the categories of Aristotle were in some way posterior to the three Eleatic categories first recorded in Plato&#x27;s dialogue &quot;Parmenides&quot; and which comprised the following three coupled terms: 
*Unity/Plurality
*Motion/Stability
*Identity/Difference

Plotinus called these &quot;the hearth of reality&quot; deriving from them not only the three categories of Quantity, Motion and Quality but also what came to be known as &quot;the three moments of the Neoplatonic world process&quot;:
*First, there existed the &quot;One&quot;, and his view that &quot;the origin of things is a contemplation&quot;
*The Second &quot;is certainly an activity ... a secondary phase ... life streaming from life ... energy running through the universe&quot;
*The Third is some kind of Intelligence concerning which he wrote &quot;Activity is prior to Intellection ... and self knowledge&quot;

Plotinus likened the three to the centre, the radii and the circumference of a circle, and clearly thought that the principles underlying the categories were the first principles of creation. &quot;From a single root all being multiplies.&quot; Similar ideas were to be introduced into Early Christian thought by, for example, Gregory of Nazianzus who summed it up saying &quot;Therefore, Unity, having from all eternity arrived by motion at duality, came to rest in Trinity.&quot;

==Modern development==
Kant and Hegel accused the Aristotelian table of categories of being &#x27;&#x27;, derived arbitrarily and in bulk from experience, without any systematic necessity.

The early modern dualism, which has been described above, of Mind and Matter or Subject and Relation, as reflected in the writings of Descartes underwent a substantial revision in the late 18th century. The first objections to this stance were formulated in the eighteenth century by Immanuel Kant who realised that we can say nothing about Substance except through the relation of the subject to other things. 

For example: In the sentence &quot;This is a house&quot; the substantive subject &quot;house&quot; only gains meaning in relation to human use patterns or to other similar houses. The category of Substance disappears from Kant&#x27;s tables, and under the heading of Relation, Kant lists &quot;inter alia&quot; the three relationship types of Disjunction, Causality and Inherence. The three older concepts of Quantity, Motion and Quality, as Peirce discovered, could be subsumed under these three broader headings in that Quantity relates to the subject through the relation of Disjunction; Motion relates to the subject through the relation of Causality; and Quality relates to the subject through the relation of Inherence. Sets of three continued to play an important part in the nineteenth century development of the categories, most notably in G.W.F. Hegel&#x27;s extensive tabulation of categories, and in C.S. Peirce&#x27;s categories set out in his work on the logic of relations. One of Peirce&#x27;s contributions was to call the three primary categories Firstness, Secondness and Thirdness which both emphasises their general nature, and avoids the confusion of having the same name for both the category itself and for a concept within that category.

In a separate development, and building on the notion of primary and secondary categories introduced by the Scholastics, Kant introduced the idea that secondary or &quot;derivative&quot; categories could be derived from the primary categories through the combination of one primary category with another. This would result in the formation of three secondary categories: the first, &quot;Community&quot; was an example that Kant gave of such a derivative category; the second, &quot;Modality&quot;, introduced by Kant, was a term which Hegel, in developing Kant&#x27;s dialectical method, showed could also be seen as a derivative category; and the third, &quot;Spirit&quot; or &quot;Will&quot; were terms that Hegel and Schopenhauer were developing separately for use in their own systems. Karl Jaspers in the twentieth century, in his development of existential categories, brought the three together, allowing for differences in terminology, as Substantiality, Communication and Will. This pattern of three primary and three secondary categories was used most notably in the nineteenth century by Peter Mark Roget to form the six headings of his Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases. The headings used were the three objective categories of Abstract Relation, Space (including Motion) and Matter and the three subjective categories of Intellect, Feeling and Volition, and he found that under these six headings all the words of the English language, and hence any possible predicate, could be assembled.

===Kant===
In the &quot;Critique of Pure Reason&quot; (1781), Immanuel Kant argued that the categories are part of our own mental structure and consist of a set of &quot;a priori&quot; concepts through which we interpret the world around us. These concepts correspond to twelve logical functions of the understanding which we use to make judgements and there are therefore two tables given in the &quot;Critique&quot;, one of the Judgements and a corresponding one for the Categories. To give an example, the logical function behind our reasoning from ground to consequence (based on the Hypothetical relation) underlies our understanding of the world in terms of cause and effect (the Causal relation). In each table the number twelve arises from, firstly, an initial division into two: the Mathematical and the Dynamical; a second division of each of these headings into a further two: Quantity and Quality, and Relation and Modality respectively; and, thirdly, each of these then divides into a further three subheadings as follows.

Table of Judgements

Mathematical
*Quantity
**Universal
**Particular
**Singular
*Quality
**Affirmative
**Negative
**Infinite
Dynamical
*Relation
**Categorical
**Hypothetical
**Disjunctive
*Modality
**Problematic
**Assertoric
**Apodictic

Table of Categories

Mathematical
*Quantity
**Unity
**Plurality
**Totality
*Quality
**Reality
**Negation
**Limitation
Dynamical
*Relation
**Inherence and Subsistence (substance and accident)
**Causality and Dependence (cause and effect)
**Community (reciprocity)
*Modality
**Possibility
**Existence
**Necessity
Criticism of Kant&#x27;s system followed, firstly, by Arthur Schopenhauer, who amongst other things was unhappy with the term &quot;Community&quot;, and declared that the tables &quot;do open violence to truth, treating it as nature was treated by old-fashioned gardeners&quot;, and secondly, by W.T.Stace who in his book &quot;The Philosophy of Hegel&quot; suggested that in order to make Kant&#x27;s structure completely symmetrical a third category would need to be added to the Mathematical and the Dynamical. This, he said, Hegel was to do with his category of concept.

===Hegel===
G.W.F. Hegel in his &quot;Science of Logic&quot; (1812) attempted to provide a more comprehensive system of categories than Kant and developed a structure that was almost entirely triadic. So important were the categories to Hegel that he claimed the first principle of the world, which he called the &quot;absolute&quot;, is &quot;a system of categories  the categories must be the reason of which the world is a consequent&quot;.

Using his own logical method of sublation, later called the Hegelian dialectic, reasoning from the abstract through the negative to the concrete, he arrived at a hierarchy of some 270 categories, as explained by W. T. Stace. The three very highest categories were &quot;logic&quot;, &quot;nature&quot; and &quot;spirit&quot;. The three highest categories of &quot;logic&quot;, however, he called &quot;being&quot;, &quot;essence&quot;, and &quot;notion&quot; which he explained as follows:

* Being was differentiated from Nothing by containing with it the concept of the &quot;other&quot;, an initial internal division that can be compared with Kant&#x27;s category of disjunction. Stace called the category of Being the sphere of common sense containing concepts such as consciousness, sensation, quantity, quality and measure.
* Essence. The &quot;other&quot; separates itself from the &quot;one&quot; by a kind of motion, reflected in Hegel&#x27;s first synthesis of &quot;becoming&quot;. For Stace this category represented the sphere of science containing within it firstly, the thing, its form and properties; secondly, cause, effect and reciprocity, and thirdly, the principles of classification, identity and difference. 
* Notion. Having passed over into the &quot;Other&quot; there is an almost neoplatonic return into a higher unity that in embracing the &quot;one&quot; and the &quot;other&quot; enables them to be considered together through their inherent qualities. This according to Stace is the sphere of philosophy proper where we find not only the three types of logical proposition: disjunctive, hypothetical, and categorical but also the three transcendental concepts of beauty, goodness and truth.

Schopenhauer&#x27;s category that corresponded with &quot;notion&quot; was that of &quot;idea&quot;, which in his &quot;Four-Fold Root of Sufficient Reason&quot; he complemented with the category of the &quot;will&quot;. The title of his major work was &quot;The World as Will and Idea&quot;. The two other complementary categories, reflecting one of Hegel&#x27;s initial divisions, were those of Being and Becoming. At around the same time, Goethe was developing his colour theories in the of 1810, and introduced similar principles of combination and complementation, symbolising, for Goethe, &quot;the primordial relations which belong both to nature and vision&quot;. Hegel in his &quot;Science of Logic&quot; accordingly asks us to see his system not as a tree but as a circle.

==Twentieth-century development==
In the twentieth century the primacy of the division between the subjective and the objective, or between mind and matter, was disputed by, among others, Bertrand Russell and Gilbert Ryle. Philosophy began to move away from the metaphysics of categorisation towards the linguistic problem of trying to differentiate between, and define, the words being used. Ludwig Wittgenstein’s conclusion was that there were no clear definitions which we can give to words and categories but only a &quot;halo&quot; or &quot;corona&quot; of related meanings radiating around each term. Gilbert Ryle thought the problem could be seen in terms of dealing with &quot;a galaxy of ideas&quot; rather than a single idea, and suggested that category mistakes are made when a concept (e.g. &quot;university&quot;), understood as falling under one category (e.g. abstract idea), is used as though it falls under another (e.g. physical object). With regard to the visual analogies being used, Peirce and Lewis, just like Plotinus earlier, likened the terms of propositions to points, and the relations between the terms to lines. Peirce, taking this further, talked of univalent, bivalent and trivalent relations linking predicates to their subject and it is just the number and types of relation linking subject and predicate that determine the category into which a predicate might fall. Primary categories contain concepts where there is one dominant kind of relation to the subject. Secondary categories contain concepts where there are two dominant kinds of relation. Examples of the latter were given by Heidegger in his two propositions &quot;the house is on the creek&quot; where the two dominant relations are spatial location (Disjunction) and cultural association (Inherence), and &quot;the house is eighteenth century&quot; where the two relations are temporal location (Causality) and cultural quality (Inherence). A third example may be inferred from Kant in the proposition &quot;the house is impressive or sublime&quot; where the two relations are spatial or mathematical disposition (Disjunction) and dynamic or motive power (Causality). Both Peirce and Wittgenstein introduced the analogy of colour theory in order to illustrate the shades of meanings of words. Primary categories, like primary colours, are analytical representing the furthest we can go in terms of analysis and abstraction and include Quantity, Motion and Quality. Secondary categories, like secondary colours, are synthetic and include concepts such as Substance, Community and Spirit. 

Apart from these, the categorial scheme of Alfred North Whitehead and his Process Philosophy, alongside Nicolai Hartmann and his Critical Realism, remain one of the most detailed and advanced systems in categorial research in metaphysics.

===Peirce===
Charles Sanders Peirce, who had read Kant and Hegel closely, and who also had some knowledge of Aristotle, proposed a system of merely three phenomenological categories: Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness, which he repeatedly invoked in his subsequent writings. Like Hegel, C.S. Peirce attempted to develop a system of categories from a single indisputable principle, in Peirce&#x27;s case the notion that in the first instance he could only be aware of his own ideas. 
 &quot;It seems that the true categories of consciousness are first, feeling ... second, a sense of resistance ... and third, synthetic consciousness, or thought&quot;.
 Elsewhere he called the three primary categories: Quality, Reaction and Meaning, and even Firstness, Secondness and Thirdness, saying, &quot;perhaps it is not right to call these categories conceptions, they are so intangible that they are rather tones or tints upon conceptions&quot;: 
*Firstness (Quality): &quot;The first is predominant in feeling ... we must think of a quality without parts, e.g. the colour of magenta ... When I say it is a quality I do not mean that it &quot;inheres&quot; in a subject ... The whole content of consciousness is made up of qualities of feeling, as truly as the whole of space is made up of points, or the whole of time by instants&quot;.
*Secondness (Reaction): &quot;This is present even in such a rudimentary fragment of experience as a simple feeling ... an action and reaction between our soul and the stimulus ... The idea of second is predominant in the ideas of causation and of statical force ... the real is active; we acknowledge it by calling it the actual&quot;.
*Thirdness (Meaning): &quot;Thirdness is essentially of a general nature ... ideas in which thirdness predominate [include] the idea of a sign or representation ... Every genuine triadic relation involves meaning ... the idea of meaning is irreducible to those of quality and reaction ... synthetical consciousness is the consciousness of a third or medium&quot;.

Although Peirce&#x27;s three categories correspond to the three concepts of relation given in Kant&#x27;s tables, the sequence is now reversed and follows that given by Hegel, and indeed before Hegel of the three moments of the world-process given by Plotinus. Later, Peirce gave a mathematical reason for there being three categories in that although monadic, dyadic and triadic nodes are irreducible, every node of a higher valency is reducible to a &quot;compound of triadic relations&quot;. Ferdinand de Saussure, who was developing &quot;semiology&quot; in France just as Peirce was developing &quot;semiotics&quot; in the US, likened each term of a proposition to &quot;the centre of a constellation, the point where other coordinate terms, the sum of which is indefinite, converge&quot;.

===Others===
Edmund Husserl (1962, 2000) wrote extensively about categorial systems as part of his phenomenology.

For Gilbert Ryle (1949), a category (in particular a &quot;category mistake&quot;) is an important semantic concept, but one having only loose affinities to an ontological category.

Contemporary systems of categories have been proposed by John G. Bennett (The Dramatic Universe, 4 vols., 1956–65), Wilfrid Sellars (1974), Reinhardt Grossmann (1983, 1992), Johansson (1989), Hoffman and Rosenkrantz (1994), Roderick Chisholm (1996), Barry Smith (ontologist) (2003), and Jonathan Lowe (2006).

==See also==

* Categories (Aristotle)
* Categories (Peirce)
* Categories (Stoic)
* Category (Kant)
* Metaphysics
* Modal logic
* Ontology
* Schema (Kant)
* Similarity (philosophy)
==References==
==Selected bibliography==

*Aristotle, 1953. &quot;Metaphysics&quot;. Ross, W. D., trans. Oxford University Press.
*--------, 2004. &quot;Categories&quot;, Edghill, E. M., trans. Uni. of Adelaide library.
*John G. Bennett, 1956–1965. &quot;The Dramatic Universe&quot;. London, Hodder &amp; Stoughton.
*Gustav Bergmann, 1992. &quot;New Foundations of Ontology&quot;. Madison: Uni. of Wisconsin Press.
*Browning, Douglas, 1990. &quot;Ontology and the Practical Arena&quot;. Pennsylvania State Uni.
*Butchvarov, Panayot, 1979. &quot;Being qua Being: A Theory of Identity, Existence, and Predication&quot;. Indiana Uni. Press.
*Roderick Chisholm, 1996. &quot;A Realistic Theory of Categories&quot;. Cambridge Uni. Press.
*Feibleman, James Kern, 1951. &quot;Ontology&quot;. The Johns Hopkins Press (reprinted 1968, Greenwood Press, Publishers, New York).
*Grossmann, Reinhardt, 1983. &quot;The Categorial Structure of the World&quot;. Indiana Uni. Press.
*Grossmann, Reinhardt, 1992. &quot;The Existence of the World: An Introduction to Ontology&quot;. Routledge.
*Haaparanta, Leila and Koskinen, Heikki J., 2012. &quot;Categories of Being: Essays on Metaphysics and Logic&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press.
*Hoffman, J., and Rosenkrantz, G. S.,1994. &quot;Substance among other Categories&quot;. Cambridge Uni. Press.
*Edmund Husserl, 1962. &quot;Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology&quot;. Boyce Gibson, W. R., trans. Collier.
*------, 2000. &quot;Logical Investigations&quot;, 2nd ed. Findlay, J. N., trans. Routledge.
*Johansson, Ingvar, 1989. &quot;Ontological Investigations&quot;. Routledge, 2nd ed. Ontos Verlag 2004.
* Kahn, Charles H., 2009. &quot;Essays on Being&quot;, Oxford University Press.
*Immanuel Kant, 1998. &quot;Critique of Pure Reason&quot;. Guyer, Paul, and Wood, A. W., trans. Cambridge Uni. Press.
*Charles Sanders Peirce, 1992, 1998. &quot;The Essential Peirce&quot;, vols. 1,2. Houser, Nathan et al., eds. Indiana Uni. Press.
*Gilbert Ryle, 1949. &quot;The Concept of Mind&quot;. Uni. of Chicago Press.
*Wilfrid Sellars, 1974, &quot;Toward a Theory of the Categories&quot; in &quot;Essays in Philosophy and Its History&quot;. Reidel.
*Barry Smith, 2003. &quot;Ontology&quot; in &quot;Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Computing and Information&quot;. Blackwell.

==External links==

* Aristotle&#x27;s &quot;Categories&quot; at MIT.
* &quot;Ontological Categories and How to Use Them&quot; – Amie Thomasson.
* &quot;Recent Advances in Metaphysics&quot; – E. J. Lowe.
* Theory and History of Ontology – Raul Corazzon.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="3" end="11" title="ontology" label="ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q714737" start="17" end="37" title="Theory of categories" label="theory of categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q714737" start="211" end="221" title="Theory of categories" label="categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127848" start="277" end="282" title="class (philosophy)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q714737" start="393" end="416" title="Theory of categories" label="ontological distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q378078" start="502" end="512" title="Substance (philosophy)" label="substances"/>
<link wikidata="Q937228" start="514" end="524" title="Property (philosophy)" label="properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q930933" start="526" end="535" title="Relations (philosophy)" label="relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603810" start="537" end="554" title="states of affairs" label="states of affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q100235738" start="558" end="564" title="Event (philosophy)" label="events"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092032" start="685" end="721" title="Problem of universals" label="Are universals prior to particulars?"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="894" end="903" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="1061" end="1069" title="Scholasticism" label="scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q583119" start="1157" end="1176" title="Gilbert de la Porrée" label="Gilbert of Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q203445" start="1471" end="1479" title="Porphyry (philosopher)" label="Porphyry"/>
<link wikidata="Q811494" start="1528" end="1532" title="Porphyrian tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q378078" start="1625" end="1634" title="Substance theory" label="Substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="1657" end="1662" title="Genus" label="Genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207505" start="1680" end="1687" title="Quality (philosophy)" label="Quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q937228" start="1713" end="1721" title="Property (philosophy)" label="Property"/>
<link wikidata="Q134189" start="1847" end="1855" title="Plotinus" label="Plotinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="2585" end="2599" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="2655" end="2664" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735826" start="3156" end="3166" title="Categories (Aristotle)" label="Categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q211411" start="3834" end="3844" title="Chrysippus" label="Chrysippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q107342" start="3926" end="3935" title="syllogism" label="syllogism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="3996" end="4007" title="Scholasticism" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118499" start="4032" end="4064" title="Category (Kant)" label="Kant&amp;#x27;s system of categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="4107" end="4116" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735826" start="4136" end="4146" title="Categories (Aristotle)" label="Categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q10797615" start="4189" end="4198" title="Equivocation" label="equivocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q378078" start="4240" end="4249" title="Substance theory" label="Substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411075" start="4266" end="4271" title="ousia" label="ousia"/>
<link wikidata="Q309314" start="4385" end="4393" title="Quantity" label="Quantity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207505" start="4511" end="4518" title="Quality (philosophy)" label="Quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q937228" start="4638" end="4646" title="Property (philosophy)" label="Relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="4740" end="4745" title="Space" label="Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="4816" end="4820" title="Time" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q29034095" start="4880" end="4888" title="Human position" label="Position"/>
<link wikidata="Q875267" start="4984" end="4993" title="Condition (philosophy)" label="condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026292" start="5055" end="5061" title="Action (philosophy)" label="Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q6322685" start="5150" end="5159" title="Affection (philosophy)" label="Affection"/>
<link wikidata="Q134189" start="5283" end="5291" title="Plotinus" label="Plotinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156747" start="5313" end="5320" title="Enneads" label="Enneads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432095" start="5797" end="5822" title="Transcendentals" label="transcendental categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735826" start="5836" end="5859" title="Categories (Aristotle)" label="categories of Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q214577" start="5900" end="5907" title="Eleatics" label="Eleatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130762" start="5965" end="5975" title="Parmenides (dialogue)" label="Parmenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q134189" start="6095" end="6103" title="Plotinus" label="Plotinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="6297" end="6322" title="Neoplatonism" label="Neoplatonic world process"/>
<link wikidata="Q44011" start="7046" end="7066" title="Gregory of Nazianzus" label="Gregory of Nazianzus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="7186" end="7193" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q210841" start="7380" end="7389" title="necessity (logic)" label="necessity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="7676" end="7689" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q378078" start="7733" end="7742" title="Substance theory" label="Substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118499" start="8027" end="8045" title="Category (Kant)" label="Kant&amp;#x27;s tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="8247" end="8253" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q309314" start="8327" end="8335" title="Quantity" label="Quantity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651704" start="8383" end="8394" title="Logical disjunction" label="Disjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="8450" end="8459" title="Causality" label="Causality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207505" start="8465" end="8472" title="Quality (philosophy)" label="Quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q352099" start="8520" end="8529" title="Inherence" label="Inherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="8654" end="8673" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="G.W.F. Hegel&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051818" start="8717" end="8746" title="Categories (Peirce)" label="C.S. Peirce&amp;#x27;s categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="9190" end="9194" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243600" start="9552" end="9560" title="Linguistic modality" label="Modality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="9780" end="9785" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="9790" end="9802" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76509" start="9860" end="9872" title="Karl Jaspers" label="Karl Jaspers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076898" start="10169" end="10185" title="Peter Mark Roget" label="Peter Mark Roget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636316" start="10218" end="10227" title="Roget&amp;#x27;s Thesaurus" label="Thesaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q220002" start="10603" end="10626" title="Critique of Pure Reason" label="Critique of Pure Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="10641" end="10654" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118499" start="10671" end="10681" title="Category (Kant)" label="categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118499" start="11052" end="11062" title="Category (Kant)" label="Categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641477" start="11167" end="11188" title="Hypothetical syllogism" label="Hypothetical relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="11265" end="11280" title="Causality" label="Causal relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q309314" start="11889" end="11897" title="Quantity" label="Quantity"/>
<link wikidata="Q481201" start="11920" end="11928" title="Absolute (philosophy)" label="Totality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207505" start="11930" end="11937" title="Quality (philosophy)" label="Quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9510" start="11940" end="11947" title="Reality" label="Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q190558" start="11950" end="11958" title="Negation" label="Negation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310700" start="11983" end="11991" title="Relation of Ideas" label="Relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q352099" start="11994" end="12003" title="Inherence" label="Inherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572679" start="12008" end="12019" title="Subsistence economy" label="Subsistence"/>
<link wikidata="Q378078" start="12021" end="12030" title="Substance theory" label="substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q171558" start="12035" end="12043" title="accident" label="accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="12047" end="12056" title="Causality" label="Causality"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="12073" end="12078" title="cause" label="cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995644" start="12083" end="12089" title="Result" label="effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q210841" start="12118" end="12126" title="Modal logic" label="Modality"/>
<link wikidata="Q781546" start="12129" end="12140" title="Logical possibility" label="Possibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q468777" start="12143" end="12152" title="Existence" label="Existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q190258" start="12155" end="12164" title="Need" label="Necessity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186897" start="12165" end="12196" title="Critique of the Kantian philosophy" label="Criticism of Kant&amp;#x27;s system"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="12219" end="12238" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q433728" start="12461" end="12470" title="Walter Terence Stace" label="W.T.Stace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="12753" end="12765" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="G.W.F. Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q374811" start="12779" end="12795" title="Science of Logic" label="Science of Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="13060" end="13068" title="Absolute spirit" label="absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q186999" start="13218" end="13227" title="Aufheben" label="sublation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="13246" end="13264" title="Hegelian dialectic" label="Hegelian dialectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q433728" start="13398" end="13409" title="Walter Terence Stace" label="W. T. Stace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433373" start="13764" end="13769" title="Other (philosophy)" label="other"/>
<link wikidata="Q190995" start="14018" end="14025" title="Essence" label="Essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114360" start="14163" end="14171" title="Becoming (philosophy)" label="becoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q151885" start="14419" end="14425" title="Notion (philosophy)" label="Notion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14492" end="14510" title="Neoplatonism#Return to the One" label="neoplatonic return"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432095" start="14852" end="14875" title="Transcendentals" label="transcendental concepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="14908" end="14927" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Schopenhauer&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q560352" start="15167" end="15193" title="The World as Will and Representation" label="The World as Will and Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="15350" end="15356" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="15580" end="15585" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q374811" start="15599" end="15615" title="Science of Logic" label="Science of Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="15880" end="15896" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q313386" start="15901" end="15913" title="Gilbert Ryle" label="Gilbert Ryle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="16085" end="16104" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735821" start="16447" end="16463" title="category mistake" label="category mistake"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="16696" end="16702" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q725642" start="16707" end="16712" title="Clarence Irving Lewis" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134189" start="16724" end="16732" title="Plotinus" label="Plotinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="17313" end="17322" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q999803" start="17725" end="17732" title="Sublime (philosophy)" label="sublime"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="17863" end="17869" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="17874" end="17886" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520130" start="17913" end="17926" title="colour theory" label="colour theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q183372" start="18322" end="18344" title="Alfred North Whitehead" label="Alfred North Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q76501" start="18383" end="18399" title="Nicolai Hartmann" label="Nicolai Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="18532" end="18554" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051818" start="18702" end="18738" title="Categories (Peirce)" label="Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207505" start="19224" end="19231" title="Quality (philosophy)" label="Quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509484" start="19246" end="19253" title="Meaning (semiotics)" label="Meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051818" start="19264" end="19299" title="Categories (Peirce)" label="Firstness, Secondness and Thirdness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207505" start="19473" end="19480" title="Quality (philosophy)" label="Quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509484" start="20201" end="20208" title="Meaning (semiotics)" label="Meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q374811" start="20723" end="20728" title="Science of Logic" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="20805" end="20813" title="Neoplatonism" label="Plotinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13230" start="21049" end="21070" title="Ferdinand de Saussure" label="Ferdinand de Saussure"/>
<link wikidata="Q58586" start="21363" end="21377" title="Edmund Husserl" label="Edmund Husserl"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="21449" end="21462" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="phenomenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q313386" start="21469" end="21481" title="Gilbert Ryle" label="Gilbert Ryle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735821" start="21524" end="21540" title="category mistake" label="category mistake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382614" start="21705" end="21720" title="John G. Bennett" label="John G. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q712462" start="21764" end="21779" title="Wilfrid Sellars" label="Wilfrid Sellars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21788" end="21807" title="Reinhardt Grossmann" label="Reinhardt Grossmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q877276" start="21872" end="21889" title="Roderick Chisholm" label="Roderick Chisholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q809101" start="21898" end="21922" title="Barry Smith (ontologist)" label="Barry Smith (ontologist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742339" start="21935" end="21948" title="E. J. Lowe (philosopher)" label="Jonathan Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735826" start="21974" end="21996" title="Categories (Aristotle)" label="Categories (Aristotle)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051818" start="21999" end="22018" title="Categories (Peirce)" label="Categories (Peirce)"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="22021" end="22039" title="Categories (Stoic)" label="Categories (Stoic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118499" start="22042" end="22057" title="Category (Kant)" label="Category (Kant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="22060" end="22071" title="Metaphysics" label="Metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q210841" start="22074" end="22085" title="Modal logic" label="Modal logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="22088" end="22096" title="Ontology" label="Ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233172" start="22099" end="22112" title="Schema (Kant)" label="Schema (Kant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105227892" start="22115" end="22138" title="Similarity (philosophy)" label="Similarity (philosophy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="22182" end="22191" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364538" start="22310" end="22324" title="Ella Mary Edghill" label="Edghill, E. M."/>
<link wikidata="Q1382614" start="22360" end="22375" title="John G. Bennett" label="John G. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q86371" start="22456" end="22471" title="Gustav Bergmann" label="Gustav Bergmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q877276" start="22778" end="22795" title="Roderick Chisholm" label="Roderick Chisholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q55675669" start="22872" end="22893" title="James Feibleman" label="Feibleman, James Kern"/>
<link wikidata="Q11875351" start="23214" end="23231" title="Leila Haaparanta" label="Haaparanta, Leila"/>
<link wikidata="Q58586" start="23476" end="23490" title="Edmund Husserl" label="Edmund Husserl"/>
<link wikidata="Q96742571" start="23797" end="23813" title="Charles H. Kahn" label="Kahn, Charles H."/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="23876" end="23889" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="23994" end="24016" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24036" end="24056" title="Charles Sanders Peirce bibliography#EP" label="The Essential Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q313386" start="24124" end="24136" title="Gilbert Ryle" label="Gilbert Ryle"/>
<link wikidata="Q712462" start="24201" end="24216" title="Wilfrid Sellars" label="Wilfrid Sellars"/>
<link wikidata="Q809101" start="24332" end="24343" title="Barry Smith (ontologist)" label="Barry Smith"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5371" wikidata="Q22657" url="?curid=5371" title="Concrete">
<text>Concrete is a composite material composed of aggregate bonded together with a fluid cement that cures to a solid over time. Concrete is the second-most-used substance in the world after water, and is the most widely used building material. Its usage worldwide, ton for ton, is twice that of steel, wood, plastics, and aluminium combined.

When aggregate is mixed with dry Portland cement and water, the mixture forms a fluid slurry that is easily poured and molded into shape. The cement reacts with the water through a process called concrete hydration that hardens it over several hours to form a hard matrix that binds the materials together into a durable stone-like material that has many uses. This time allows concrete to not only be cast in forms, but also to have a variety of tooled processes performed. The hydration process is exothermic, which means ambient temperature plays a significant role in how long it takes concrete to set. Often, additives (such as pozzolans or superplasticizers) are included in the mixture to improve the physical properties of the wet mix, delay or accelerate the curing time, or otherwise change the finished material. Most concrete is poured with reinforcing materials (such as steel rebar) embedded to provide tensile strength, yielding reinforced concrete.

In the past, lime-based cement binders, such as lime putty, were often used but sometimes with other hydraulic cements, (water resistant) such as a calcium aluminate cement or with Portland cement to form Portland cement concrete (named for its visual resemblance to Portland stone). Many other non-cementitious types of concrete exist with other methods of binding aggregate together, including asphalt concrete with a bitumen binder, which is frequently used for road surfaces, and polymer concretes that use polymers as a binder. Concrete is distinct from mortar. Whereas concrete is itself a building material, mortar is a bonding agent that typically holds bricks, tiles and other masonry units together. Grout is another material associated with concrete and cement. It does not contain coarse aggregates and is usually either pourable or thixotropic, and is used to fill gaps between masonry components or coarse aggregate which has already been put in place. Some methods of concrete manufacture and repair involve pumping grout into the gaps to make up a solid mass &quot;in situ&quot;.
== Etymology ==
The word concrete comes from the Latin word &quot; (meaning compact or condensed), the perfect passive participle of &quot;, from &quot;-&quot; (together) and &quot;&quot; (to grow).

==History==
===Ancient times===
Concrete floors were found in the royal palace of Tiryns, Greece, which dates roughly to 1400 to 1200 BC. Lime mortars were used in Greece, such as in Crete and Cyprus, in 800 BC. The Assyrian Jerwan Aqueduct (688 BC) made use of waterproof concrete. Concrete was used for construction in many ancient structures.

Mayan concrete at the ruins of Uxmal (AD 850–925) is referenced in &quot;Incidents of Travel in the Yucatán&quot; by John L. Stephens. &quot;The roof is flat and had been covered with cement&quot;. &quot;The floors were cement, in some places hard, but, by long exposure, broken, and now crumbling under the feet.&quot; &quot;But throughout the wall was solid, and consisting of large stones imbedded in mortar, almost as hard as rock.&quot;

Small-scale production of concrete-like materials was pioneered by the Nabatean traders who occupied and controlled a series of oases and developed a small empire in the regions of southern Syria and northern Jordan from the 4th century BC. They discovered the advantages of hydraulic lime, with some self-cementing properties, by 700 BC. They built kilns to supply mortar for the construction of rubble masonry houses, concrete floors, and underground waterproof cisterns. They kept the cisterns secret as these enabled the Nabataeans to thrive in the desert. Some of these structures survive to this day.

In the Ancient Egyptian and later Roman eras, builders discovered that adding volcanic ash to lime allowed the mix to set underwater. They discovered the pozzolanic reaction.

===Classical era===


The Romans used concrete extensively from 300 BC to AD 476. During the Roman Empire, Roman concrete (or &quot;opus caementicium&quot;) was made from quicklime, pozzolana and an aggregate of pumice. Its widespread use in many Roman structures, a key event in the history of architecture termed the Roman architectural revolution, freed Roman construction from the restrictions of stone and brick materials. It enabled revolutionary new designs in terms of both structural complexity and dimension. The Colosseum in Rome was built largely of concrete, and the Pantheon has the world&#x27;s largest unreinforced concrete dome.

Concrete, as the Romans knew it, was a new and revolutionary material. Laid in the shape of arches, vaults and domes, it quickly hardened into a rigid mass, free from many of the internal thrusts and strains that troubled the builders of similar structures in stone or brick.

Modern tests show that &quot;opus caementicium&quot; had as much compressive strength as modern Portland-cement concrete (c. ). However, due to the absence of reinforcement, its tensile strength was far lower than modern reinforced concrete, and its mode of application also differed:

Modern structural concrete differs from Roman concrete in two important details. First, its mix consistency is fluid and homogeneous, allowing it to be poured into forms rather than requiring hand-layering together with the placement of aggregate, which, in Roman practice, often consisted of rubble. Second, integral reinforcing steel gives modern concrete assemblies great strength in tension, whereas Roman concrete could depend only upon the strength of the concrete bonding to resist tension.

The long-term durability of Roman concrete structures has been found to be due to its use of pyroclastic (volcanic) rock and ash, whereby the crystallization of strätlingite (a specific and complex calcium aluminosilicate hydrate) and the coalescence of this and similar calcium–aluminium-silicate–hydrate cementing binders helped give the concrete a greater degree of fracture resistance even in seismically active environments. Roman concrete is significantly more resistant to erosion by seawater than modern concrete; it used pyroclastic materials which react with seawater to form Al-tobermorite crystals over time. The use of hot mixing and the presence of lime clasts are thought to give the concrete a self-healing ability, where cracks that form become filled with calcite that prevents the crack from spreading.

The widespread use of concrete in many Roman structures ensured that many survive to the present day. The Baths of Caracalla in Rome are just one example. Many Roman aqueducts and bridges, such as the magnificent Pont du Gard in southern France, have masonry cladding on a concrete core, as does the dome of the Pantheon.

===Middle Ages===
After the Roman Empire, the use of burned lime and pozzolana was greatly reduced. Low kiln temperatures in the burning of lime, lack of pozzolana, and poor mixing all contributed to a decline in the quality of concrete and mortar. From the 11th century, the increased use of stone in church and castle construction led to an increased demand for mortar. Quality began to improve in the 12th century through better grinding and sieving. Medieval lime mortars and concretes were non-hydraulic and were used for binding masonry, &quot;hearting&quot; (binding rubble masonry cores) and foundations. Bartholomaeus Anglicus in his &quot;De proprietatibus rerum&quot; (1240) describes the making of mortar. In an English translation from 1397, it reads &quot;lyme ... is a stone brent; by medlynge thereof with sonde and water sement is made&quot;. From the 14th century, the quality of mortar was again excellent, but only from the 17th century was pozzolana commonly added.

The &quot;Canal du Midi&quot; was built using concrete in 1670.

===Industrial era===
Perhaps the greatest step forward in the modern use of concrete was Smeaton&#x27;s Tower, built by British engineer John Smeaton in Devon, England, between 1756 and 1759. This third Eddystone Lighthouse pioneered the use of hydraulic lime in concrete, using pebbles and powdered brick as aggregate.

A method for producing Portland cement was developed in England and patented by Joseph Aspdin in 1824. Aspdin chose the name for its similarity to Portland stone, which was quarried on the Isle of Portland in Dorset, England. His son William continued developments into the 1840s, earning him recognition for the development of &quot;modern&quot; Portland cement.

Reinforced concrete was invented in 1849 by Joseph Monier. and the first reinforced concrete house was built by François Coignet in 1853.
The first concrete reinforced bridge was designed and built by Joseph Monier in 1875.

Prestressed concrete and post-tensioned concrete were pioneered by Eugène Freyssinet, a French structural and civil engineer. Concrete components or structures are compressed by tendon cables during, or after, their fabrication in order to strengthen them against tensile forces developing when put in service. Freyssinet patented the technique on 2 October 1928.

==Composition==
Concrete is an artificial composite material, comprising a matrix of cementitious binder (typically Portland cement paste or asphalt) and a dispersed phase or &quot;filler&quot; of aggregate (typically a rocky material, loose stones, and sand). The binder &quot;glues&quot; the filler together to form a synthetic conglomerate. Many types of concrete are available, determined by the formulations of binders and the types of aggregate used to suit the application of the engineered material. These variables determine strength and density, as well as chemical and thermal resistance of the finished product.

Construction aggregates consist of large chunks of material in a concrete mix, generally a coarse gravel or crushed rocks such as limestone, or granite, along with finer materials such as sand.

Cement paste, most commonly made of Portland cement, is the most prevalent kind of concrete binder. For cementitious binders, water is mixed with the dry cement powder and aggregate, which produces a semi-liquid slurry (paste) that can be shaped, typically by pouring it into a form. The concrete solidifies and hardens through a chemical process called hydration. The water reacts with the cement, which bonds the other components together, creating a robust, stone-like material. Other cementitious materials, such as fly ash and slag cement, are sometimes added—either pre-blended with the cement or directly as a concrete component—and become a part of the binder for the aggregate. Fly ash and slag can enhance some properties of concrete such as fresh properties and durability. Alternatively, other materials can also be used as a concrete binder: the most prevalent substitute is asphalt, which is used as the binder in asphalt concrete.

Admixtures are added to modify the cure rate or properties of the material. Mineral admixtures use recycled materials as concrete ingredients. Conspicuous materials include fly ash, a by-product of coal-fired power plants; ground granulated blast furnace slag, a by-product of steelmaking; and silica fume, a by-product of industrial electric arc furnaces.

Structures employing Portland cement concrete usually include steel reinforcement because this type of concrete can be formulated with high compressive strength, but always has lower tensile strength. Therefore, it is usually reinforced with materials that are strong in tension, typically steel rebar.

The &quot;mix design&quot; depends on the type of structure being built, how the concrete is mixed and delivered, and how it is placed to form the structure.

===Cement===

Portland cement is the most common type of cement in general usage. It is a basic ingredient of concrete, mortar, and many plasters. It consists of a mixture of calcium silicates (alite, belite), aluminates and ferrites—compounds, which will react with water. Portland cement and similar materials are made by heating limestone (a source of calcium) with clay or shale (a source of silicon, aluminium and iron) and grinding this product (called &quot;clinker&quot;) with a source of sulfate (most commonly gypsum).

Cement kilns are extremely large, complex, and inherently dusty industrial installations. Of the various ingredients used to produce a given quantity of concrete, the cement is the most energetically expensive. Even complex and efficient kilns require 3.3 to 3.6 gigajoules of energy to produce a ton of clinker and then grind it into cement. Many kilns can be fueled with difficult-to-dispose-of wastes, the most common being used tires. The extremely high temperatures and long periods of time at those temperatures allows cement kilns to efficiently and completely burn even difficult-to-use fuels. The five major compounds of calcium silicates and aluminates comprising Portland cement range from 5 to 50% in weight.

===Curing===
Combining water with a cementitious material forms a cement paste by the process of hydration. The cement paste glues the aggregate together, fills voids within it, and makes it flow more freely.

As stated by Abrams&#x27; law, a lower water-to-cement ratio yields a stronger, more durable concrete, whereas more water gives a freer-flowing concrete with a higher slump. The hydration of cement involves many concurrent reactions. The process involves polymerization, the interlinking of the silicates and aluminate components as well as their bonding to sand and gravel particles to form a solid mass. One illustrative conversion is the hydration of tricalcium silicate:

: Cement chemist notation: C3S + H → C-S-H + CH + heat
: Standard notation: Ca3SiO5 + H2O → CaO・SiO2・H2O (gel) + Ca(OH)2 + heat
: Balanced: 2 Ca3SiO5 + 7 H2O → 3 CaO・2 SiO2・4 H2O (gel) + 3 Ca(OH)2 + heat
: (approximately as the exact ratios of CaO, SiO2 and H2O in C-S-H can vary)

The hydration (curing) of cement is irreversible.

===Aggregates===

Fine and coarse aggregates make up the bulk of a concrete mixture. Sand, natural gravel, and crushed stone are used mainly for this purpose. Recycled aggregates (from construction, demolition, and excavation waste) are increasingly used as partial replacements for natural aggregates, while a number of manufactured aggregates, including air-cooled blast furnace slag and bottom ash are also permitted.

The size distribution of the aggregate determines how much binder is required. Aggregate with a very even size distribution has the biggest gaps whereas adding aggregate with smaller particles tends to fill these gaps. The binder must fill the gaps between the aggregate as well as paste the surfaces of the aggregate together, and is typically the most expensive component. Thus, variation in sizes of the aggregate reduces the cost of concrete. The aggregate is nearly always stronger than the binder, so its use does not negatively affect the strength of the concrete.

Redistribution of aggregates after compaction often creates non-homogeneity due to the influence of vibration. This can lead to strength gradients.

Decorative stones such as quartzite, small river stones or crushed glass are sometimes added to the surface of concrete for a decorative &quot;exposed aggregate&quot; finish, popular among landscape designers.

===Admixtures===
Admixtures are materials in the form of powder or fluids that are added to the concrete to give it certain characteristics not obtainable with plain concrete mixes. Admixtures are defined as additions &quot;made as the concrete mix is being prepared&quot;. The most common admixtures are retarders and accelerators. In normal use, admixture dosages are less than 5% by mass of cement and are added to the concrete at the time of batching/mixing. (See below.) The common types of admixtures are as follows:

* Accelerators speed up the hydration (hardening) of the concrete. Typical materials used are calcium chloride, calcium nitrate and sodium nitrate. However, use of chlorides may cause corrosion in steel reinforcing and is prohibited in some countries, so that nitrates may be favored, even though they are less effective than the chloride salt. Accelerating admixtures are especially useful for modifying the properties of concrete in cold weather.
* Air entraining agents add and entrain tiny air bubbles in the concrete, which reduces damage during freeze-thaw cycles, increasing durability. However, entrained air entails a tradeoff with strength, as each 1% of air may decrease compressive strength by 5%. If too much air becomes trapped in the concrete as a result of the mixing process, defoamers can be used to encourage the air bubble to agglomerate, rise to the surface of the wet concrete and then disperse.
* Bonding agents are used to create a bond between old and new concrete (typically a type of polymer) with wide temperature tolerance and corrosion resistance.
* Corrosion inhibitors are used to minimize the corrosion of steel and steel bars in concrete.
* Crystalline admixtures are typically added during batching of the concrete to lower permeability. The reaction takes place when exposed to water and un-hydrated cement particles to form insoluble needle-shaped crystals, which fill capillary pores and micro-cracks in the concrete to block pathways for water and waterborne contaminates. Concrete with crystalline admixture can expect to self-seal as constant exposure to water will continuously initiate crystallization to ensure permanent waterproof protection.
* Pigments can be used to change the color of concrete, for aesthetics.
* Plasticizers increase the workability of plastic, or &quot;fresh&quot;, concrete, allowing it to be placed more easily, with less consolidating effort. A typical plasticizer is lignosulfonate. Plasticizers can be used to reduce the water content of a concrete while maintaining workability and are sometimes called water-reducers due to this use. Such treatment improves its strength and durability characteristics.
* Superplasticizers (also called high-range water-reducers) are a class of plasticizers that have fewer deleterious effects and can be used to increase workability more than is practical with traditional plasticizers. Superplasticizers are used to increase compressive strength. It increases the workability of the concrete and lowers the need for water content by 15–30%. 
* Pumping aids improve pumpability, thicken the paste and reduce separation and bleeding.
* Retarders slow the hydration of concrete and are used in large or difficult pours where partial setting is undesirable before completion of the pour. Typical retarders include sugar, sodium gluconate, citric acid, and tartaric acid.

===Mineral admixtures and blended cements===
Inorganic materials that have pozzolanic or latent hydraulic properties, these very fine-grained materials are added to the concrete mix to improve the properties of concrete (mineral admixtures), or as a replacement for Portland cement (blended cements). Products which incorporate limestone, fly ash, blast furnace slag, and other useful materials with pozzolanic properties into the mix, are being tested and used. These developments are ever growing in relevance to minimize the impacts caused by cement use, notorious for being one of the largest producers (at about 5 to 10%) of global greenhouse gas emissions. The use of alternative materials also is capable of lowering costs, improving concrete properties, and recycling wastes, the latest being relevant for circular economy aspects of the construction industry, whose demand is ever growing with greater impacts on raw material extraction, waste generation and landfill practices.
* Fly ash: A by-product of coal-fired electric generating plants, it is used to partially replace Portland cement (by up to 60% by mass). The properties of fly ash depend on the type of coal burnt. In general, siliceous fly ash is pozzolanic, while calcareous fly ash has latent hydraulic properties.
* Ground granulated blast furnace slag (GGBFS or GGBS): A by-product of steel production is used to partially replace Portland cement (by up to 80% by mass). It has latent hydraulic properties.
* Silica fume: A by-product of the production of silicon and ferrosilicon alloys. Silica fume is similar to fly ash, but has a particle size 100 times smaller. This results in a higher surface-to-volume ratio and a much faster pozzolanic reaction. Silica fume is used to increase strength and durability of concrete, but generally requires the use of superplasticizers for workability.
* High reactivity metakaolin (HRM): Metakaolin produces concrete with strength and durability similar to concrete made with silica fume. While silica fume is usually dark gray or black in color, high-reactivity metakaolin is usually bright white in color, making it the preferred choice for architectural concrete where appearance is important.
* Carbon nanofibers can be added to concrete to enhance compressive strength and gain a higher Young&#x27;s modulus, and also to improve the electrical properties required for strain monitoring, damage evaluation and self-health monitoring of concrete. Carbon fiber has many advantages in terms of mechanical and electrical properties (e.g., higher strength) and self-monitoring behavior due to the high tensile strength and high electrical conductivity.
* Carbon products have been added to make concrete electrically conductive, for deicing purposes.
* New research from Japan&#x27;s University of Kitakyushu shows that a washed and dried recycled mix of used diapers can be an environmental solution to producing less landfill and using less sand in concrete production. A model home was built in Indonesia to test the strength and durability of the new diaper-cement composite.

==Production==

Concrete production is the process of mixing together the various ingredients—water, aggregate, cement, and any additives—to produce concrete. Concrete production is time-sensitive. Once the ingredients are mixed, workers must put the concrete in place before it hardens. In modern usage, most concrete production takes place in a large type of industrial facility called a concrete plant, or often a batch plant. The usual method of placement is casting in formwork, which holds the mix in shape until it has set enough to hold its shape unaided.

Concrete plants come in two main types, ready-mix plants and central mix plants. A ready-mix plant blends all of the solid ingredients, while a central mix does the same but adds water. A central-mix plant offers more precise control of the concrete quality. Central mix plants must be close to the work site where the concrete will be used, since hydration begins at the plant.

A concrete plant consists of large hoppers for storage of various ingredients like cement, storage for bulk ingredients like aggregate and water, mechanisms for the addition of various additives and amendments, machinery to accurately weigh, move, and mix some or all of those ingredients, and facilities to dispense the mixed concrete, often to a concrete mixer truck.

Modern concrete is usually prepared as a viscous fluid, so that it may be poured into forms. The forms are containers that define the desired shape. Concrete formwork can be prepared in several ways, such as slip forming and steel plate construction. Alternatively, concrete can be mixed into dryer, non-fluid forms and used in factory settings to manufacture precast concrete products.

Interruption in pouring the concrete can cause the initially placed material to begin to set before the next batch is added on top. This creates a horizontal plane of weakness called a &quot;cold joint&quot; between the two batches. Once the mix is where it should be, the curing process must be controlled to ensure that the concrete attains the desired attributes. During concrete preparation, various technical details may affect the quality and nature of the product.

===Design mix===
&quot;Design mix&quot; ratios are decided by an engineer after analyzing the properties of the specific ingredients being used. Instead of using a &#x27;nominal mix&#x27; of 1 part cement, 2 parts sand, and 4 parts aggregate, a civil engineer will custom-design a concrete mix to exactly meet the requirements of the site and conditions, setting material ratios and often designing an admixture package to fine-tune the properties or increase the performance envelope of the mix. Design-mix concrete can have very broad specifications that cannot be met with more basic nominal mixes, but the involvement of the engineer often increases the cost of the concrete mix.

Concrete mixes are primarily divided into nominal mix, standard mix and design mix.

Nominal mix ratios are given in volume of formula_1. Nominal mixes are a simple, fast way of getting a basic idea of the properties of the finished concrete without having to perform testing in advance.

Various governing bodies (such as British Standards) define nominal mix ratios into a number of grades, usually ranging from lower compressive strength to higher compressive strength. The grades usually indicate the 28-day cure strength.

===Mixing===
Thorough mixing is essential to produce uniform, high-quality concrete.

 has shown that the mixing of cement and water into a paste before combining these materials with aggregates can increase the compressive strength of the resulting concrete. The paste is generally mixed in a , shear-type mixer at a w/c (water to cement ratio) of 0.30 to 0.45 by mass. The cement paste premix may include admixtures such as accelerators or retarders, superplasticizers, pigments, or silica fume. The premixed paste is then blended with aggregates and any remaining batch water and final mixing is completed in conventional concrete mixing equipment.

Resonant acoustic mixing has also been found effective in producing ultra-high performance cementitious materials, as it produces a dense matrix with low porosity.

===Sample analysis—workability===


Workability is the ability of a fresh (plastic) concrete mix to fill the form/mold properly with the desired work (pouring, pumping, spreading, tamping, vibration) and without reducing the concrete&#x27;s quality. Workability depends on water content, aggregate (shape and size distribution), cementitious content and age (level of hydration) and can be modified by adding chemical admixtures, like superplasticizer. Raising the water content or adding chemical admixtures increases concrete workability. Excessive water leads to increased bleeding or segregation of aggregates (when the cement and aggregates start to separate), with the resulting concrete having reduced quality. Changes in gradation can also affect workability of the concrete, although a wide range of gradation can be used for various applications. An undesirable gradation can mean using a large aggregate that is too large for the size of the formwork, or which has too few smaller aggregate grades to serve to fill the gaps between the larger grades, or using too little or too much sand for the same reason, or using too little water, or too much cement, or even using jagged crushed stone instead of smoother round aggregate such as pebbles. Any combination of these factors and others may result in a mix which is too harsh, i.e., which does not flow or spread out smoothly, is difficult to get into the formwork, and which is difficult to surface finish.

Workability can be measured by the concrete slump test, a simple measure of the plasticity of a fresh batch of concrete following the ASTM C 143 or EN 12350-2 test standards. Slump is normally measured by filling an &quot;Abrams cone&quot; with a sample from a fresh batch of concrete. The cone is placed with the wide end down onto a level, non-absorptive surface. It is then filled in three layers of equal volume, with each layer being tamped with a steel rod to consolidate the layer. When the cone is carefully lifted off, the enclosed material slumps a certain amount, owing to gravity. A relatively dry sample slumps very little, having a slump value of one or two inches (25 or 50 mm) out of . A relatively wet concrete sample may slump as much as eight inches. Workability can also be measured by the flow table test.

Slump can be increased by addition of chemical admixtures such as plasticizer or superplasticizer without changing the water-cement ratio. Some other admixtures, especially air-entraining admixture, can increase the slump of a mix.

High-flow concrete, like self-consolidating concrete, is tested by other flow-measuring methods. One of these methods includes placing the cone on the narrow end and observing how the mix flows through the cone while it is gradually lifted.

After mixing, concrete is a fluid and can be pumped to the location where needed.

===Curing===
====Maintaining optimal conditions for cement hydration====
Concrete must be kept moist during curing in order to achieve optimal strength and durability. During curing hydration occurs, allowing calcium-silicate hydrate (C-S-H) to form. Over 90% of a mix&#x27;s final strength is typically reached within four weeks, with the remaining 10% achieved over years or even decades. The conversion of calcium hydroxide in the concrete into calcium carbonate from absorption of CO2 over several decades further strengthens the concrete and makes it more resistant to damage. This carbonation reaction, however, lowers the pH of the cement pore solution and can corrode the reinforcement bars.

Hydration and hardening of concrete during the first three days is critical. Abnormally fast drying and shrinkage due to factors such as evaporation from wind during placement may lead to increased tensile stresses at a time when it has not yet gained sufficient strength, resulting in greater shrinkage cracking. The early strength of the concrete can be increased if it is kept damp during the curing process. Minimizing stress prior to curing minimizes cracking. High-early-strength concrete is designed to hydrate faster, often by increased use of cement that increases shrinkage and cracking. The strength of concrete changes (increases) for up to three years. It depends on cross-section dimension of elements and conditions of structure exploitation. Addition of short-cut polymer fibers can improve (reduce) shrinkage-induced stresses during curing and increase early and ultimate compression strength.

Properly curing concrete leads to increased strength and lower permeability and avoids cracking where the surface dries out prematurely. Care must also be taken to avoid freezing or overheating due to the exothermic setting of cement. Improper curing can cause spalling, reduced strength, poor abrasion resistance and cracking.

====Curing techniques avoiding water loss by evaporation====
During the curing period, concrete is ideally maintained at controlled temperature and humidity. To ensure full hydration during curing, concrete slabs are often sprayed with &quot;curing compounds&quot; that create a water-retaining film over the concrete. Typical films are made of wax or related hydrophobic compounds. After the concrete is sufficiently cured, the film is allowed to abrade from the concrete through normal use.

Traditional conditions for curing involve spraying or ponding the concrete surface with water. The adjacent picture shows one of many ways to achieve this, ponding—submerging setting concrete in water and wrapping in plastic to prevent dehydration. Additional common curing methods include wet burlap and plastic sheeting covering the fresh concrete.

For higher-strength applications, accelerated curing techniques may be applied to the concrete. A common technique involves heating the poured concrete with steam, which serves to both keep it damp and raise the temperature so that the hydration process proceeds more quickly and more thoroughly.

==Alternative types==
===Asphalt===
&quot;Asphalt concrete&quot; (commonly called &quot;asphalt&quot;, &quot;blacktop&quot;, or &quot;pavement&quot; in North America, and &quot;tarmac&quot;, &quot;bitumen macadam&quot;, or &quot;rolled asphalt&quot; in the United Kingdom and Ireland) is a composite material commonly used to surface roads, parking lots, airports, as well as the core of embankment dams. Asphalt mixtures have been used in pavement construction since the beginning of the twentieth century. It consists of mineral aggregate bound together with asphalt, laid in layers, and compacted. The process was refined and enhanced by Belgian inventor and U.S. immigrant Edward De Smedt.

The terms &quot;asphalt&quot; (or &quot;asphaltic&quot;) &quot;concrete&quot;, &quot;bituminous asphalt concrete&quot;, and &quot;bituminous mixture&quot; are typically used only in engineering and construction documents, which define concrete as any composite material composed of mineral aggregate adhered with a binder. The abbreviation, &quot;AC&quot;, is sometimes used for &quot;asphalt concrete&quot; but can also denote &quot;asphalt content&quot; or &quot;asphalt cement&quot;, referring to the liquid asphalt portion of the composite material.

=== Graphene enhanced concrete ===
Graphene enhanced concretes are standard designs of concrete mixes, except that during the cement-mixing or production process, a small amount of chemically engineered graphene is added. These enhanced graphene concretes are designed around the concrete application.

=== Microbial ===
Bacteria such as &quot;Bacillus pasteurii&quot;, &quot;Bacillus pseudofirmus&quot;, &quot;Bacillus cohnii&quot;, &quot;Sporosarcina pasteuri&quot;, and &quot;Arthrobacter crystallopoietes&quot; increase the compression strength of concrete through their biomass. However some forms of bacteria can also be concrete-destroying. Bacillus sp. CT-5. can reduce corrosion of reinforcement in reinforced concrete by up to four times. &quot;Sporosarcina pasteurii&quot; reduces water and chloride permeability. &quot;B. pasteurii&quot; increases resistance to acid. &quot;Bacillus pasteurii&quot; and &quot;B. sphaericuscan&quot; induce calcium carbonate precipitation in the surface of cracks, adding compression strength.

=== Nanoconcrete ===
Nanoconcrete (also spelled &quot;nano concrete&quot;&#x27; or &quot;nano-concrete&quot;) is a class of materials that contains Portland cement particles that are no greater than 100 μm and particles of silica no greater than 500 μm, which fill voids that would otherwise occur in normal concrete, thereby substantially increasing the material&#x27;s strength. It is widely used in foot and highway bridges where high flexural and compressive strength are indicated.

=== Pervious ===
Pervious concrete is a mix of specially graded coarse aggregate, cement, water, and little-to-no fine aggregates. This concrete is also known as &quot;no-fines&quot; or porous concrete. Mixing the ingredients in a carefully controlled process creates a paste that coats and bonds the aggregate particles. The hardened concrete contains interconnected air voids totaling approximately 15 to 25 percent. Water runs through the voids in the pavement to the soil underneath. Air entrainment admixtures are often used in freeze-thaw climates to minimize the possibility of frost damage. Pervious concrete also permits rainwater to filter through roads and parking lots, to recharge aquifers, instead of contributing to runoff and flooding.

=== Polymer ===
Polymer concretes are mixtures of aggregate and any of various polymers and may be reinforced. The cement is costlier than lime-based cements, but polymer concretes nevertheless have advantages; they have significant tensile strength even without reinforcement, and they are largely impervious to water. Polymer concretes are frequently used for the repair and construction of other applications, such as drains.

=== Plant fibers ===
Plant fibers and particles can be used in a concrete mix or as a reinforcement. These materials can increase ductility but the lignocellulosic particles hydrolyze during concrete curing as a result of alkaline environment and elevated temperatures Such process, that is difficult to measure, can affect the properties of the resulting concrete.

=== Sulfur concrete ===
Sulfur concrete is a special concrete that uses sulfur as a binder and does not require cement or water.

=== Volcanic ===
Volcanic concrete substitutes volcanic rock for the limestone that is burned to form clinker. It consumes a similar amount of energy, but does not directly emit carbon as a byproduct. Volcanic rock/ash are used as supplementary cementitious materials in concrete to improve the resistance to sulfate, chloride and alkali silica reaction due to pore refinement. Also, they are generally cost effective in comparison to other aggregates, good for semi and light weight concretes, and good for thermal and acoustic insulation.

Pyroclastic materials, such as pumice, scoria, and ashes are formed from cooling magma during explosive volcanic eruptions. They are used as supplementary cementitious materials (SCM) or as aggregates for cements and concretes. They have been extensively used since ancient times to produce materials for building applications. For example, pumice and other volcanic glasses were added as a natural pozzolanic material for mortars and plasters during the construction of the Villa San Marco in the Roman period (89 BC – 79 AD), which remain one of the best-preserved otium villae of the Bay of Naples in Italy.

===Waste light===
Waste light is a form of polymer modified concrete. The specific polymer admixture allows the replacement of all the traditional aggregates (gravel, sand, stone) by any mixture of solid waste materials in the grain size of 3–10 mm to form a low-compressive-strength (3–20 N/mm2) product for road and building construction. One cubic meter of waste light concrete contains 1.1–1.3 m3 of shredded waste and no other aggregates.

===Recycled Aggregate Concrete (RAC)===
Recycled aggregate concretes are standard concrete mixes with the addition or substitution of natural aggregates with recycled aggregates sourced from construction and demolition wastes, disused pre-cast concretes or masonry. In most cases, recycled aggregate concrete results in higher water absorption levels by capillary action and permeation, which are the prominent determiners of the strength and durability of the resulting concrete. The increase in water absorption levels is mainly caused by the porous adhered mortar that exists in the recycled aggregates. Accordingly, recycled concrete aggregates that have been washed to reduce the quantity of mortar adhered to aggregates show lower water absorption levels compared to untreated recycled aggregates.

The quality of the recycled aggregate concrete is determined by several factors, including the size, the number of replacement cycles, and the moisture levels of the recycled aggregates. When the recycled concrete aggregates are crushed into coarser fractures, the mixed concrete shows better permeability levels, resulting in an overall increase in strength. In contrast, recycled masonry aggregates provide better qualities when crushed in finer fractures. With each generation of recycled concrete, the resulting compressive strength decreases.

==Properties==
Concrete has relatively high compressive strength, but much lower tensile strength. Therefore, it is usually reinforced with materials that are strong in tension (often steel). The elasticity of concrete is relatively constant at low stress levels but starts decreasing at higher stress levels as matrix cracking develops. Concrete has a very low coefficient of thermal expansion and shrinks as it matures. All concrete structures crack to some extent, due to shrinkage and tension. Concrete that is subjected to long-duration forces is prone to creep.

Tests can be performed to ensure that the properties of concrete correspond to specifications for the application.

The ingredients affect the strengths of the material. Concrete strength values are usually specified as the lower-bound compressive strength of either a cylindrical or cubic specimen as determined by standard test procedures.

The strengths of concrete is dictated by its function. Very low-strength— or less—concrete may be used when the concrete must be lightweight. Lightweight concrete is often achieved by adding air, foams, or lightweight aggregates, with the side effect that the strength is reduced. For most routine uses, concrete is often used. concrete is readily commercially available as a more durable, although more expensive, option. Higher-strength concrete is often used for larger civil projects. Strengths above are often used for specific building elements. For example, the lower floor columns of high-rise concrete buildings may use concrete of or more, to keep the size of the columns small. Bridges may use long beams of high-strength concrete to lower the number of spans required. Occasionally, other structural needs may require high-strength concrete. If a structure must be very rigid, concrete of very high strength may be specified, even much stronger than is required to bear the service loads. Strengths as high as have been used commercially for these reasons.

===Energy efficiency===
The cement produced for making concrete accounts for about 8% of worldwide emissions per year (compared to, &quot;e.g.&quot;, global aviation at 1.9%). The two largest sources of are produced by the cement manufacturing process, arising from (1) the decarbonation reaction of limestone in the cement kiln (T ≈ 950 °C), and (2) from the combustion of fossil fuel to reach the sintering temperature (T ≈ 1450 °C) of cement clinker in the kiln. The energy required for extracting, crushing, and mixing the raw materials (construction aggregates used in the concrete production, and also limestone and clay feeding the cement kiln) is lower. Energy requirement for transportation of ready-mix concrete is also lower because it is produced nearby the construction site from local resources, typically manufactured within 100 kilometers of the job site. The overall embodied energy of concrete at roughly 1 to 1.5 megajoules per kilogram is therefore lower than for many structural and construction materials.

Once in place, concrete offers a great energy efficiency over the lifetime of a building. Concrete walls leak air far less than those made of wood frames. Air leakage accounts for a large percentage of energy loss from a home. The thermal mass properties of concrete increase the efficiency of both residential and commercial buildings. By storing and releasing the energy needed for heating or cooling, concrete&#x27;s thermal mass delivers year-round benefits by reducing temperature swings inside and minimizing heating and cooling costs. While insulation reduces energy loss through the building envelope, thermal mass uses walls to store and release energy. Modern concrete wall systems use both external insulation and thermal mass to create an energy-efficient building. Insulating concrete forms (ICFs) are hollow blocks or panels made of either insulating foam or rastra that are stacked to form the shape of the walls of a building and then filled with reinforced concrete to create the structure.

===Fire safety===
Concrete buildings are more resistant to fire than those constructed using steel frames, since concrete has lower heat conductivity than steel and can thus last longer under the same fire conditions. Concrete is sometimes used as a fire protection for steel frames, for the same effect as above. Concrete as a fire shield, for example Fondu fyre, can also be used in extreme environments like a missile launch pad.

Options for non-combustible construction include floors, ceilings and roofs made of cast-in-place and hollow-core precast concrete. For walls, concrete masonry technology and Insulating Concrete Forms (ICFs) are additional options. ICFs are hollow blocks or panels made of fireproof insulating foam that are stacked to form the shape of the walls of a building and then filled with reinforced concrete to create the structure.

Concrete also provides good resistance against externally applied forces such as high winds, hurricanes, and tornadoes owing to its lateral stiffness, which results in minimal horizontal movement. However, this stiffness can work against certain types of concrete structures, particularly where a relatively higher flexing structure is required to resist more extreme forces.

===Earthquake safety===
As discussed above, concrete is very strong in compression, but weak in tension. Larger earthquakes can generate very large shear loads on structures. These shear loads subject the structure to both tensile and compressional loads. Concrete structures without reinforcement, like other unreinforced masonry structures, can fail during severe earthquake shaking. Unreinforced masonry structures constitute one of the largest earthquake risks globally. These risks can be reduced through seismic retrofitting of at-risk buildings, (e.g. school buildings in Istanbul, Turkey).

==Construction ==
Concrete is one of the most durable building materials. It provides superior fire resistance compared with wooden construction and gains strength over time. Structures made of concrete can have a long service life. Concrete is used more than any other artificial material in the world. As of 2006, about 7.5 billion cubic meters of concrete are made each year, more than one cubic meter for every person on Earth.

=== Reinforced ===

The use of reinforcement, in the form of iron was introduced in the 1850s by French industrialist François Coignet, and it was not until the 1880s that German civil engineer G. A. Wayss used steel as reinforcement. Concrete is a relatively brittle material that is strong under compression but less in tension. Plain, unreinforced concrete is unsuitable for many structures as it is relatively poor at withstanding stresses induced by vibrations, wind loading, and so on. Hence, to increase its overall strength, steel rods, wires, mesh or cables can be embedded in concrete before it is set. This reinforcement, often known as rebar, resists tensile forces.

Reinforced concrete (RC) is a versatile composite and one of the most widely used materials in modern construction. It is made up of different constituent materials with very different properties that complement each other. In the case of reinforced concrete, the component materials are almost always concrete and steel. These two materials form a strong bond together and are able to resist a variety of applied forces, effectively acting as a single structural element.

Reinforced concrete can be precast or cast-in-place (in situ) concrete, and is used in a wide range of applications such as; slab, wall, beam, column, foundation, and frame construction. Reinforcement is generally placed in areas of the concrete that are likely to be subject to tension, such as the lower portion of beams. Usually, there is a minimum of 50 mm cover, both above and below the steel reinforcement, to resist spalling and corrosion which can lead to structural instability. Other types of non-steel reinforcement, such as Fibre-reinforced concretes are used for specialized applications, predominately as a means of controlling cracking.

=== Precast ===
Precast concrete is concrete which is cast in one place for use elsewhere and is a mobile material. The largest part of precast production is carried out in the works of specialist suppliers, although in some instances, due to economic and geographical factors, scale of product or difficulty of access, the elements are cast on or adjacent to the construction site. Precasting offers considerable advantages because it is carried out in a controlled environment, protected from the elements, but the downside of this is the contribution to greenhouse gas emission from transportation to the construction site.

Advantages to be achieved by employing precast concrete:

* Preferred dimension schemes exist, with elements of tried and tested designs available from a catalogue.
* Major savings in time result from manufacture of structural elements apart from the series of events which determine overall duration of the construction, known by planning engineers as the &#x27;critical path&#x27;.
* Availability of Laboratory facilities capable of the required control tests, many being certified for specific testing in accordance with National Standards.
* Equipment with capability suited to specific types of production such as stressing beds with appropriate capacity, moulds and machinery dedicated to particular products.
* High-quality finishes achieved direct from the mould eliminate the need for interior decoration and ensure low maintenance costs.

===Mass structures===

Due to cement&#x27;s exothermic chemical reaction while setting up, large concrete structures such as dams, navigation locks, large mat foundations, and large breakwaters generate excessive heat during hydration and associated expansion. To mitigate these effects, &quot;post-cooling&quot; is commonly applied during construction. An early example at Hoover Dam used a network of pipes between vertical concrete placements to circulate cooling water during the curing process to avoid damaging overheating. Similar systems are still used; depending on volume of the pour, the concrete mix used, and ambient air temperature, the cooling process may last for many months after the concrete is placed. Various methods also are used to pre-cool the concrete mix in mass concrete structures.

Another approach to mass concrete structures that minimizes cement&#x27;s thermal by-product is the use of roller-compacted concrete, which uses a dry mix which has a much lower cooling requirement than conventional wet placement. It is deposited in thick layers as a semi-dry material then roller compacted into a dense, strong mass.

===Surface finishes===

Raw concrete surfaces tend to be porous and have a relatively uninteresting appearance. Many finishes can be applied to improve the appearance and preserve the surface against staining, water penetration, and freezing.

Examples of improved appearance include stamped concrete where the wet concrete has a pattern impressed on the surface, to give a paved, cobbled or brick-like effect, and may be accompanied with coloration. Another popular effect for flooring and table tops is polished concrete where the concrete is polished optically flat with diamond abrasives and sealed with polymers or other sealants.

Other finishes can be achieved with chiseling, or more conventional techniques such as painting or covering it with other materials.

The proper treatment of the surface of concrete, and therefore its characteristics, is an important stage in the construction and renovation of architectural structures.

===Prestressed ===

Prestressed concrete is a form of reinforced concrete that builds in compressive stresses during construction to oppose tensile stresses experienced in use. This can greatly reduce the weight of beams or slabs, by
better distributing the stresses in the structure to make optimal use of the reinforcement. For example, a horizontal beam tends to sag. Prestressed reinforcement along the bottom of the beam counteracts this.
In pre-tensioned concrete, the prestressing is achieved by using steel or polymer tendons or bars that are subjected to a tensile force prior to casting, or for post-tensioned concrete, after casting.

There are two different systems being used:

* Pretensioned concrete is almost always precast, and contains steel wires (tendons) that are held in tension while the concrete is placed and sets around them.
* Post-tensioned concrete has ducts through it. After the concrete has gained strength, tendons are pulled through the ducts and stressed. The ducts are then filled with grout. Bridges built in this way have experienced considerable corrosion of the tendons, so external post-tensioning may now be used in which the tendons run along the outer surface of the concrete.

More than of highways in the United States are paved with this material. Reinforced concrete, prestressed concrete and precast concrete are the most widely used types of concrete functional extensions in modern days. For more information see Brutalist architecture.

===Placement===
Once mixed, concrete is typically transported to the place where it is intended to become a structural item. Various methods of transportation and placement are used depending on the distances involve, quantity needed, and other details of application. Large amounts are often transported by truck, poured free under gravity or through a tremie, or pumped through a pipe. Smaller amounts may be carried in a skip (a metal container which can be tilted or opened to release the contents, usually transported by crane or hoist), or wheelbarrow, or carried in toggle bags for manual placement underwater.

====Cold weather placement====
Extreme weather conditions (extreme heat or cold; windy conditions, and humidity variations) can significantly alter the quality of concrete. Many precautions are observed in cold weather placement. Low temperatures significantly slow the chemical reactions involved in hydration of cement, thus affecting the strength development. Preventing freezing is the most important precaution, as formation of ice crystals can cause damage to the crystalline structure of the hydrated cement paste. If the surface of the concrete pour is insulated from the outside temperatures, the heat of hydration will prevent freezing.

The American Concrete Institute (ACI) definition of cold weather placement, ACI 306, is:

* A period when for more than three successive days the average daily air temperature drops below 40 °F (~ 4.5 °C), and
* Temperature stays below for more than one-half of any 24-hour period.

In Canada, where temperatures tend to be much lower during the cold season, the following criteria are used by CSA A23.1:

* When the air temperature is ≤ 5 °C, and
* When there is a probability that the temperature may fall below 5 °C within 24 hours of placing the concrete.

The minimum strength before exposing concrete to extreme cold is . CSA A 23.1 specified a compressive strength of 7.0 MPa to be considered safe for exposure to freezing.

==== Underwater placement ====

Concrete may be placed and cured underwater. Care must be taken in the placement method to prevent washing out the cement. Underwater placement methods include the tremie, pumping, skip placement, manual placement using toggle bags, and bagwork.

A tremie is a vertical, or near-vertical, pipe with a hopper at the top used to pour concrete underwater in a way that avoids washout of cement from the mix due to turbulent water contact with the concrete while it is flowing. This produces a more reliable strength of the product. The method is generally used for placing small quantities and for repairs. Wet concrete is loaded into a reusable canvas bag and squeezed out at the required place by the diver. Care must be taken to avoid washout of the cement and fines.

 is the manual placement by divers of woven cloth bags containing dry mix, followed by piercing the bags with steel rebar pins to tie the bags together after every two or three layers, and create a path for hydration to induce curing, which can typically take about 6 to 12 hours for initial hardening and full hardening by the next day. Bagwork concrete will generally reach full strength within 28 days. Each bag must be pierced by at least one, and preferably up to four pins. Bagwork is a simple and convenient method of underwater concrete placement which does not require pumps, plant, or formwork, and which can minimise environmental effects from dispersing cement in the water. Prefilled bags are available, which are sealed to prevent premature hydration if stored in suitable dry conditions. The bags may be biodegradable.

 is an alternative method of forming a concrete mass underwater, where the forms are filled with coarse aggregate and the voids then completely filled from the bottom by displacing the water with pumped grout.

===Roads===
Concrete roads are more fuel efficient to drive on, more reflective and last significantly longer than other paving surfaces, yet have a much smaller market share than other paving solutions. Modern-paving methods and design practices have changed the economics of concrete paving, so that a well-designed and placed concrete pavement will be less expensive on initial costs and significantly less expensive over the life cycle. Another major benefit is that pervious concrete can be used, which eliminates the need to place storm drains near the road, and reducing the need for slightly sloped roadway to help rainwater to run off. No longer requiring discarding rainwater through use of drains also means that less electricity is needed (more pumping is otherwise needed in the water-distribution system), and no rainwater gets polluted as it no longer mixes with polluted water. Rather, it is immediately absorbed by the ground.

=== Tube forest ===
Cement molded into a forest of tubular structures can be 5.6 times more resistant to cracking/failure than standard concrete. The approach mimics mammalian cortical bone that features elliptical, hollow osteons suspended in an organic matrix, connected by relatively weak &quot;cement lines&quot;. Cement lines provide a preferable in-plane crack path. This design fails via a &quot;stepwise toughening mechanism&quot;. Cracks are contained within the tube, reducing spreading, by dissipating energy at each tube/step.

==Environment, health and safety==

The manufacture and use of concrete produce a wide range of environmental, economic and social impacts.

===Health and safety===


Grinding of concrete can produce hazardous dust. Exposure to cement dust can lead to issues such as silicosis, kidney disease, skin irritation and similar effects. The U.S. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health in the United States recommends attaching local exhaust ventilation shrouds to electric concrete grinders to control the spread of this dust. In addition, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has placed more stringent regulations on companies whose workers regularly come into contact with silica dust. An updated silica rule, which OSHA put into effect 23 September 2017 for construction companies, restricted the amount of breathable crystalline silica workers could legally come into contact with to 50 micro grams per cubic meter of air per 8-hour workday. That same rule went into effect 23 June 2018 for general industry, hydraulic fracturing and maritime. That deadline was extended to 23 June 2021 for engineering controls in the hydraulic fracturing industry. Companies which fail to meet the tightened safety regulations can face financial charges and extensive penalties. The presence of some substances in concrete, including useful and unwanted additives, can cause health concerns due to toxicity and radioactivity. Fresh concrete (before curing is complete) is highly alkaline and must be handled with proper protective equipment.

===Cement ===
A major component of concrete is cement, a fine powder used mainly to bind sand and coarser aggregates together in concrete. Although a variety of cement types exist, the most common is &quot;Portland cement&quot;, which is produced by mixing clinker with smaller quantities of other additives such as gypsum and ground limestone. The production of clinker, the main constituent of cement, is responsible for the bulk of the sector&#x27;s greenhouse gas emissions, including both energy intensity and process emissions.

The cement industry is one of the three primary producers of carbon dioxide, a major greenhouse gas – the other two being energy production and transportation industries. On average, every tonne of cement produced releases one tonne of CO2 into the atmosphere. Pioneer cement manufacturers have claimed to reach lower carbon intensities, with 590 kg of CO2eq per tonne of cement produced. The emissions are due to combustion and calcination processes, which roughly account for 40% and 60% of the greenhouse gases, respectively. Considering that cement is only a fraction of the constituents of concrete, it is estimated that a tonne of concrete is responsible for emitting about 100–200 kg of CO2. Every year more than 10 billion tonnes of concrete are used worldwide. In the coming years, large quantities of concrete will continue to be used, and the mitigation of CO2 emissions from the sector will be even more critical.

Concrete is used to create hard surfaces that contribute to surface runoff, which can cause heavy soil erosion, water pollution, and flooding, but conversely can be used to divert, dam, and control flooding. Concrete dust released by building demolition and natural disasters can be a major source of dangerous air pollution. Concrete is a contributor to the urban heat island effect, though less so than asphalt.

===Climate change mitigation===
Reducing the cement clinker content might have positive effects on the environmental life-cycle assessment of concrete. Some research work on reducing the cement clinker content in concrete has already been carried out. However, there exist different research strategies. Often replacement of some clinker for large amounts of slag or fly ash was investigated based on conventional concrete technology. This could lead to a waste of scarce raw materials such as slag and fly ash. The aim of other research activities is the efficient use of cement and reactive materials like slag and fly ash in concrete based on a modified mix design approach.

The embodied carbon of a precast concrete facade can be reduced by 50% when using the presented fiber reinforced high performance concrete in place of typical reinforced concrete cladding. Studies have been conducted about commercialization of low-carbon concretes. Life cycle assessment (LCA) of low-carbon concrete was investigated according to the ground granulated blast-furnace slag (GGBS) and fly ash (FA) replacement ratios. Global warming potential (GWP) of GGBS decreased by 1.1 kg CO2 eq/m3, while FA decreased by 17.3 kg CO2 eq/m3 when the mineral admixture replacement ratio was increased by 10%. This study also compared the compressive strength properties of binary blended low-carbon concrete according to the replacement ratios, and the applicable range of mixing proportions was derived.

===Climate change adaptation===
High-performance building materials will be particularly important for enhancing resilience, including for flood defenses and critical-infrastructure protection. Risks to infrastructure and cities posed by extreme weather events are especially serious for those places exposed to flood and hurricane damage, but also where residents need protection from extreme summer temperatures. Traditional concrete can come under strain when exposed to humidity and higher concentrations of atmospheric CO2. While concrete is likely to remain important in applications where the environment is challenging, novel, smarter and more adaptable materials are also needed.

=== End-of-life: degradation and waste ===
===Recycling ===
There have been concerns about the recycling of painted concrete due to possible lead content. Studies have indicated that recycled concrete exhibits lower strength and durability compared to concrete produced using natural aggregates. This deficiency can be addressed by incorporating supplementary materials such as fly ash into the mixture.

==World records==
The world record for the largest concrete pour in a single project is the Three Gorges Dam in Hubei Province, China by the Three Gorges Corporation. The amount of concrete used in the construction of the dam is estimated at 16 million cubic meters over 17 years. The previous record was 12.3 million cubic meters held by Itaipu hydropower station in Brazil.

The world record for concrete pumping was set on 7 August 2009 during the construction of the Parbati Hydroelectric Project, near the village of Suind, Himachal Pradesh, India, when the concrete mix was pumped through a vertical height of .

The Polavaram dam works in Andhra Pradesh on 6 January 2019 entered the Guinness World Records by pouring 32,100 cubic metres of concrete in 24 hours. The world record for the largest continuously poured concrete raft was achieved in August 2007 in Abu Dhabi by contracting firm Al Habtoor-CCC Joint Venture and the concrete supplier is Unibeton Ready Mix. The pour (a part of the foundation for the Abu Dhabi&#x27;s Landmark Tower) was 16,000 cubic meters of concrete poured within a two-day period. The previous record, 13,200 cubic meters poured in 54 hours despite a severe tropical storm requiring the site to be covered with tarpaulins to allow work to continue, was achieved in 1992 by joint Japanese and South Korean consortiums Hazama Corporation and the Samsung C&amp;T Corporation for the construction of the Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

The world record for largest continuously poured concrete floor was completed 8 November 1997, in Louisville, Kentucky by design-build firm EXXCEL Project Management. The monolithic placement consisted of of concrete placed in 30 hours, finished to a flatness tolerance of FF 54.60 and a levelness tolerance of FL 43.83. This surpassed the previous record by 50% in total volume and 7.5% in total area.

The record for the largest continuously placed underwater concrete pour was completed 18 October 2010, in New Orleans, Louisiana by contractor C. J. Mahan Construction Company, LLC of Grove City, Ohio. The placement consisted of 10,251 cubic yards of concrete placed in 58.5 hours using two concrete pumps and two dedicated concrete batch plants. Upon curing, this placement allows the cofferdam to be dewatered approximately below sea level to allow the construction of the Inner Harbor Navigation Canal Sill &amp; Monolith Project to be completed in the dry.

== Art ==
Concrete is used as an artistic medium. It&#x27;s appearance is also imitated in other media: for example Congolese artist Sardoine Mia creates canvases that look like concrete surfaces.

==See also==
* 
* 
* Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures
* 
* 

==References==
==Further reading==

== External links ==

* Advantage and Disadvantage of Concrete
* 
* Release of ultrafine particles from three simulated building processes
* Concrete: The Quest for Greener Alternatives</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="0" end="8" title="Concrete" label="Concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="14" end="32" title="composite material" label="composite material"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238502" start="45" end="54" title="construction aggregate" label="aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="84" end="90" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="186" end="191" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q844123" start="372" end="387" title="Portland cement" label="Portland cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="392" end="397" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q23925154" start="425" end="431" title="slurry" label="slurry"/>
<link wikidata="Q60661" start="839" end="849" title="Exothermic process" label="exothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q694124" start="972" end="980" title="pozzolan" label="pozzolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504762" start="985" end="1001" title="superplasticizer" label="superplasticizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q150425" start="1229" end="1234" title="rebar" label="rebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="1256" end="1272" title="tensile strength" label="tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="1283" end="1302" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q250423" start="1318" end="1322" title="Lime (material)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="1406" end="1422" title="hydraulic cement" label="hydraulic cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q953138" start="1453" end="1477" title="calcium aluminate cements" label="calcium aluminate cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q82337" start="1572" end="1586" title="Portland stone" label="Portland stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889687" start="1617" end="1634" title="types of concrete" label="types of concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="1701" end="1717" title="asphalt concrete" label="asphalt concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="1725" end="1732" title="bitumen" label="bitumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049667" start="1770" end="1782" title="road surface" label="road surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878576" start="1789" end="1805" title="polymer concrete" label="polymer concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q189566" start="1864" end="1870" title="Mortar (masonry)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q40089" start="1967" end="1972" title="brick" label="brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q468402" start="1975" end="1979" title="tile" label="tile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580104" start="2015" end="2020" title="Grout" label="Grout"/>
<link wikidata="Q288903" start="2150" end="2161" title="thixotropic" label="thixotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2450" end="2455" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217379" start="2683" end="2689" title="Tiryns" label="Tiryns"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="2817" end="2824" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="2863" end="2882" title="waterproof concrete" label="waterproof concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q213232" start="2979" end="2984" title="Uxmal" label="Uxmal"/>
<link wikidata="Q56635" start="3065" end="3081" title="John Lloyd Stephens" label="John L. Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11029653" start="3462" end="3470" title="Nabataea" label="Nabatean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602656" start="3666" end="3680" title="hydraulic lime" label="hydraulic lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="3741" end="3745" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q47401" start="3788" end="3802" title="rubble masonry" label="rubble masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q838858" start="3855" end="3862" title="cistern" label="cistern"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="4006" end="4019" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="4033" end="4038" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q694124" start="4077" end="4089" title="Pozzolan" label="volcanic ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q250423" start="4093" end="4097" title="Lime (material)" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4153" end="4172" title="Pozzolanic activity#Reaction" label="pozzolanic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q610076" start="4282" end="4296" title="Roman concrete" label="Roman concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q610076" start="4307" end="4324" title="opus caementicium" label="opus caementicium"/>
<link wikidata="Q185006" start="4346" end="4355" title="quicklime" label="quicklime"/>
<link wikidata="Q17075870" start="4357" end="4366" title="pozzolana" label="pozzolana"/>
<link wikidata="Q180044" start="4387" end="4393" title="pumice" label="pumice"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="4422" end="4438" title="Architecture of ancient Rome" label="Roman structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q8180985" start="4459" end="4482" title="history of architecture" label="history of architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361577" start="4494" end="4524" title="Roman architectural revolution" label="Roman architectural revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413460" start="4532" end="4550" title="Roman engineering" label="Roman construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="4698" end="4707" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="4755" end="4763" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12277" start="4914" end="4918" title="arch" label="arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q189771" start="4922" end="4928" title="Vault (architecture)" label="vaults"/>
<link wikidata="Q847797" start="4933" end="4938" title="List of Roman domes" label="domes"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="5277" end="5293" title="Ultimate tensile strength" label="tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="5320" end="5339" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225329" start="5678" end="5684" title="rubble" label="rubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q512121" start="5977" end="5988" title="Pyroclastic rock" label="pyroclastic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6045" end="6057" title="strätlingite" label="strätlingite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992095" start="6473" end="6484" title="tobermorite" label="tobermorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q502098" start="6813" end="6831" title="Baths of Caracalla" label="Baths of Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="6867" end="6881" title="Roman aqueduct" label="Roman aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q189764" start="6920" end="6932" title="Pont du Gard" label="Pont du Gard"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="7019" end="7027" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="7343" end="7349" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47401" start="7604" end="7618" title="rubble masonry" label="rubble masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q809312" start="7643" end="7665" title="Bartholomaeus Anglicus" label="Bartholomaeus Anglicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q202494" start="8028" end="8041" title="Canal du Midi" label="Canal du Midi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995634" start="8172" end="8192" title="Smeaton&amp;#x27;s Tower" label="Smeaton&amp;#x27;s Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q460922" start="8220" end="8232" title="John Smeaton" label="John Smeaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="8236" end="8241" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q546122" start="8286" end="8306" title="Eddystone Lighthouse" label="Eddystone Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602656" start="8328" end="8342" title="hydraulic lime" label="hydraulic lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q844123" start="8427" end="8442" title="Portland cement" label="Portland cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q121838" start="8484" end="8497" title="Joseph Aspdin" label="Joseph Aspdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q82337" start="8551" end="8565" title="Portland stone" label="Portland stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q774215" start="8593" end="8609" title="Isle of Portland" label="Isle of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="8613" end="8619" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004630" start="8638" end="8645" title="William Aspdin" label="William"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="8769" end="8788" title="Reinforced concrete" label="Reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q647426" start="8813" end="8826" title="Joseph Monier" label="Joseph Monier"/>
<link wikidata="Q647426" start="8970" end="8983" title="Joseph Monier" label="Joseph Monier"/>
<link wikidata="Q465444" start="8994" end="9014" title="Prestressed concrete" label="Prestressed concrete"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9019" end="9042" title="Prestressed concrete#Post-tensioned concrete" label="post-tensioned concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q697514" start="9061" end="9078" title="Eugène Freyssinet" label="Eugène Freyssinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305987" start="9089" end="9099" title="structural engineer" label="structural"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582652" start="9104" end="9118" title="civil engineer" label="civil engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="9258" end="9265" title="Tension (physics)" label="tensile"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="9316" end="9322" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="9401" end="9419" title="composite material" label="composite material"/>
<link wikidata="Q844123" start="9475" end="9490" title="Portland cement" label="Portland cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="9500" end="9507" title="Bitumen" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9556" end="9565" title="#Aggregates" label="aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q191704" start="9689" end="9701" title="Conglomerate (geology)" label="conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889687" start="9708" end="9725" title="types of concrete" label="types of concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238502" start="9984" end="10006" title="Construction aggregate" label="Construction aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="10082" end="10088" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="10114" end="10123" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="10128" end="10135" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="10172" end="10176" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q844123" start="10215" end="10230" title="Portland cement" label="Portland cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="10305" end="10310" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="10509" end="10525" title="Chemical reaction" label="chemical process"/>
<link wikidata="Q20396016" start="10533" end="10542" title="mineral hydration" label="hydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137808" start="10699" end="10706" title="fly ash" label="fly ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q353009" start="10711" end="10722" title="slag cement" label="slag cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="11067" end="11074" title="Bitumen" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="11107" end="11123" title="asphalt concrete" label="asphalt concrete"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11202" end="11220" title="#Mineral admixtures and blended cements" label="Mineral admixtures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137808" start="11299" end="11306" title="fly ash" label="fly ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434958" start="11324" end="11347" title="Fossil fuel power plant" label="coal-fired power plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q353009" start="11349" end="11385" title="ground granulated blast furnace slag" label="ground granulated blast furnace slag"/>
<link wikidata="Q482090" start="11403" end="11414" title="steelmaking" label="steelmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622096" start="11420" end="11431" title="silica fume" label="silica fume"/>
<link wikidata="Q650993" start="11460" end="11480" title="electric arc furnace" label="electric arc furnace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11546" end="11565" title="#Reinforcement" label="steel reinforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q186191" start="11624" end="11644" title="compressive strength" label="compressive strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="11667" end="11683" title="tensile strength" label="tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="11774" end="11779" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q150425" start="11780" end="11785" title="rebar" label="rebar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11798" end="11808" title="types of concrete#Mix design" label="mix design"/>
<link wikidata="Q189566" start="12067" end="12073" title="mortar (masonry)" label="mortar"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="12084" end="12091" title="plaster" label="plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258724" start="12141" end="12146" title="alite" label="alite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598593" start="12148" end="12154" title="belite" label="belite"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860582" start="12157" end="12167" title="tricalcium aluminate" label="aluminates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018811" start="12172" end="12180" title="calcium aluminoferrite" label="ferrites"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="12279" end="12288" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q189333" start="12412" end="12419" title="clinker (cement)" label="clinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q172290" start="12444" end="12451" title="sulfate" label="sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="12467" end="12473" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q748594" start="12477" end="12488" title="Cement kiln" label="Cement kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q593493" start="12798" end="12818" title="Cement mill" label="grind it into cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="13222" end="13227" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669408" start="13422" end="13438" title="Abrams&amp;#x27; law" label="Abrams&amp;#x27; law"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053088" start="13494" end="13501" title="Reinforced concrete structures durability" label="durable"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13576" end="13581" title="Workability" label="slump"/>
<link wikidata="Q181898" start="13664" end="13678" title="polymerization" label="polymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344437" start="13887" end="13910" title="Cement chemist notation" label="Cement chemist notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="14303" end="14307" title="Sand" label="Sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262699" start="14329" end="14342" title="crushed stone" label="crushed stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="14585" end="14598" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205307" start="14608" end="14618" title="bottom ash" label="bottom ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q237883" start="15388" end="15397" title="quartzite" label="quartzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756656" start="16099" end="16111" title="Accelerant" label="Accelerators"/>
<link wikidata="Q208451" start="16191" end="16207" title="calcium chloride" label="calcium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q407392" start="16209" end="16224" title="calcium nitrate" label="calcium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q184373" start="16229" end="16243" title="sodium nitrate" label="sodium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523286" start="16548" end="16569" title="Air entrainment" label="Air entraining agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="16648" end="16659" title="Weathering" label="freeze-thaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053088" start="16679" end="16689" title="Reinforced concrete structures durability" label="durability"/>
<link wikidata="Q904035" start="16890" end="16898" title="defoamer" label="defoamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468815" start="17177" end="17196" title="Corrosion inhibitor" label="Corrosion inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="17787" end="17794" title="Pigment" label="Pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q910212" start="17859" end="17870" title="Plasticizer" label="Plasticizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504762" start="18277" end="18293" title="Superplasticizer" label="Superplasticizer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18571" end="18582" title="#Sample analysis—workability" label="workability"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911200" start="18741" end="18750" title="Retarder (chemistry)" label="Retarders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="18917" end="18922" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q264552" start="18924" end="18940" title="sodium gluconate" label="sodium gluconate"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="18942" end="18953" title="citric acid" label="citric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q194322" start="18959" end="18972" title="tartaric acid" label="tartaric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q694124" start="19050" end="19058" title="pozzolan" label="pozzolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246948" start="19104" end="19116" title="Granularity" label="fine-grained"/>
<link wikidata="Q844123" start="19241" end="19256" title="Portland cement" label="Portland cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="19303" end="19312" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137808" start="19314" end="19321" title="fly ash" label="fly ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q353009" start="19323" end="19341" title="Ground granulated blast-furnace slag" label="blast furnace slag"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237073" start="19375" end="19396" title="Pozzolanic activity" label="pozzolanic properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="19612" end="19636" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q497743" start="19789" end="19805" title="circular economy" label="circular economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="19821" end="19842" title="Construction Industry" label="construction industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q152810" start="19943" end="19951" title="landfill" label="landfill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137808" start="19965" end="19972" title="Fly ash" label="Fly ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="20001" end="20027" title="power station" label="electric generating plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237073" start="20194" end="20204" title="Pozzolanic activity" label="pozzolanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005941" start="20212" end="20222" title="calcareous" label="calcareous"/>
<link wikidata="Q353009" start="20266" end="20302" title="Ground granulated blast furnace slag" label="Ground granulated blast furnace slag"/>
<link wikidata="Q482090" start="20336" end="20352" title="Steelmaking" label="steel production"/>
<link wikidata="Q844123" start="20382" end="20397" title="Portland cement" label="Portland cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622096" start="20460" end="20471" title="Silica fume" label="Silica fume"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="20507" end="20514" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q899309" start="20519" end="20531" title="ferrosilicon" label="ferrosilicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="20532" end="20537" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237073" start="20685" end="20704" title="Pozzolanic activity" label="pozzolanic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053088" start="20751" end="20761" title="Reinforced concrete structures durability" label="durability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291516" start="20862" end="20872" title="metakaolin" label="metakaolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q240553" start="20914" end="20922" title="Strength of materials" label="strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q10269116" start="20927" end="20937" title="durability" label="durability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468924" start="21191" end="21207" title="Carbon nanofiber" label="Carbon nanofiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091584" start="21284" end="21304" title="Young&amp;#x27;s modulus" label="Young&amp;#x27;s modulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="21593" end="21609" title="Ultimate tensile strength" label="tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="21619" end="21642" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q195546" start="21775" end="21799" title="University of Kitakyushu" label="University of Kitakyushu"/>
<link wikidata="Q303506" start="22462" end="22476" title="concrete plant" label="concrete plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q752323" start="22546" end="22554" title="formwork" label="formwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q831584" start="23365" end="23379" title="concrete mixer" label="concrete mixer"/>
<link wikidata="Q752323" start="23546" end="23554" title="formwork" label="formwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540838" start="23596" end="23608" title="slip forming" label="slip forming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605758" start="23613" end="23637" title="steel plate construction" label="steel plate construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q831541" start="23748" end="23764" title="precast concrete" label="precast concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q920219" start="25257" end="25274" title="British Standards" label="British Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q186191" start="25354" end="25374" title="compressive strength" label="compressive strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238502" start="25646" end="25656" title="Construction aggregate" label="aggregates"/>
<link wikidata="Q186191" start="25674" end="25694" title="compressive strength" label="compressive strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413436" start="25780" end="25783" title="Water-cement ratio" label="w/c"/>
<link wikidata="Q910212" start="25915" end="25932" title="Plasticizer" label="superplasticizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="25934" end="25941" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622096" start="25947" end="25958" title="silica fume" label="silica fume"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107540" start="26648" end="26657" title="hydration reaction" label="hydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510550" start="26868" end="26893" title="Segregation in concrete" label="segregation of aggregates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250742" start="27786" end="27805" title="concrete slump test" label="concrete slump test"/>
<link wikidata="Q621977" start="27885" end="27889" title="ASTM" label="ASTM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3970604" start="27973" end="27984" title="Duff Abrams" label="Abrams cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q778164" start="28561" end="28576" title="flow table test" label="flow table test"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504762" start="28660" end="28676" title="superplasticizer" label="superplasticizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413436" start="28698" end="28716" title="water-cement ratio" label="water-cement ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q928630" start="28837" end="28864" title="self-consolidating concrete" label="self-consolidating concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053088" start="29293" end="29303" title="Reinforced concrete structures durability" label="durability"/>
<link wikidata="Q462174" start="29319" end="29328" title="hydrate" label="hydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q182849" start="29546" end="29563" title="calcium hydroxide" label="calcium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="29585" end="29602" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="29622" end="29625" title="carbon dioxide" label="CO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139722" start="29724" end="29735" title="carbonation" label="carbonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60661" start="30955" end="30965" title="exothermic" label="exothermic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31011" end="31019" title="Spalling#Spalling in mechanical weathering" label="spalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819233" start="31044" end="31052" title="abrasion (mechanical)" label="abrasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120022" start="31068" end="31076" title="fracture" label="cracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672280" start="31959" end="31977" title="accelerated curing" label="accelerated curing"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="32480" end="32494" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="32499" end="32506" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q181790" start="32513" end="32531" title="composite material" label="composite material"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049667" start="32557" end="32562" title="road surface" label="roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501349" start="32564" end="32575" title="parking lot" label="parking lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="32578" end="32585" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244922" start="32611" end="32625" title="embankment dam" label="embankment dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238502" start="32746" end="32763" title="Construction aggregate" label="mineral aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q863583" start="32764" end="32769" title="Binder (material)" label="bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="32784" end="32791" title="Bitumen" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986562" start="32900" end="32915" title="Edward De Smedt" label="Edward De Smedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="33100" end="33111" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q169917" start="33676" end="33684" title="graphene" label="graphene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579277" start="33817" end="33835" title="Bacillus pasteurii" label="Bacillus pasteurii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838978" start="33849" end="33870" title="Bacillus pseudofirmus" label="Bacillus pseudofirmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965723" start="33952" end="33981" title="Arthrobacter crystallopoietes" label="Arthrobacter crystallopoietes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579277" start="34359" end="34377" title="Bacillus pasteurii" label="Bacillus pasteurii"/>
<link wikidata="Q85787715" start="34533" end="34545" title="Nanoconcrete" label="Nanoconcrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q186191" start="39677" end="39697" title="compressive strength" label="compressive strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="39714" end="39730" title="tensile strength" label="tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="39757" end="39767" title="reinforced concrete" label="reinforced"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="39995" end="40027" title="coefficient of thermal expansion" label="coefficient of thermal expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q462188" start="40194" end="40199" title="Creep (deformation)" label="creep"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41799" end="41814" title="Cement#CO2 emissions" label="largest sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="41915" end="41924" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q748594" start="41932" end="41943" title="cement kiln" label="cement kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="41989" end="42000" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q844613" start="42014" end="42023" title="sintering" label="sintering"/>
<link wikidata="Q189333" start="42053" end="42067" title="cement clinker" label="cement clinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238502" start="42157" end="42179" title="construction aggregate" label="construction aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="42223" end="42232" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="42237" end="42241" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q748594" start="42254" end="42265" title="cement kiln" label="cement kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058822" start="42318" end="42336" title="ready-mix concrete" label="ready-mix concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153531" start="42499" end="42514" title="embodied energy" label="embodied energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295286" start="43517" end="43523" title="rastra" label="rastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465014" start="44006" end="44016" title="Fondu fyre" label="Fondu fyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799251" start="44262" end="44287" title="Insulating concrete forms" label="Insulating Concrete Forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="46604" end="46628" title="Reinforced concrete" label="Reinforced concrete (RC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397403" start="47615" end="47641" title="Fiber-reinforced concrete" label="Fibre-reinforced concretes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60661" start="49253" end="49263" title="exothermic" label="exothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="49334" end="49337" title="dam" label="dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="49340" end="49355" title="navigation lock" label="navigation lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q215635" start="49391" end="49402" title="breakwater (structure)" label="breakwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547687" start="50127" end="50152" title="roller-compacted concrete" label="roller-compacted concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131760" start="50318" end="50327" title="compactor" label="compacted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597466" start="50640" end="50656" title="stamped concrete" label="stamped concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q794236" start="50861" end="50878" title="polished concrete" label="polished concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q465444" start="51318" end="51338" title="Prestressed concrete" label="Prestressed concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920781" start="51387" end="51405" title="compressive stress" label="compressive stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q465444" start="51991" end="52012" title="Prestressed concrete" label="Pretensioned concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q465444" start="52152" end="52175" title="Prestressed concrete" label="Post-tensioned concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q184190" start="52593" end="52612" title="Reinforced concrete" label="Reinforced concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q465444" start="52614" end="52634" title="prestressed concrete" label="prestressed concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q831541" start="52639" end="52655" title="precast concrete" label="precast concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889687" start="52681" end="52698" title="types of concrete" label="types of concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q994776" start="52762" end="52784" title="Brutalist architecture" label="Brutalist architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q121030199" start="53141" end="53147" title="tremie" label="tremie"/>
<link wikidata="Q786115" start="53152" end="53158" title="Concrete pump" label="pumped"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277161" start="53437" end="53452" title="Extreme weather" label="Extreme weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q463779" start="54058" end="54085" title="American Concrete Institute" label="American Concrete Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="54340" end="54346" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032374" start="54448" end="54451" title="Canadian Standards Agency" label="CSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q121030199" start="54982" end="54988" title="tremie" label="tremie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580104" start="56625" end="56630" title="grout" label="grout"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56645" end="56659" title="Road surface#Concrete" label="Concrete roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171262" start="57104" end="57121" title="pervious concrete" label="pervious concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="57170" end="57181" title="storm drain" label="storm drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="57754" end="57767" title="Bone" label="cortical bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424568" start="57801" end="57808" title="osteons" label="osteons"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136091" start="58318" end="58332" title="hazardous dust" label="hazardous dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q653318" start="58385" end="58394" title="silicosis" label="silicosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="58458" end="58511" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="58671" end="58716" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="Occupational Safety and Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q890794" start="59160" end="59180" title="hydraulic fracturing" label="hydraulic fracturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q45190" start="59726" end="59732" title="cement" label="cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q844123" start="59885" end="59900" title="Portland cement" label="Portland cement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="61201" end="61215" title="surface runoff" label="surface runoff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61349" end="61362" title="Concrete dust" label="Concrete dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q331483" start="61384" end="61394" title="demolition" label="demolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="61452" end="61465" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="61500" end="61517" title="urban heat island" label="urban heat island"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="61546" end="61553" title="Asphalt concrete" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q581950" start="62501" end="62522" title="Life-cycle assessment" label="Life cycle assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12514" start="64228" end="64244" title="Three Gorges Dam" label="Three Gorges Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q244169" start="64475" end="64500" title="Itaipu Dam" label="Itaipu hydropower station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357803" start="64607" end="64614" title="Parbati River (Himachal Pradesh)" label="Parbati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="64665" end="64681" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209206" start="64759" end="64772" title="Polavaram Project" label="Polavaram dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="64782" end="64796" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="64827" end="64849" title="Guinness World Records" label="Guinness World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735111" start="65172" end="65186" title="The Landmark (Abu Dhabi)" label="Landmark Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347026" start="65386" end="65395" title="tarpaulin" label="tarpaulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4410214" start="65492" end="65510" title="Hazama Corporation" label="Hazama Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q499194" start="65519" end="65546" title="Samsung C&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="Samsung C&amp;amp;T Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83063" start="65575" end="65590" title="Petronas Towers" label="Petronas Towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="65594" end="65606" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="65717" end="65727" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q928918" start="66498" end="66527" title="Industrial Canal" label="Inner Harbor Navigation Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q109043954" start="66718" end="66730" title="Sardoine Mia" label="Sardoine Mia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="66804" end="66845" title="Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures" label="Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5373" wikidata="Q182207" url="?curid=5373" title="Coitus interruptus">
<text>Coitus interruptus, also known as withdrawal, pulling out or the pull-out method, is an act of birth control during penetrative sexual intercourse, whereby the penis is withdrawn from a vagina prior to ejaculation so that the ejaculate (semen) may be directed away in an effort to avoid insemination.

This method was used by an estimated 38 million couples worldwide in 1991. &quot;Coitus interruptus&quot; does not protect against sexually transmitted infections (STIs).

==History==
Perhaps the oldest description of the use of the withdrawal method to avoid pregnancy is the story of Onan in the Torah and the Bible. This text is believed to have been written over 2,500 years ago. Societies in the ancient civilizations of Greece and Rome preferred small families and are known to have practiced a variety of birth control methods. There are references that have led historians to believe withdrawal was sometimes used as birth control. However, these societies viewed birth control as a woman&#x27;s responsibility, and the only well-documented contraception methods were female-controlled devices (both possibly effective, such as pessaries, and ineffective, such as amulets).

After the decline of the Roman Empire in the 5th century AD, contraceptive practices fell out of use in Europe; the use of contraceptive pessaries, for example, is not documented again until the 15th century. If withdrawal was used during the Roman Empire, knowledge of the art may have been lost during its decline.

From the 18th century until the development of modern methods, withdrawal was one of the most popular methods of birth-control in Europe, North America, and elsewhere.

== Effects ==
Like many methods of birth control, reliable effect is achieved only by correct and consistent use. Observed failure rates of withdrawal vary depending on the population being studied: American studies have found actual failure rates of 15–28% per year. One US study, based on self-reported data from the 2006–2010 cycle of the National Survey of Family Growth, found significant differences in failure rate based on parity status. Women with 0 previous births had a 12-month failure rate of only 8.4%, which then increased to 20.4% for those with 1 prior birth and again to 27.7% for those with 2 or more.

An analysis of Demographic and Health Surveys in 43 developing countries between 1990 and 2013 found a median 12-month failure rate across subregions of 13.4%, with a range of 7.8–17.1%. Individual countries within the subregions were even more varied. A large scale study of women in England and Scotland during 1968–1974 to determine the efficacy of various contraceptive methods found a failure rate of 6.7 per 100 woman-years of use. This was a “typical use” failure rate, including user failure to use the method correctly. In comparison, the combined oral contraceptive pill has an actual use failure rate of 2–8%, while intrauterine devices (IUDs) have an actual use failure rate of 0.1–0.8%. Condoms have an actual use failure rate of 10–18%. However, some authors suggest that actual effectiveness of withdrawal could be similar to the effectiveness of condoms; this area needs further research. (See Comparison of birth control methods.)

For couples that use &quot;coitus interruptus&quot; consistently and correctly at every act of intercourse, the failure rate is 4% per year. This rate is derived from an educated guess based on a modest chance of sperm in the pre-ejaculate. In comparison, the pill has a perfect-use failure rate of 0.3%, IUDs a rate of 0.1–0.6%, and internal condoms a rate of 2%.

It has been suggested that the pre-ejaculate (&quot;Cowper&#x27;s fluid&quot;) emitted by the penis prior to ejaculation may contain spermatozoa (sperm cells), which would compromise the effectiveness of the method. However, several small studies have failed to find any viable sperm in the fluid. While no large conclusive studies have been done, it is believed by some that the cause of method (correct-use) failure is the pre-ejaculate fluid picking up sperm from a previous ejaculation. For this reason, it is recommended that the male partner urinate between ejaculations, to clear the urethra of sperm, and wash any ejaculate from objects that might come near the woman&#x27;s vulva (such as hands and penis).

However, recent research suggests that this might not be accurate. A contrary, yet non-generalizable study that found mixed evidence, including individual cases of a high sperm concentration, was published in March 2011. A noted limitation to these previous studies&#x27; findings is that pre-ejaculate samples were analyzed after the critical two-minute point. That is, looking for motile sperm in small amounts of pre-ejaculate via microscope after two minutes – when the sample has most likely dried – makes examination and evaluation &quot;extremely difficult&quot;. Thus, in March 2011 a team of researchers assembled 27 male volunteers and analyzed their pre-ejaculate samples within two minutes after producing them. The researchers found that 11 of the 27 men (41%) produced pre-ejaculatory samples that contained sperm, and 10 of these samples (37%) contained a &quot;fair amount&quot; of motile sperm (in other words, as few as 1 million to as many as 35 million). This study therefore recommends, in order to minimize unintended pregnancy and disease transmission, the use of condoms from the first moment of genital contact. As a point of reference, a study showed that, of couples who conceived within a year of trying, only 2.5% included a male partner with a total sperm count (per ejaculate) of 23 million sperm or less. However, across a wide range of observed values, total sperm count (as with other identified semen and sperm characteristics) has weak power to predict which couples are at risk of pregnancy. Regardless, this study introduced the concept that some men may consistently have sperm in their pre-ejaculate, due to a &quot;leakage,&quot; while others may not.

Similarly, another robust study performed in 2016 found motile sperm in the pre-ejaculate of 16.7% (7/42) healthy men. What more, this study attempted to exclude contamination of sperm from ejaculate by drying the pre-ejaculate specimens to reveal a fern-like pattern, characteristics of true pre-ejaculate. All pre-ejaculate specimens were examined within an hour of production and then dried; all pre-ejaculate specimens were found to be true pre-ejaculate. It is widely believed that urinating after an ejaculation will flush the urethra of remaining sperm. However, some of the subjects in the March 2011 study who produced sperm in their pre-ejaculate did urinate (sometimes more than once) before producing their sample. Therefore, some males can release the pre-ejaculate fluid containing sperm without a previous ejaculation.

== Advantages ==
The advantage of &quot;coitus interruptus&quot; is that it can be used by people who have objections to, or do not have access to, other forms of contraception. Some people prefer it so they can avoid possible adverse effects of hormonal contraceptives or so that they can have a full experience and be able to &quot;feel&quot; their partner. Other reasons for the popularity of this method are its anecdotal increase in male sexual deftness, it has no direct monetary cost, requires no artificial devices, has no physical side effects, can be practiced without a prescription or medical consultation, and provides no barriers to stimulation.

== Disadvantages ==
Compared to the other common reversible methods of contraception such as IUDs, hormonal contraceptives, and male condoms, &quot;coitus interruptus&quot; is less effective at preventing pregnancy. As a result, it is also less cost-effective than many more effective methods: although the method itself has no direct cost, users have a greater chance of incurring the risks and expenses of either child-birth or abortion. Only models that assume all couples practice perfect use of the method find cost savings associated with the choice of withdrawal as a birth control method.

The method is largely ineffective in the prevention of sexually transmitted infections (STIs), like HIV, since pre-ejaculate may carry viral particles or bacteria which may infect the partner if this fluid comes in contact with mucous membranes. However, a reduction in the volume of bodily fluids exchanged during intercourse may reduce the likelihood of disease transmission compared to using no method due to the smaller number of pathogens present.

== Prevalence ==
Based on data from surveys conducted during the late 1990s, 3% of women of childbearing age worldwide rely on withdrawal as their primary method of contraception. Regional popularity of the method varies widely, from a low of 1% in Africa to 16% in Western Asia.

In the United States, according to the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) in 2014, 8.1% of reproductive-aged women reported using withdrawal as a primary contraceptive method. This was a significant increase from 2012 when 4.8% of women reported the use of withdrawal as their most effective method. However, when withdrawal is used in addition to or in rotation with another contraceptive method, the percentage of women using withdrawal jumps from 5% for sole use and 11% for any withdrawal use in 2002, and for adolescents from 7.1% of sole withdrawal use to 14.6% of any withdrawal use in 2006–2008.

When asked if withdrawal was used at least once in the past month by women, use of withdrawal increased from 13% as sole use to 33% ever use in the past month. These increases are even more pronounced for adolescents 15 to 19 years old and young women 20 to 24 years old Similarly, the NSFG reports that 9.8% of unmarried men who have had sexual intercourse in the last three months in 2002 used withdrawal, which then increased to 14.5% in 2006–2010, and then to 18.8% in 2011–2015. The use of withdrawal varied by the unmarried man&#x27;s age and cohabiting status, but not by ethnicity or race. The use of withdrawal decreased significantly with increasing age groups, ranging from 26.2% among men aged 15–19 to 12% among men aged 35–44. The use of withdrawal was significantly higher for never-married men (23.0%) compared with formerly married (16.3%) and cohabiting (13.0%) men.

For 1998, about 18% of married men in Turkey reported using withdrawal as a contraceptive method.

== See also ==
* &quot;Coitus reservatus&quot; 
* &quot;Coitus saxonicus&quot; 
* Masturbation

== References ==
== External links ==
* Contraception and abortion in Islam
* Withdrawal</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q182207" start="34" end="44" title="Coitus interruptus" label="withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182207" start="46" end="57" title="Coitus interruptus" label="pulling out"/>
<link wikidata="Q182207" start="65" end="80" title="Coitus interruptus" label="pull-out method"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="95" end="108" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="128" end="146" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8124" start="160" end="165" title="Human penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="186" end="192" title="vagina" label="vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q14820885" start="202" end="213" title="ejaculation" label="ejaculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9715" start="237" end="242" title="semen" label="semen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379223" start="287" end="299" title="insemination" label="insemination"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="433" end="464" title="Sexually transmitted disease" label="sexually transmitted infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q661074" start="588" end="592" title="Onan" label="Onan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="600" end="605" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="614" end="619" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="728" end="734" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="739" end="743" title="Roman Empire" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q174952" start="1138" end="1147" title="pessary" label="pessaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="1174" end="1180" title="amulet" label="amulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="1195" end="1222" title="decline of the Roman Empire" label="decline of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="2842" end="2874" title="combined oral contraceptive pill" label="combined oral contraceptive pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q899868" start="2921" end="2940" title="intrauterine device" label="intrauterine device"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="2994" end="3000" title="Condom" label="Condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q666544" start="3204" end="3239" title="Comparison of birth control methods" label="Comparison of birth control methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q628958" start="3640" end="3653" title="pre-ejaculate" label="pre-ejaculate"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="3742" end="3753" title="Spermatozoon" label="spermatozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817591" start="5355" end="5375" title="unintended pregnancy" label="unintended pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292449" start="7101" end="7124" title="hormonal contraceptives" label="hormonal contraceptives"/>
<link wikidata="Q899868" start="7609" end="7613" title="IUDs" label="IUDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="8169" end="8200" title="Sexually transmitted disease" label="sexually transmitted infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="8214" end="8217" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070897" start="8888" end="8920" title="National Survey of Family Growth" label="National Survey of Family Growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429826" start="10467" end="10484" title="Coitus reservatus" label="Coitus reservatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759920" start="10500" end="10516" title="Coitus saxonicus" label="Coitus saxonicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="10526" end="10538" title="Masturbation" label="Masturbation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5374" wikidata="Q14076" url="?curid=5374" title="Condom">
<text>A condom is a sheath-shaped barrier device used during sexual intercourse to reduce the probability of pregnancy or a sexually transmitted infection (STI). There are both external condoms, also called male condoms, and internal (female) condoms.
The external condom is rolled onto an erect penis before intercourse and works by forming a physical barrier which limits skin-to-skin contact, exposure to fluids, and blocks semen from entering the body of a sexual partner. External condoms are typically made from latex and, less commonly, from polyurethane, polyisoprene, or lamb intestine. External condoms have the advantages of ease of use, ease of access, and few side effects. Individuals with latex allergy should use condoms made from a material other than latex, such as polyurethane. Internal condoms are typically made from polyurethane and may be used multiple times.

With proper use—and use at every act of intercourse—women whose partners use external condoms experience a 2% per-year pregnancy rate. With typical use, the rate of pregnancy is 18% per-year. Their use greatly decreases the risk of gonorrhea, chlamydia, trichomoniasis, hepatitis B, and HIV/AIDS. To a lesser extent, they also protect against genital herpes, human papillomavirus (HPV), and syphilis.
Condoms as a method of preventing STIs have been used since at least 1564. Rubber condoms became available in 1855, followed by latex condoms in the 1920s. It is on the World Health Organization&#x27;s List of Essential Medicines. As of 2019, globally around 21% of those using birth control use the condom, making it the second-most common method after female sterilization (24%). Rates of condom use are highest in East and Southeast Asia, Europe and North America. 
== Medical uses ==

=== Birth control ===

The effectiveness of condoms, as of most forms of contraception, can be assessed two ways. &quot;Perfect use&quot; or &quot;method&quot; effectiveness rates only include people who use condoms properly and consistently. &quot;Actual use&quot;, or &quot;typical use&quot; effectiveness rates are of all condom users, including those who use condoms incorrectly or do not use condoms at every act of intercourse. Rates are generally presented for the first year of use. Most commonly the Pearl Index is used to calculate effectiveness rates, but some studies use decrement tables.

The typical use pregnancy rate among condom users varies depending on the population being studied, ranging from 10 to 18% per year. The perfect use pregnancy rate of condoms is 2% per year. Condoms may be combined with other forms of contraception (such as spermicide) for greater protection.

=== Sexually transmitted infections ===
Condoms are widely recommended for the prevention of sexually transmitted infections (STIs). They have been shown to be effective in reducing infection rates in both men and women. While not perfect, the condom is effective at reducing the transmission of organisms that cause AIDS, genital herpes, cervical cancer, genital warts, syphilis, chlamydia, gonorrhea, and other diseases. Condoms are often recommended as an adjunct to more effective birth control methods (such as IUD) in situations where STI protection is also desired.
For this reason, condoms are frequently used by those in the swinging community.

According to a 2000 report by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), consistent use of latex condoms reduces the risk of HIV transmission by approximately 85% relative to risk when unprotected, putting the seroconversion rate (infection rate) at 0.9 per 100 person-years with condom, down from 6.7 per 100 person-years. Analysis published in 2007 from the University of Texas Medical Branchand the World Health Organization found similar risk reductions of 80–95%.

The 2000 NIH review concluded that condom use significantly reduces the risk of gonorrhea for men. A 2006 study reports that proper condom use decreases the risk of transmission of human papillomavirus (HPV) to women by approximately 70%. Another study in the same year found consistent condom use was effective at reducing transmission of herpes simplex virus-2, also known as genital herpes, in both men and women.

Although a condom is effective in limiting exposure, some disease transmission may occur even with a condom. Infectious areas of the genitals, especially when symptoms are present, may not be covered by a condom, and as a result, some diseases like HPV and herpes may be transmitted by direct contact. The primary effectiveness issue with using condoms to prevent STIs, however, is inconsistent use.

Condoms may also be useful in treating potentially precancerous cervical changes. Exposure to human papillomavirus, even in individuals already infected with the virus, appears to increase the risk of precancerous changes. The use of condoms helps promote regression of these changes. In addition, researchers in the UK suggest that a hormone in semen can aggravate existing cervical cancer, condom use during sex can prevent exposure to the hormone.

=== Causes of failure ===

Condoms may slip off the penis after ejaculation, break due to improper application or physical damage (such as tears caused when opening the package), or break or slip due to latex degradation (typically from usage past the expiration date, improper storage, or exposure to oils). The rate of breakage is between 0.4% and 2.3%, while the rate of slippage is between 0.6% and 1.3%. Even if no breakage or slippage is observed, 1–3% of women will test positive for semen residue after intercourse with a condom. Failure rates are higher for anal sex, and until 2022, condoms were only approved by the FDA for vaginal sex. The One Male Condom received FDA approval for anal sex on 23 February 2022.

Different modes of condom failure result in different levels of semen exposure. If a failure occurs during application, the damaged condom may be disposed of and a new condom applied before intercourse begins – such failures generally pose no risk to the user. One study found that semen exposure from a broken condom was about half that of unprotected intercourse; semen exposure from a slipped condom was about one-fifth that of unprotected intercourse.

Standard condoms will fit almost any penis, with varying degrees of comfort or risk of slippage. Many condom manufacturers offer &quot;snug&quot; or &quot;magnum&quot; sizes. Some manufacturers also offer custom sized-to-fit condoms, with claims that they are more reliable and offer improved sensation/comfort. Some studies have associated larger penises and smaller condoms with increased breakage and decreased slippage rates (and vice versa), but other studies have been inconclusive.

It is recommended for condoms manufacturers to avoid very thick or very thin condoms, because they are both considered less effective. Some authors encourage users to choose thinner condoms &quot;for greater durability, sensation, and comfort&quot;, but others warn that &quot;the thinner the condom, the smaller the force required to break it&quot;.

Experienced condom users are significantly less likely to have a condom slip or break compared to first-time users, although users who experience one slippage or breakage are more likely to suffer a second such failure. An article in &quot;Population Reports&quot; suggests that education on condom use reduces behaviors that increase the risk of breakage and slippage. A Family Health International publication also offers the view that education can reduce the risk of breakage and slippage, but emphasizes that more research needs to be done to determine all of the causes of breakage and slippage.

Among people who intend condoms to be their form of birth control, pregnancy may occur when the user has sex without a condom. The person may have run out of condoms, or be traveling and not have a condom with them, or dislike the feel of condoms and decide to &quot;take a chance&quot;. This behavior is the primary cause of typical use failure (as opposed to method or perfect use failure).

Another possible cause of condom failure is sabotage. One motive is to have a child against a partner&#x27;s wishes or consent. Some commercial sex workers from Nigeria reported clients sabotaging condoms in retaliation for being coerced into condom use. Using a fine needle to make several pinholes at the tip of the condom is believed to significantly impact on their effectiveness. Cases of such condom sabotage have occurred.

== Side effects ==
The use of latex condoms by people with an allergy to latex can cause allergic symptoms, such as skin irritation. In people with severe latex allergies, using a latex condom can potentially be life-threatening. Repeated use of latex condoms can also cause the development of a latex allergy in some people. Irritation may also occur due to spermicides that may be present.

== Use ==

External condoms are usually packaged inside a foil or plastic wrapper, in a rolled-up form, and are designed to be applied to the tip of the penis and then unrolled over the erect penis. It is important that the closed end or the teat of the condom is pinched when the condom is placed on the tip of the penis. This will ensure that air is not trapped inside the condom which could cause it to burst during intercourse. In addition, this leaves space for the semen to collect which reduces the risk of it being forced out of the base of the device. Most condoms have a teat end for this purpose. Soon after ejaculating, the male should withdraw from his partner&#x27;s body. The condom should then be carefully removed from the penis away from the other partner. It is recommended that the condom be wrapped in tissue or tied in a knot, then disposed of in a trash receptacle. Condoms are used to reduce the likelihood of pregnancy during intercourse and to reduce the likelihood of contracting sexually transmitted infections (STIs). Condoms are also used during fellatio to reduce the likelihood of contracting STIs.

Some couples find that putting on a condom interrupts sex, although others incorporate condom application as part of their foreplay. Some men and women find the physical barrier of a condom dulls sensation. Advantages of dulled sensation can include prolonged erection and delayed ejaculation; disadvantages might include a loss of some sexual excitement. Advocates of condom use also cite their advantages of being inexpensive, easy to use, and having few side effects.

=== Adult film industry ===
In 2012 proponents gathered 372,000 voter signatures through a citizens&#x27; initiative in Los Angeles County to put Measure B on the 2012 ballot. As a result, Measure B, a law requiring the use of condoms in the production of pornographic films, was passed. This requirement has received much criticism and is said by some to be counter-productive, merely forcing companies that make pornographic films to relocate to other places without this requirement. Producers claim that condom use depresses sales.

=== Sex education ===
Condoms are often used in sex education programs, because they have the capability to reduce the chances of pregnancy and the spread of some sexually transmitted infections when used correctly. A recent American Psychological Association (APA) press release supported the inclusion of information about condoms in sex education, saying &quot;comprehensive sexuality education programs ... discuss the appropriate use of condoms&quot;, and &quot;promote condom use for those who are sexually active.&quot;

In the United States, teaching about condoms in public schools is opposed by some religious organizations. Planned Parenthood, which advocates family planning and sex education, argues that no studies have shown abstinence-only programs to result in delayed intercourse, and cites surveys showing that 76% of American parents want their children to receive comprehensive sexuality education including condom use.

=== Infertility treatment ===

Common procedures in infertility treatment such as semen analysis and intrauterine insemination (IUI) require collection of semen samples. These are most commonly obtained through masturbation, but an alternative to masturbation is use of a special &quot;collection condom&quot; to collect semen during sexual intercourse.

Collection condoms are made from silicone or polyurethane, as latex is somewhat harmful to sperm. Some religions prohibit masturbation entirely. Also, compared with samples obtained from masturbation, semen samples from collection condoms have higher total sperm counts, sperm motility, and percentage of sperm with normal morphology. For this reason, they are believed to give more accurate results when used for semen analysis, and to improve the chances of pregnancy when used in procedures such as intracervical or intrauterine insemination. Adherents of religions that prohibit contraception, such as Catholicism, may use collection condoms with holes pricked in them.

For fertility treatments, a collection condom may be used to collect semen during sexual intercourse where the semen is provided by the woman&#x27;s partner. Private sperm donors may also use a collection condom to obtain samples through masturbation or by sexual intercourse with a partner and will transfer the ejaculate from the collection condom to a specially designed container. The sperm is transported in such containers, in the case of a donor, to a recipient woman to be used for insemination, and in the case of a woman&#x27;s partner, to a fertility clinic for processing and use. However, transportation may reduce the fecundity of the sperm. Collection condoms may also be used where semen is produced at a sperm bank or fertility clinic.

&quot;Condom therapy&quot; is sometimes prescribed to infertile couples when the female has high levels of antisperm antibodies. The theory is that preventing exposure to her partner&#x27;s semen will lower her level of antisperm antibodies, and thus increase her chances of pregnancy when condom therapy is discontinued. However, condom therapy has not been shown to increase subsequent pregnancy rates.

=== Other uses ===
Condoms excel as multipurpose containers and barriers because they are waterproof, elastic, durable, and (for military and espionage uses) will not arouse suspicion if found.

Ongoing military utilization began during World War II, and includes covering the muzzles of rifle barrels to prevent fouling, the waterproofing of firing assemblies in underwater demolitions, and storage of corrosive materials and garrotes by paramilitary agencies.

Condoms have also been used to smuggle alcohol, cocaine, heroin, and other drugs across borders and into prisons by filling the condom with drugs, tying it in a knot and then either swallowing it or inserting it into the rectum. These methods are very dangerous and potentially lethal; if the condom breaks, the drugs inside become absorbed into the bloodstream and can cause an overdose.

Medically, condoms can be used to cover endovaginal ultrasound probes, or in field chest needle decompressions they can be used to make a one-way valve.

Condoms have also been used to protect scientific samples from the environment, and to waterproof microphones for underwater recording.

== Types ==
Most condoms have a reservoir tip or teat end, making it easier to accommodate the man&#x27;s ejaculate. Condoms come in different sizes and shapes.

They also come in a variety of surfaces intended to stimulate the user&#x27;s partner. Condoms are usually supplied with a lubricant coating to facilitate penetration, while flavored condoms are principally used for oral sex. As mentioned above, most condoms are made of latex, but polyurethane and lambskin condoms also exist.

=== Internal condom ===

External condoms have a tight ring to form a seal around the penis, while internal condoms usually have a large stiff ring to prevent them from slipping into the body orifice. The Female Health Company produced an internal condom that was initially made of polyurethane, but newer versions are made of nitrile rubber. Medtech Products produces an internal condom made of latex.

=== Materials ===

==== Natural latex ====
Latex has outstanding elastic properties: Its tensile strength exceeds 30 MPa, and latex condoms may be stretched in excess of 800% before breaking. In 1990 the ISO set standards for condom production (ISO 4074, Natural latex rubber condoms), and the EU followed suit with its CEN standard (Directive 93/42/EEC concerning medical devices). Every latex condom is tested for holes with an electric current. If the condom passes, it is rolled and packaged. In addition, a portion of each batch of condoms is subject to water leak and air burst testing.

While the advantages of latex have made it the most popular condom material, it does have some drawbacks. Latex condoms are damaged when used with oil-based substances as lubricants, such as petroleum jelly, cooking oil, baby oil, mineral oil, skin lotions, suntan lotions, cold creams, butter or margarine. Contact with oil makes latex condoms more likely to break or slip off due to loss of elasticity caused by the oils. Additionally, latex allergy precludes use of latex condoms and is one of the principal reasons for the use of other materials. In May 2009, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted approval for the production of condoms composed of Vytex, latex that has been treated to remove 90% of the proteins responsible for allergic reactions. An allergen-free condom made of synthetic latex (polyisoprene) is also available.

==== Synthetic ====
The most common non-latex condoms are made from polyurethane. Condoms may also be made from other synthetic materials, such as AT-10 resin, and most polyisoprene.

Polyurethane condoms tend to be the same width and thickness as latex condoms, with most polyurethane condoms between 0.04 mm and 0.07 mm thick.

Polyurethane can be considered better than latex in several ways: it conducts heat better than latex, is not as sensitive to temperature and ultraviolet light (and so has less rigid storage requirements and a longer shelf life), can be used with oil-based lubricants, is less allergenic than latex, and does not have an odor. Polyurethane condoms have gained FDA approval for sale in the United States as an effective method of contraception and HIV prevention, and under laboratory conditions have been shown to be just as effective as latex for these purposes.

However, polyurethane condoms are less elastic than latex ones, and may be more likely to slip or break than latex, lose their shape or bunch up more than latex, and are more expensive.

Polyisoprene is a synthetic version of natural rubber latex. While significantly more expensive, it has the advantages of latex (such as being softer and more elastic than polyurethane condoms) without the protein which is responsible for latex allergies. Unlike polyurethane condoms, they cannot be used with an oil-based lubricant.

==== Lambskin ====
Condoms made from sheep intestines, labeled &quot;lambskin&quot;, are also available. Although they are generally effective as a contraceptive by blocking sperm, studies have found that they are less effective than latex in preventing the transmission of sexually transmitted infections because of pores in the material. This is because intestines, by their nature, are porous, permeable membranes, and while sperm are too large to pass through the pores, viruses—such as HIV, herpes, and genital warts—are small enough to pass.

As a result of laboratory data on condom porosity, in 1989, the FDA began requiring lambskin condom manufacturers to indicate that the products were not to be used for the prevention of sexually transmitted infections. The FDA cautions that while lambskin condoms &quot;provide good birth control and a varying degree of protection against some, but not all, sexually transmitted diseases&quot;, people do not know what STIs a partner might have, and thus cannot assume that a lambskin condom will protect them.

While lambskin condoms avoid triggering latex allergies, polyurethane condoms do as well, while also protecting more reliably against STIs. As slaughter by-products, lambskin condoms are also not vegetarian. Pharmacist advice prepared by the &quot;Canadian Pharmaceutical Journal&quot; says that lambskin condoms &quot;are generally not recommended&quot; due to limited STI prevention. An article in &quot;Adolescent Medicine&quot; advises that they &quot;should be used only for pregnancy prevention&quot;.

=== Spermicide ===
Some latex condoms are lubricated at the manufacturer with a small amount of a nonoxynol-9, a spermicidal chemical. According to &quot;Consumer Reports&quot;, condoms lubricated with spermicide have no additional benefit in preventing pregnancy, have a shorter shelf life, and may cause urinary tract infections in women. In contrast, application of separately packaged spermicide &quot;is&quot; believed to increase the contraceptive efficacy of condoms.

Nonoxynol-9 was once believed to offer additional protection against STIs (including HIV) but recent studies have shown that, with frequent use, nonoxynol-9 may increase the risk of HIV transmission. The World Health Organization says that spermicidally lubricated condoms should no longer be promoted. However, it recommends using a nonoxynol-9 lubricated condom over no condom at all. , nine condom manufacturers have stopped manufacturing condoms with nonoxynol-9 and Planned Parenthood has discontinued the distribution of condoms so lubricated.

=== Ribbed and studded ===

Textured condoms include studded and ribbed condoms which can provide extra sensations to both partners. The studs or ribs can be located on the inside, outside, or both; alternatively, they are located in specific sections to provide directed stimulation to either the G-spot or frenulum. Many textured condoms which advertise &quot;mutual pleasure&quot; also are bulb-shaped at the top, to provide extra stimulation to the penis. Some women experience irritation during vaginal intercourse with studded condoms.

=== Other ===
The anti-rape condom is another variation designed to be worn by women. It is designed to cause pain to the attacker, hopefully allowing the victim a chance to escape.

A collection condom is used to collect semen for fertility treatments or sperm analysis. These condoms are designed to maximize sperm life.

In February 2022, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the first condoms specifically indicated to help reduce transmission of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) during anal intercourse.

== Prevalence ==
The prevalence of condom use varies greatly between countries. Most surveys of contraceptive use are among married women, or women in informal unions. Japan has the highest rate of condom usage in the world: in that country, condoms account for almost 80% of contraceptive use by married women. On average, in developed countries, condoms are the most popular method of birth control: 28% of married contraceptive users rely on condoms. In the average less-developed country, condoms are less common: only 6–8% of married contraceptive users choose condoms.

== History ==

=== Before the 19th century ===
Whether condoms were used in ancient civilizations is debated by archaeologists and historians. In ancient Egypt, Greece, and Rome, pregnancy prevention was generally seen as a woman&#x27;s responsibility, and the only well documented contraception methods were female-controlled devices. In Asia before the 15th century, some use of glans condoms (devices covering only the head of the penis) is recorded. Condoms seem to have been used for contraception, and to have been known only by members of the upper classes. In China, glans condoms may have been made of oiled silk paper, or of lamb intestines. In Japan, condoms called &quot;Kabuto-gata&quot; (甲形) were made of tortoise shell or animal horn.

In 16th-century Italy, anatomist and physician Gabriele Falloppio wrote a treatise on syphilis. The earliest documented strain of syphilis, first appearing in Europe in a 1490s outbreak, caused severe symptoms and often death within a few months of contracting the disease. Falloppio&#x27;s treatise is the earliest uncontested description of condom use: it describes linen sheaths soaked in a chemical solution and allowed to dry before use. The cloths he described were sized to cover the glans of the penis, and were held on with a ribbon. Falloppio claimed that an experimental trial of the linen sheath demonstrated protection against syphilis.

After this, the use of penis coverings to protect from disease is described in a wide variety of literature throughout Europe. The first indication that these devices were used for birth control, rather than disease prevention, is the 1605 theological publication &quot;De iustitia et iure&quot; (On justice and law) by Catholic theologian Leonardus Lessius, who condemned them as immoral. In 1666, the English Birth Rate Commission attributed a recent downward fertility rate to use of &quot;condons&quot;, the first documented use of that word or any similar spelling. Other early spellings include &quot;condam&quot; and &quot;quondam&quot;, from which the Italian derivation &quot;guantone&quot; has been suggested, from &quot;guanto&quot;, &quot;a glove&quot;.
In addition to linen, condoms during the Renaissance were made out of intestines and bladder. In the late 16th century, Dutch traders introduced condoms made from &quot;fine leather&quot; to Japan. Unlike the horn condoms used previously, these leather condoms covered the entire penis.
Casanova in the 18th century was one of the first reported using &quot;assurance caps&quot; to prevent impregnating his mistresses.

From at least the 18th century, condom use was opposed in some legal, religious, and medical circles for essentially the same reasons that are given today: condoms reduce the likelihood of pregnancy, which some thought immoral or undesirable for the nation; they do not provide full protection against sexually transmitted infections, while belief in their protective powers was thought to encourage sexual promiscuity; and, they are not used consistently due to inconvenience, expense, or loss of sensation.

Despite some opposition, the condom market grew rapidly. In the 18th century, condoms were available in a variety of qualities and sizes, made from either linen treated with chemicals, or &quot;skin&quot; (bladder or intestine softened by treatment with sulfur and lye). They were sold at pubs, barbershops, chemist shops, open-air markets, and at the theater throughout Europe and Russia. They later spread to America, although in every place there were generally used only by the middle and upper classes, due to both expense and lack of sex education.

=== 1800 through 1920s ===

The early 19th century saw contraceptives promoted to the poorer classes for the first time. Writers on contraception tended to prefer other birth control methods to the condom. By the late 19th century, many feminists expressed distrust of the condom as a contraceptive, as its use was controlled and decided upon by men alone. They advocated instead for methods controlled by women, such as diaphragms and spermicidal douches. Other writers cited both the expense of condoms and their unreliability (they were often riddled with holes and often fell off or tore). Still, they discussed condoms as a good option for some and the only contraceptive that protects from disease.

Many countries passed laws impeding the manufacture and promotion of contraceptives. In spite of these restrictions, condoms were promoted by traveling lecturers and in newspaper advertisements, using euphemisms in places where such ads were illegal. Instructions on how to make condoms at home were distributed in the United States and Europe. Despite social and legal opposition, at the end of the 19th century the condom was the Western world&#x27;s most popular birth control method.
Beginning in the second half of the 19th century, American rates of sexually transmitted infections skyrocketed. Causes cited by historians include the effects of the American Civil War and the ignorance of prevention methods promoted by the Comstock laws. To fight the growing epidemic, sex education classes were introduced to public schools for the first time, teaching about venereal diseases and how they were transmitted. They generally taught abstinence was the only way to avoid sexually transmitted infections. Condoms were not promoted for disease prevention because the medical community and moral watchdogs considered STIs to be punishment for sexual misbehavior. The stigma against people with these diseases was so significant that many hospitals refused to treat people with syphilis.
The German military was the first to promote condom use among its soldiers in the later 19th century. Early 20th century experiments by the American military concluded that providing condoms to soldiers significantly lowered rates of sexually transmitted infections. During World War I, the United States and (at the beginning of the war only) Britain were the only countries with soldiers in Europe who did not provide condoms and promote their use.

In the decades after World War I, there remained social and legal obstacles to condom use throughout the U.S. and Europe. Founder of psychoanalysis Sigmund Freud opposed all methods of birth control because their failure rates were too high. Freud was especially opposed to the condom because he thought it cut down on sexual pleasure. Some feminists continued to oppose male-controlled contraceptives such as condoms. In 1920 the Church of England&#x27;s Lambeth Conference condemned all &quot;unnatural means of conception avoidance&quot;. The Bishop of London, Arthur Winnington-Ingram, complained of the huge number of condoms discarded in alleyways and parks, especially after weekends and holidays.

However, European militaries continued to provide condoms to their members for disease protection, even in countries where they were illegal for the general population. Through the 1920s, catchy names and slick packaging became an increasingly important marketing technique for many consumer items, including condoms and cigarettes. Quality testing became more common, involving filling each condom with air followed by one of several methods intended to detect loss of pressure. Worldwide, condom sales doubled in the 1920s.

=== Rubber and manufacturing advances ===
In 1839, Charles Goodyear discovered a way of processing natural rubber, which is too stiff when cold and too soft when warm, in such a way as to make it elastic. This proved to have advantages for the manufacture of condoms; unlike the sheep&#x27;s gut condoms, they could stretch and did not tear quickly when used. The rubber vulcanization process was patented by Goodyear in 1844. The first rubber condom was produced in 1855. The earliest rubber condoms had a seam and were as thick as a bicycle inner tube. Besides this type, small rubber condoms covering only the glans were often used in England and the United States. There was more risk of losing them and if the rubber ring was too tight, it would constrict the penis. This type of condom was the original &quot;capote&quot; (French for condom), perhaps because of its resemblance to a woman&#x27;s bonnet worn at that time, also called a capote.

For many decades, rubber condoms were manufactured by wrapping strips of raw rubber around penis-shaped molds, then dipping the wrapped molds in a chemical solution to cure the rubber. In 1912, Polish-born inventor Julius Fromm developed a new, improved manufacturing technique for condoms: dipping glass molds into a raw rubber solution. Called &quot;cement dipping&quot;, this method required adding gasoline or benzene to the rubber to make it liquid.
Around 1920 patent lawyer and vice-president of the United States Rubber Company Ernest Hopkinson invented a new technique of converting latex into rubber without a coagulant (demulsifier), which featured using water as a solvent and warm air to dry the solution, as well as optionally preserving liquid latex with ammonia. Condoms made this way, commonly called &quot;latex&quot; ones, required less labor to produce than cement-dipped rubber condoms, which had to be smoothed by rubbing and trimming. The use of water to suspend the rubber instead of gasoline and benzene eliminated the fire hazard previously associated with all condom factories. Latex condoms also performed better for the consumer: they were stronger and thinner than rubber condoms, and had a shelf life of five years (compared to three months for rubber).

Until the twenties, all condoms were individually hand-dipped by semi-skilled workers. Throughout the decade of the 1920s, advances in the automation of the condom assembly line were made. The first fully automated line was patented in 1930. Major condom manufacturers bought or leased conveyor systems, and small manufacturers were driven out of business. The skin condom, now significantly more expensive than the latex variety, became restricted to a niche high-end market.

=== 1930 to present ===
In 1930 the Anglican Church&#x27;s Lambeth Conference sanctioned the use of birth control by married couples. In 1931 the Federal Council of Churches in the U.S. issued a similar statement. The Roman Catholic Church responded by issuing the encyclical &quot;Casti connubii&quot; affirming its opposition to all contraceptives, a stance it has never reversed. In the 1930s, legal restrictions on condoms began to be relaxed. However, during this period Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany increased restrictions on condoms (limited sales as disease preventatives were still allowed). During the Depression, condom lines by Schmid gained in popularity. Schmid still used the cement-dipping method of manufacture which had two advantages over the latex variety. Firstly, cement-dipped condoms could be safely used with oil-based lubricants. Secondly, while less comfortable, these older-style rubber condoms could be reused and so were more economical, a valued feature in hard times. More attention was brought to quality issues in the 1930s, and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration began to regulate the quality of condoms sold in the United States.

Throughout World War II, condoms were not only distributed to male U.S. military members, but also heavily promoted with films, posters, and lectures. European and Asian militaries on both sides of the conflict also provided condoms to their troops throughout the war, even Germany which outlawed all civilian use of condoms in 1941. In part because condoms were readily available, soldiers found a number of non-sexual uses for the devices, many of which continue to this day. After the war, condom sales continued to grow. From 1955 to 1965, 42% of Americans of reproductive age relied on condoms for birth control. In Britain from 1950 to 1960, 60% of married couples used condoms. The birth control pill became the world&#x27;s most popular method of birth control in the years after its 1960 début, but condoms remained a strong second. The U.S. Agency for International Development pushed condom use in developing countries to help solve the &quot;world population crises&quot;: by 1970 hundreds of millions of condoms were being used each year in India alone.(This number has grown in recent decades: in 2004, the government of India purchased 1.9 billion condoms for distribution at family planning clinics.)

In the 1960s and 1970s quality regulations tightened, and more legal barriers to condom use were removed. In Ireland, legal condom sales were allowed for the first time in 1978. Advertising, however was one area that continued to have legal restrictions. In the late 1950s, the American National Association of Broadcasters banned condom advertisements from national television; this policy remained in place until 1979.

After it was discovered in the early 1980s that AIDS can be a sexually transmitted infection, the use of condoms was encouraged to prevent transmission of HIV. Despite opposition by some political, religious, and other figures, national condom promotion campaigns occurred in the U.S. and Europe. These campaigns increased condom use significantly.

Due to increased demand and greater social acceptance, condoms began to be sold in a wider variety of retail outlets, including in supermarkets and in discount department stores such as Walmart. Condom sales increased every year until 1994, when media attention to the AIDS pandemic began to decline. The phenomenon of decreasing use of condoms as disease preventatives has been called &quot;prevention fatigue&quot; or &quot;condom fatigue&quot;. Observers have cited condom fatigue in both Europe and North America. As one response, manufacturers have changed the tone of their advertisements from scary to humorous.

New developments continued to occur in the condom market, with the first polyurethane condom—branded Avanti and produced by the manufacturer of Durex—introduced in the 1990s. Worldwide condom use is expected to continue to grow: one study predicted that developing nations would need 18.6 billion condoms by 2015. , condoms are available inside prisons in Canada, most of the European Union, Australia, Brazil, Indonesia, South Africa, and the US states of Vermont (on 17 September 2013, the Californian Senate approved a bill for condom distribution inside the state&#x27;s prisons, but the bill was not yet law at the time of approval).

The global condom market was estimated at US$9.2 billion in 2020.

=== Etymology and other terms ===
The term &quot;condom&quot; first appears in the early 18th century: early forms include &quot;condum&quot; (1706 and 1717), &quot;condon&quot; (1708) and &quot;cundum&quot; (1744). The word&#x27;s etymology is unknown. In popular tradition, the invention and naming of the condom came to be attributed to an associate of England&#x27;s King Charles II, one &quot;Dr. Condom&quot; or &quot;Earl of Condom&quot;. There is however no evidence of the existence of such a person, and condoms had been used for over one hundred years before King Charles II acceded to the throne in 1660.

A variety of unproven Latin etymologies have been proposed, including (receptacle), (house), and (scabbard or case). It has also been speculated to be from the Italian word &quot;guantone&quot;, derived from &quot;guanto&quot;, meaning glove. William E. Kruck wrote an article in 1981 concluding that, &quot;As for the word &#x27;condom&#x27;, I need state only that its origin remains completely unknown, and there ends this search for an etymology.&quot; Modern dictionaries may also list the etymology as &quot;unknown&quot;.
Other terms are also commonly used to describe condoms. In North America condoms are also commonly known as &quot;prophylactics&quot;, or &quot;rubbers&quot;. In Britain they may be called &quot;French letters&quot; or &quot;rubber johnnies&quot;. Additionally, condoms may be referred to using the manufacturer&#x27;s name.

== Society and culture ==

Some moral and scientific criticism of condoms exists despite the many benefits of condoms agreed on by scientific consensus and sexual health experts.

Condom usage is typically recommended for new couples who have yet to develop full trust in their partner with regard to STIs. Established couples on the other hand have few concerns about STIs, and can use other methods of birth control such as the pill, which does not act as a barrier to intimate sexual contact. Note that the polar debate with regard to condom usage is attenuated by the target group the argument is directed. Notably the age category and stable partner question are factors, as well as the distinction between heterosexual and homosexuals, who have different kinds of sex and have different risk consequences and factors.

Among the prime objections to condom usage is the blocking of erotic sensation, or the intimacy that barrier-free sex provides. As the condom is held tightly to the skin of the penis, it diminishes the delivery of stimulation through rubbing and friction. Condom proponents claim this has the benefit of making sex last longer, by diminishing sensation and delaying male ejaculation. Those who promote condom-free heterosexual sex (slang: &quot;bareback&quot;) claim that the condom puts a barrier between partners, diminishing what is normally a highly sensual, intimate, and spiritual connection between partners.

=== Religious ===

The United Church of Christ (UCC), a Reformed denomination of the Congregationalist tradition, promotes the distribution of condoms in churches and faith-based educational settings. Michael Shuenemeyer, a UCC minister, has stated that &quot;The practice of safer sex is a matter of life and death. People of faith make condoms available because we have chosen life so that we and our children may live.&quot;

On the other hand, the Roman Catholic Church opposes all kinds of sexual acts outside of marriage, as well as any sexual act in which the chance of successful conception has been reduced by direct and intentional acts (for example, surgery to prevent conception) or foreign objects (for example, condoms).

The use of condoms to prevent STI transmission is not specifically addressed by Catholic doctrine, and is currently a topic of debate among theologians and high-ranking Catholic authorities. A few, such as Belgian Cardinal Godfried Danneels, believe the Catholic Church should actively support condoms used to prevent disease, especially serious diseases such as AIDS. However, the majority view—including all statements from the Vatican—is that condom-promotion programs encourage promiscuity, thereby actually increasing STI transmission. This view was most recently reiterated in 2009 by Pope Benedict XVI.

The Roman Catholic Church is the largest organized body of any world religion. The church has hundreds of programs dedicated to fighting the AIDS epidemic in Africa, but its opposition to condom use in these programs has been highly controversial.

In a November 2011 interview, Pope Benedict XVI discussed for the first time the use of condoms to prevent STI transmission. He said that the use of a condom can be justified in a few individual cases if the purpose is to reduce the risk of an HIV infection. He gave as an example male prostitutes. There was some confusion at first whether the statement applied only to homosexual prostitutes and thus not to heterosexual intercourse at all. However, Federico Lombardi, spokesman for the Vatican, clarified that it applied to heterosexual and transsexual prostitutes, whether male or female, as well. He did, however, also clarify that the Vatican&#x27;s principles on sexuality and contraception had not been changed.

=== Scientific and environmental ===
More generally, some scientific researchers have expressed objective concern over certain ingredients sometimes added to condoms, notably talc and nitrosamines. Dry dusting powders are applied to latex condoms before packaging to prevent the condom from sticking to itself when rolled up. Previously, talc was used by most manufacturers, but cornstarch is currently the most popular dusting powder. Although rare during normal use, talc is known to be potentially irritant to mucous membranes (such as in the vagina). Cornstarch is generally believed to be safe; however, some researchers have raised concerns over its use as well.

Nitrosamines, which are potentially carcinogenic in humans, are believed to be present in a substance used to improve elasticity in latex condoms. A 2001 review stated that humans regularly receive 1,000 to 10,000 times greater nitrosamine exposure from food and tobacco than from condom use and concluded that the risk of cancer from condom use is very low. However, a 2004 study in Germany detected nitrosamines in 29 out of 32 condom brands tested, and concluded that exposure from condoms might exceed the exposure from food by 1.5- to 3-fold.

In addition, the large-scale use of disposable condoms has resulted in concerns over their environmental impact via littering and in landfills, where they can eventually wind up in wildlife environments if not incinerated or otherwise permanently disposed of first. Polyurethane condoms in particular, given they are a form of plastic, are not biodegradable, and latex condoms take a very long time to break down. Experts, such as AVERT, recommend condoms be disposed of in a garbage receptacle, as flushing them down the toilet (which some people do) may cause plumbing blockages and other problems. Furthermore, the plastic and foil wrappers condoms are packaged in are also not biodegradable. However, the benefits condoms offer are widely considered to offset their small landfill mass. Frequent condom or wrapper disposal in public areas such as a parks have been seen as a persistent litter problem.

While biodegradable, latex condoms damage the environment when disposed of improperly. According to the Ocean Conservancy, condoms, along with certain other types of trash, cover the coral reefs and smother sea grass and other bottom dwellers. The United States Environmental Protection Agency also has expressed concerns that many animals might mistake the litter for food.

=== Cultural barriers to use ===
In much of the Western world, the introduction of the pill in the 1960s was associated with a decline in condom use. In Japan, oral contraceptives were not approved for use until September 1999, and even then access was more restricted than in other industrialized nations. Perhaps because of this restricted access to hormonal contraception, Japan has the highest rate of condom usage in the world: in 2008, 80% of contraceptive users relied on condoms.

Cultural attitudes toward gender roles, contraception, and sexual activity vary greatly around the world, and range from extremely conservative to extremely liberal. But in places where condoms are misunderstood, mischaracterised, demonised, or looked upon with overall cultural disapproval, the prevalence of condom use is directly affected. In less-developed countries and among less-educated populations, misperceptions about how disease transmission and conception work negatively affect the use of condoms; additionally, in cultures with more traditional gender roles, women may feel uncomfortable demanding that their partners use condoms.

As an example, Latino immigrants in the United States often face cultural barriers to condom use. A study on female HIV prevention published in the &quot;Journal of Sex Health Research&quot; asserts that Latino women often lack the attitudes needed to negotiate safe sex due to traditional gender-role norms in the Latino community, and may be afraid to bring up the subject of condom use with their partners. Women who participated in the study often reported that because of the general machismo subtly encouraged in Latino culture, their male partners would be angry or possibly violent at the woman&#x27;s suggestion that they use condoms. A similar phenomenon has been noted in a survey of low-income American black women; the women in this study also reported a fear of violence at the suggestion to their male partners that condoms be used.

A telephone survey conducted by Rand Corporation and Oregon State University, and published in the &quot;Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes&quot; showed that belief in AIDS conspiracy theories among United States black men is linked to rates of condom use. As conspiracy beliefs about AIDS grow in a given sector of these black men, consistent condom use drops in that same sector. Female use of condoms was not similarly affected.

In the African continent, condom promotion in some areas has been impeded by anti-condom campaigns by some Muslim and Catholic clerics. Among the Maasai in Tanzania, condom use is hampered by an aversion to &quot;wasting&quot; sperm, which is given sociocultural importance beyond reproduction. Sperm is believed to be an &quot;elixir&quot; to women and to have beneficial health effects. Maasai women believe that, after conceiving a child, they must have sexual intercourse repeatedly so that the additional sperm aids the child&#x27;s development. Frequent condom use is also considered by some Maasai to cause impotence. Some women in Africa believe that condoms are &quot;for prostitutes&quot; and that respectable women should not use them. A few clerics even promote the lie that condoms are deliberately laced with HIV. In the United States, possession of many condoms has been used by police to accuse women of engaging in prostitution. The Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS has condemned this practice and there are efforts to end it.

Middle-Eastern couples who have not had children, because of the strong desire and social pressure to establish fertility as soon as possible within marriage, rarely use condoms.

In 2017, India restricted TV advertisements for condoms to between the hours of 10 pm to 6 am. Family planning advocates were against this, saying it was liable to &quot;undo decades of progress on sexual and reproductive health&quot;.

=== Major manufacturers ===

One analyst described the size of the condom market as something that &quot;boggles the mind&quot;. Numerous small manufacturers, nonprofit groups, and government-run manufacturing plants exist around the world. Within the condom market, there are several major contributors, among them both for-profit businesses and philanthropic organizations. Most large manufacturers have ties to the business that reach back to the end of the 19th century.

== Research ==

A spray-on condom made of latex is intended to be easier to apply and more successful in preventing the transmission of diseases. , the spray-on condom was not going to market because the drying time could not be reduced below two to three minutes.

The Invisible Condom, developed at Université Laval in Quebec, Canada, is a gel that hardens upon increased temperature after insertion into the vagina or rectum. In the lab, it has been shown to effectively block HIV and herpes simplex virus. The barrier breaks down and liquefies after several hours. , the invisible condom is in the clinical trial phase, and has not yet been approved for use.

Also developed in 2005 is a condom treated with an erectogenic compound. The drug-treated condom is intended to help the wearer maintain an erection, which should also help reduce slippage. If approved, the condom would be marketed under the Durex brand. , it was still in clinical trials. In 2009, Ansell Healthcare, the makers of Lifestyle condoms, introduced the X2 condom lubricated with &quot;Excite Gel&quot; which contains the amino acid L-arginine and is intended to improve the strength of the erectile response.

In March 2013, philanthropist Bill Gates offered US$100,000 grants through his foundation for a condom design that &quot;significantly preserves or enhances pleasure&quot; to encourage more males to adopt the use of condoms for safer sex. The grant information stated: &quot;The primary drawback from the male perspective is that condoms decrease pleasure as compared to no condom, creating a trade-off that many men find unacceptable, particularly given that the decisions about use must be made just prior to intercourse. Is it possible to develop a product without this stigma, or better, one that is felt to enhance pleasure?&quot; In November of the same year, 11 research teams were selected to receive the grant money.

== References ==
== External links ==
* WHO fact sheet on condoms
* &quot;Sheathing Cupid&#x27;s Arrow: the Oldest Artificial Contraceptive May Be Ripe for a Makeover&quot;, &quot;The Economist&quot;, February 2014.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="2" end="8" title="Condom" label="condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="28" end="42" title="Barrier contraception" label="barrier device"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="55" end="73" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="103" end="112" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="118" end="148" title="Sexually transmitted disease" label="sexually transmitted infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="171" end="187" title="Condom" label="external condoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="201" end="213" title="Condom" label="male condoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q864088" start="219" end="244" title="Internal condom" label="internal (female) condoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q133993" start="284" end="295" title="erect penis" label="erect penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058795" start="402" end="408" title="Bodily Fluids" label="fluids"/>
<link wikidata="Q9715" start="421" end="426" title="semen" label="semen"/>
<link wikidata="Q244680" start="512" end="517" title="latex" label="latex"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="543" end="555" title="polyurethane" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q145126" start="557" end="569" title="polyisoprene" label="polyisoprene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754830" start="698" end="711" title="latex allergy" label="latex allergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="1111" end="1120" title="gonorrhea" label="gonorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q153356" start="1122" end="1131" title="chlamydia" label="chlamydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q745865" start="1133" end="1147" title="trichomoniasis" label="trichomoniasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6853" start="1149" end="1160" title="hepatitis B" label="hepatitis B"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="1166" end="1174" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7476596" start="1222" end="1236" title="genital herpes" label="genital herpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184627" start="1238" end="1258" title="human papillomavirus" label="human papillomavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="1270" end="1278" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37155" start="1449" end="1509" title="World Health Organization&amp;#x27;s List of Essential Medicines" label="World Health Organization&amp;#x27;s List of Essential Medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="1558" end="1571" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764560" start="1634" end="1654" title="Tubal ligation" label="female sterilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="1697" end="1701" title="East Asia" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="1706" end="1720" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="1722" end="1728" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1733" end="1746" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="1842" end="1855" title="contraception" label="contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q512514" start="2278" end="2289" title="Pearl Index" label="Pearl Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249677" start="2353" end="2368" title="decrement table" label="decrement table"/>
<link wikidata="Q513122" start="2630" end="2640" title="spermicide" label="spermicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="2760" end="2790" title="sexually transmitted infection" label="sexually transmitted infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="2984" end="2988" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7476596" start="2990" end="3004" title="genital herpes" label="genital herpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q160105" start="3006" end="3021" title="cervical cancer" label="cervical cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208726" start="3023" end="3035" title="genital wart" label="genital wart"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="3038" end="3046" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q153356" start="3048" end="3057" title="chlamydia" label="chlamydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="3059" end="3068" title="gonorrhea" label="gonorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q899868" start="3183" end="3186" title="IUD" label="IUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q626503" start="3301" end="3309" title="swinging (sexual practice)" label="swinging"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="3356" end="3385" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="3445" end="3461" title="HIV transmission" label="HIV transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q921264" start="3680" end="3714" title="University of Texas Medical Branch" label="University of Texas Medical Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="3722" end="3747" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q184627" start="3971" end="3991" title="human papillomavirus" label="human papillomavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q655331" start="4130" end="4152" title="herpes simplex virus-2" label="herpes simplex virus-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q160105" start="4660" end="4689" title="cervical cancer" label="precancerous cervical changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14820885" start="5125" end="5136" title="ejaculation" label="ejaculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8398" start="5628" end="5636" title="anal sex" label="anal sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q164654" start="5696" end="5707" title="vaginal sex" label="vaginal sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q111913462" start="5713" end="5728" title="One Male Condom" label="One Male Condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915584" start="6265" end="6285" title="Human penis size" label="fit almost any penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433149" start="7457" end="7484" title="Family Health International" label="Family Health International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314307" start="8126" end="8134" title="Birth control sabotage" label="sabotage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="8243" end="8250" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754830" start="8575" end="8591" title="Latex allergy" label="allergy to latex"/>
<link wikidata="Q513122" start="8872" end="8882" title="spermicide" label="spermicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q133993" start="9092" end="9097" title="erection" label="erect"/>
<link wikidata="Q660064" start="10601" end="10626" title="Popular initiative" label="citizens&amp;#x27; initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="10630" end="10648" title="Los Angeles County, California" label="Los Angeles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804176" start="10656" end="10665" title="Measure B" label="Measure B"/>
<link wikidata="Q185529" start="10766" end="10784" title="pornographic films" label="pornographic films"/>
<link wikidata="Q192280" start="11095" end="11108" title="sex education" label="sex education"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="11272" end="11306" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553262" start="11682" end="11700" title="Planned Parenthood" label="Planned Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280670" start="11718" end="11733" title="family planning" label="family planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q179399" start="12041" end="12052" title="infertility" label="infertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501844" start="12071" end="12085" title="semen analysis" label="semen analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207122" start="12090" end="12115" title="Artificial insemination" label="intrauterine insemination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7449214" start="12130" end="12157" title="semen collection" label="collection of semen samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="12200" end="12212" title="masturbation" label="masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115245" start="12377" end="12385" title="Silicone rubber" label="silicone"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="12389" end="12401" title="polyurethane" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q556924" start="12442" end="12487" title="Religious views on masturbation" label="Some religions prohibit masturbation entirely"/>
<link wikidata="Q207122" start="12876" end="12888" title="Artificial insemination" label="insemination"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="12950" end="12961" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5873" start="13101" end="13119" title="sexual intercourse" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q857158" start="13185" end="13197" title="sperm donors" label="sperm donors"/>
<link wikidata="Q45086254" start="13880" end="13900" title="antisperm antibodies" label="antisperm antibodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="14673" end="14680" title="drug smuggling" label="smuggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="14681" end="14688" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="14690" end="14697" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="14699" end="14705" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q158716" start="14863" end="14869" title="rectum" label="rectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q234904" start="15072" end="15094" title="endovaginal ultrasound" label="endovaginal ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q942818" start="15608" end="15617" title="Personal lubricant" label="lubricant"/>
<link wikidata="Q107304170" start="15659" end="15674" title="flavored condom" label="flavored condom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15767" end="15779" title="#Synthetic" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15784" end="15792" title="#Lambskin" label="lambskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q546776" start="16001" end="16013" title="body orifice" label="body orifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q145246" start="16141" end="16155" title="nitrile rubber" label="nitrile rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="16307" end="16323" title="tensile strength" label="tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="16422" end="16425" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="16512" end="16514" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q648403" start="16538" end="16541" title="European Committee for Standardization" label="CEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q942818" start="16983" end="16993" title="Personal lubricant" label="lubricants"/>
<link wikidata="Q457239" start="17003" end="17018" title="petroleum jelly" label="petroleum jelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q427457" start="17020" end="17031" title="cooking oil" label="cooking oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12302713" start="17033" end="17041" title="baby oil" label="baby oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q583582" start="17043" end="17054" title="mineral oil" label="mineral oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871151" start="17056" end="17067" title="skin lotion" label="skin lotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q827658" start="17070" end="17084" title="Sunscreen" label="suntan lotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107763" start="17086" end="17096" title="cold cream" label="cold cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q34172" start="17099" end="17105" title="butter" label="butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4287" start="17109" end="17118" title="margarine" label="margarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754830" start="17250" end="17263" title="latex allergy" label="latex allergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="17385" end="17413" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944040" start="17479" end="17484" title="Vytex" label="Vytex"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="17535" end="17578" title="antibody generator" label="proteins responsible for allergic reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="17731" end="17743" title="polyurethane" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17810" end="17821" title="AT-10 resin" label="AT-10 resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q145126" start="17832" end="17844" title="polyisoprene" label="polyisoprene"/>
<link wikidata="Q942818" start="18249" end="18259" title="Personal lubricant" label="lubricants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="19116" end="19121" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="19122" end="19131" title="intestine" label="intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="19353" end="19384" title="sexually transmitted infections" label="sexually transmitted infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="19570" end="19573" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6473911" start="19575" end="19581" title="herpes" label="herpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208726" start="19587" end="19600" title="genital warts" label="genital warts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754830" start="20181" end="20196" title="latex allergies" label="latex allergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="20198" end="20210" title="polyurethane" label="polyurethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="20337" end="20347" title="vegetarian" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030470" start="20389" end="20420" title="Canadian Pharmaceutical Journal" label="Canadian Pharmaceutical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q420039" start="20748" end="20759" title="nonoxynol-9" label="nonoxynol-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q513122" start="20763" end="20783" title="spermicide" label="spermicidal chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957782" start="20804" end="20820" title="Consumer Reports" label="Consumer Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q221668" start="20956" end="20979" title="urinary tract infection" label="urinary tract infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="21330" end="21355" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q420039" start="21460" end="21471" title="nonoxynol-9" label="nonoxynol-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553262" start="21597" end="21615" title="Planned Parenthood" label="Planned Parenthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q517807" start="21975" end="21981" title="G-spot" label="G-spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772935" start="21985" end="21993" title="Frenulum of prepuce of penis" label="frenulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880" start="22177" end="22183" title="vagina" label="vagina"/>
<link wikidata="Q570849" start="22238" end="22254" title="anti-rape condom" label="anti-rape condom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22405" end="22422" title="#Infertility treatment" label="collection condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="22571" end="22599" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q496997" start="22646" end="22655" title="indicated" label="indicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q650891" start="23709" end="23714" title="Glans penis" label="glans"/>
<link wikidata="Q177869" start="24126" end="24144" title="Gabriele Falloppio" label="Gabriele Falloppio"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="24165" end="24173" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367280" start="25070" end="25087" title="Leonardus Lessius" label="Leonardus Lessius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="25537" end="25548" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q83321" start="25783" end="25791" title="Giacomo Casanova" label="Casanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="26680" end="26686" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122650" start="26691" end="26694" title="lye" label="lye"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="28343" end="28361" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122799" start="28418" end="28431" title="Comstock laws" label="Comstock laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="29250" end="29261" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="29576" end="29589" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29884" end="29902" title="Lambeth Conferences#Sixth Conference (1920)" label="Lambeth Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3891928" start="29992" end="30016" title="Arthur Winnington-Ingram" label="Arthur Winnington-Ingram"/>
<link wikidata="Q207667" start="30712" end="30728" title="Charles Goodyear" label="Charles Goodyear"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="30768" end="30774" title="rubber" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q188631" start="31025" end="31045" title="vulcanized rubber" label="rubber vulcanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q650891" start="31274" end="31279" title="Glans penis" label="glans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149531" start="31603" end="31609" title="Bonnet (headgear)" label="capote"/>
<link wikidata="Q87264" start="31827" end="31839" title="Julius Fromm" label="Julius Fromm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296074" start="32119" end="32147" title="United States Rubber Company" label="United States Rubber Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q244680" start="32204" end="32209" title="latex" label="latex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186651" start="32243" end="32254" title="demulsifier" label="demulsifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="32620" end="32628" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="32633" end="32640" title="benzene" label="benzene"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33435" end="33453" title="Lambeth Conferences#Seventh: 1930" label="Lambeth Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q31870" start="33522" end="33549" title="National Council of Churches" label="Federal Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q845571" start="33658" end="33672" title="Casti connubii" label="Casti connubii"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="33852" end="33865" title="Italian fascism" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="33870" end="33882" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6310064" start="34017" end="34023" title="Julius Schmid (manufacturer)" label="Schmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q942818" start="34221" end="34231" title="Personal lubricant" label="lubricants"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="34449" end="34477" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="34558" end="34570" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34956" end="34971" title="#Other uses" label="non-sexual uses"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="35236" end="35254" title="combined oral contraceptive pill" label="birth control pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="35398" end="35434" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759624" start="36052" end="36088" title="National Association of Broadcasters" label="National Association of Broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="36235" end="36239" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="36342" end="36345" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="36723" end="36730" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159313" start="36963" end="36977" title="condom fatigue" label="condom fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="38235" end="38250" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773974" start="39125" end="39138" title="prophylactics" label="prophylactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q235282" start="39369" end="39374" title="moral" label="moral"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="39379" end="39389" title="scientific" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q316748" start="39468" end="39488" title="scientific consensus" label="scientific consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="39763" end="39771" title="birth control pill" label="the pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8124" start="40339" end="40344" title="Human penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q808074" start="40607" end="40615" title="Bareback (sex)" label="bareback"/>
<link wikidata="Q426316" start="40802" end="40825" title="United Church of Christ" label="United Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="40835" end="40843" title="Reformed tradition" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="40864" end="40881" title="Congregationalist" label="Congregationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="41231" end="41252" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423147" start="41398" end="41420" title="direct and intentional" label="direct and intentional"/>
<link wikidata="Q324503" start="41440" end="41469" title="Human sterilization" label="surgery to prevent conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="41545" end="41548" title="Sexually Transmitted Infections" label="STI"/>
<link wikidata="Q44882" start="41738" end="41755" title="Godfried Danneels" label="Godfried Danneels"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="41878" end="41882" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="42106" end="42123" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="42195" end="42203" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358589" start="42267" end="42290" title="HIV/AIDS in Africa" label="AIDS epidemic in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="42661" end="42672" title="prostitutes" label="prostitutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q725753" start="42827" end="42844" title="Federico Lombardi" label="Federico Lombardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q134583" start="43271" end="43275" title="talc" label="talc"/>
<link wikidata="Q413779" start="43280" end="43291" title="nitrosamine" label="nitrosamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393961" start="43475" end="43485" title="cornstarch" label="cornstarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q187661" start="43802" end="43814" title="carcinogenic" label="carcinogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780867" start="44431" end="44440" title="littering" label="littering"/>
<link wikidata="Q152810" start="44448" end="44457" title="landfills" label="landfills"/>
<link wikidata="Q241741" start="44496" end="44504" title="wildlife" label="wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q622772" start="44525" end="44536" title="incinerated" label="incinerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="44642" end="44649" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q696715" start="44659" end="44672" title="biodegradable" label="biodegradable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655041" start="44746" end="44751" title="AVERT" label="AVERT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348656" start="45326" end="45343" title="Ocean Conservancy" label="Ocean Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q463960" start="45365" end="45393" title="marine debris" label="certain other types of trash"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="45405" end="45415" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q646660" start="45429" end="45438" title="sea grass" label="sea grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="45470" end="45515" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="45646" end="45659" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="45681" end="45689" title="combined oral contraceptive pill" label="the pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="45751" end="45756" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672163" start="46113" end="46125" title="gender roles" label="gender roles"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="46127" end="46140" title="contraception" label="contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q608" start="46146" end="46161" title="Human sexual activity" label="sexual activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="46749" end="46755" title="Latinos" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q842254" start="47223" end="47231" title="machismo" label="machismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="47316" end="47323" title="domestic violence" label="violent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="47440" end="47454" title="African-American" label="American black"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="47615" end="47631" title="Rand Corporation" label="Rand Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="47636" end="47659" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294722" start="47688" end="47735" title="Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes" label="Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes"/>
<link wikidata="Q840825" start="47764" end="47788" title="AIDS conspiracy theories" label="AIDS conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q163022" start="48175" end="48181" title="Maasai people" label="Maasai"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="48185" end="48193" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241411" start="48979" end="49020" title="Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS" label="Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580220" start="49994" end="50009" title="spray-on condom" label="spray-on condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067935" start="50277" end="50293" title="Université Laval" label="Université Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="50913" end="50928" title="clinical trials" label="clinical trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q173670" start="51085" end="51095" title="Arginine" label="L-arginine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="51193" end="51203" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="52070" end="52083" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5375" wikidata="Q906278" url="?curid=5375" title="Country code">
<text>A country code is a short alphanumeric identification code for countries and dependent areas. Its primary use is in data processing and communications. Several identification systems have been developed.

The term &quot;country code&quot; frequently refers to ISO 3166-1 alpha-2, as well as the telephone country code, which is embodied in the E.164 recommendation by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU).

==ISO 3166-1==
The standard ISO 3166-1 defines short identification codes for most countries and dependent areas:

*ISO 3166-1 alpha-2: two-letter code
*ISO 3166-1 alpha-3: three-letter code
*ISO 3166-1 numeric: three-digit code

The two-letter codes are used as the basis for other codes and applications, for example,

*for ISO 4217 currency codes
*with deviations, for country code top-level domain names (ccTLDs) on the Internet: list of Internet TLDs.

Other applications are defined in ISO 3166-1 alpha-2.

==ITU country codes==
In telecommunications, a &quot;country code&quot;, or &quot;international subscriber dialing&quot; (ISD) code, is a telephone number prefix used in international direct dialing (IDD) and for destination routing of telephone calls to a country other than the caller&#x27;s. A country or region with an autonomous telephone administration must apply for membership in the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) to participate in the international public switched telephone network (PSTN). Country codes are defined by the ITU-T section of the ITU in standards E.123 and E.164.

Country codes constitute the international telephone numbering plan, and are dialed only when calling a telephone number in another country. They are dialed before the national telephone number. International calls require at least one additional prefix to be dialing before the country code, to connect the call to international circuits, the international call prefix. When printing telephone numbers this is indicated by a plus-sign (&quot;+&quot;) in front of a complete international telephone number, per recommendation E164 by the ITU.

=== History ===
The International Telecommunications Union (ITU) created country codes for international dialing, first introduced in 1960 for Europe and expanded globally in 1964. Numbers were typically allocated by landmass and then subdivided by the capacity of each network at the time. France, the United Kingdom, the USA and USSR obtained preferential numbers due to their dominance in telecommunications at the time whilst China was able to ensure that Taiwan was officially left unlisted whilst being allocated the code &quot;886&quot;. 

==Other country codes==
*European Union:
**Before the 2004 EU enlargement the EU used the UN Road Traffic Conventions license plate codes. Since then, it has used the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 code, but with two modifications:
***EL for Greece (instead of GR)
***(formerly) UK for United Kingdom (instead of GB)
**The &quot;Nomenclature des unités territoriales statistiques&quot; (Nomenclature of territorial units for statistics, NUTS) of the European Union, mostly focusing on subdivisions of the EU member states
*FIFA (Fédération Internationale de Football Association) assigns a three-letter code (dubbed FIFA Trigramme) to each of its member and non-member countries: List of FIFA country codes
*Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 10-4 defined two-letter codes used by the U.S. government and in the CIA World Factbook: list of FIPS country codes. On September 2, 2008, FIPS 10-4 was one of ten standards withdrawn by NIST as a Federal Information Processing Standard.
* The Bureau of Transportation Statistics, part of the United States Department of Transportation (US DOT), maintains its own list of codes, so-called World Area Codes (WAC), for state and country codes.
* GOST 7.67: country codes in Cyrillic from the GOST standards committee
*From the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO):
**The national prefixes used in aircraft registration numbers
**Location prefixes in four-character ICAO airport codes
*International Olympic Committee (IOC) three-letter codes used in sporting events: list of IOC country codes
*From the International Telecommunication Union (ITU):
**the E.212 mobile country codes (MCC), for mobile/wireless phone addresses,
**the first few characters of call signs of radio stations (maritime, aeronautical, amateur radio, broadcasting, and so on) define the country: the ITU prefix,
**ITU letter codes for member-countries,
**ITU prefix - amateur and experimental stations - The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) assigns national telecommunication prefixes for amateur and experimental radio use, so that operators can be identified by their country of origin. These prefixes are legally administered by the national entity to which prefix ranges are assigned.
**Three-digit codes used to identify countries in maritime mobile radio transmissions, known as maritime identification digits
*License plates for automobiles:
**Under the 1949 and 1968 United Nations Road Traffic Conventions (distinguishing signs of vehicles in international traffic): List of international license plate codes.
**Diplomatic license plates in the United States, assigned by the U.S. State Department.
*North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) used two-letter codes of its own: list of NATO country codes. They were largely borrowed from the FIPS 10-4 codes mentioned below. In 2003 the eighth edition of the Standardisation Agreement (STANAG) adopted the ISO 3166 three-letter codes with one exception (the code for Macedonia). With the ninth edition, NATO is transitioning to four- and six-letter codes based on ISO 3166 with a few exceptions and additions
*United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) also has its own list of trigram country codes
* World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO): WIPO ST.3 gives two-letter codes to countries and regional intellectual property organizations
*World Meteorological Organization (WMO) maintains a list of country codes, used in reporting meteorological observations
* UIC (the International Union of Railways): UIC Country Codes

The developers of ISO 3166 intended that in time it would replace other coding systems.

==Other codings==
Country identities may be encoded in the following coding systems:
*The initial digits of International Standard Book Numbers (ISBN) are group identifiers for countries, areas, or language regions.
*The first three digits of GS1 Company Prefixes used to identify products, for example, in barcodes, designate (national) numbering agencies.

==Lists of country codes by country==
A -
B -
C -
D–E -
F -
G -
H–I -
J–K -
L -
M -
N -
O–Q -
R -
S -
T -
U–Z

==See also==
*List of ISO 3166 country codes
*ISO 639 language codes
*Language code
*Numbering scheme

==References==
==External links==
*Comparison of various systems
*Another comparison: 
*A comparison with ISO, IFS and others with notes
*United Nations Region Codes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="2" end="14" title="Country code" label="country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661985" start="116" end="131" title="data processing" label="data processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="136" end="149" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140221" start="260" end="278" title="ISO 3166-1 alpha-2" label="ISO 3166-1 alpha-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273341" start="344" end="349" title="E.164" label="E.164"/>
<link wikidata="Q25275" start="446" end="456" title="ISO 3166-1" label="ISO 3166-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140221" start="534" end="552" title="ISO 3166-1 alpha-2" label="ISO 3166-1 alpha-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341492" start="571" end="589" title="ISO 3166-1 alpha-3" label="ISO 3166-1 alpha-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725758" start="610" end="628" title="ISO 3166-1 numeric" label="ISO 3166-1 numeric"/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="744" end="752" title="ISO 4217" label="ISO 4217"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="753" end="761" title="currency" label="currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="790" end="819" title="country code top-level domain" label="country code top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q318153" start="852" end="873" title="list of Internet TLDs" label="list of Internet TLDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140221" start="910" end="928" title="ISO 3166-1 alpha-2" label="ISO 3166-1 alpha-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="956" end="974" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q214995" start="1069" end="1085" title="telephone number" label="telephone number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242551" start="1101" end="1129" title="international direct dialing" label="international direct dialing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5265190" start="1144" end="1163" title="destination routing" label="destination routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256" start="1188" end="1195" title="country" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="1323" end="1360" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="1403" end="1436" title="public switched telephone network" label="public switched telephone network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007363" start="1478" end="1483" title="ITU-T" label="ITU-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q390735" start="1516" end="1521" title="E.123" label="E.123"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273341" start="1526" end="1531" title="E.164" label="E.164"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390458" start="1577" end="1601" title="telephone numbering plan" label="telephone numbering plan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1878" end="1903" title="International direct dialing#International call prefix" label="international call prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="2098" end="2136" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunications Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2650" end="2664" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q47232" start="2679" end="2698" title="Enlargement of the European Union" label="2004 EU enlargement"/>
<link wikidata="Q154015" start="2743" end="2762" title="List of international license plate codes" label="license plate codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25275" start="2792" end="2802" title="ISO 3166-1" label="ISO 3166-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q193083" start="2942" end="2992" title="Nomenclature des unités territoriales statistiques" label="Nomenclature des unités territoriales statistiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="3063" end="3077" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="3136" end="3140" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q575156" start="3293" end="3319" title="List of FIFA country codes" label="List of FIFA country codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q917824" start="3321" end="3360" title="Federal Information Processing Standard" label="Federal Information Processing Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063249" start="3368" end="3372" title="FIPS 10-4" label="10-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="3437" end="3455" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733492" start="3457" end="3483" title="list of FIPS country codes" label="list of FIPS country codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="3555" end="3559" title="NIST" label="NIST"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998432" start="3612" end="3647" title="Bureau of Transportation Statistics" label="Bureau of Transportation Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q852211" start="3661" end="3703" title="United States Department of Transportation" label="United States Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637917" start="3757" end="3779" title="World Area Codes" label="World Area Codes (WAC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977241" start="3812" end="3821" title="GOST 7.67" label="GOST 7.67"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="3840" end="3848" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349015" start="3858" end="3862" title="GOST" label="GOST"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="3893" end="3934" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="International Civil Aviation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3945" end="4004" title="Aircraft Registration#List of countries/regions and their registration prefixes and patterns" label="The national prefixes used in aircraft registration numbers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4007" end="4024" title="International Civil Aviation Organization#Registered codes" label="Location prefixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207529" start="4043" end="4060" title="ICAO airport code" label="ICAO airport code"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="4063" end="4094" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q180672" start="4145" end="4170" title="list of IOC country codes" label="list of IOC country codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="4181" end="4218" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218407" start="4232" end="4237" title="International mobile subscriber identity" label="E.212"/>
<link wikidata="Q978801" start="4238" end="4258" title="mobile country codes" label="mobile country codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="4387" end="4400" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344924" start="4451" end="4461" title="ITU prefix" label="ITU prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573810" start="4465" end="4481" title="ITU letter codes" label="ITU letter codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q455644" start="4506" end="4552" title="ITU prefix - amateur and experimental stations" label="ITU prefix - amateur and experimental stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="4559" end="4596" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="4651" end="4658" title="amateur radio" label="amateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435632" start="4947" end="4977" title="maritime identification digits" label="maritime identification digits"/>
<link wikidata="Q22706" start="4979" end="4992" title="License plate" label="License plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q154015" start="5138" end="5179" title="List of international license plate codes" label="List of international license plate codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740451" start="5183" end="5229" title="Diplomatic license plates in the United States" label="Diplomatic license plates in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="5247" end="5268" title="United States Department of State" label="U.S. State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="5271" end="5305" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394114" start="5347" end="5373" title="list of NATO country codes" label="list of NATO country codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="5729" end="5765" title="United Nations Development Programme" label="United Nations Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601212" start="5798" end="5819" title="List of UNDP country codes" label="trigram country codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q177773" start="5822" end="5862" title="World Intellectual Property Organization" label="World Intellectual Property Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950858" start="5871" end="5880" title="WIPO ST.3" label="WIPO ST.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="5967" end="6000" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="World Meteorological Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q388314" start="6099" end="6130" title="International Union of Railways" label="International Union of Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q597349" start="6133" end="6149" title="UIC Country Code" label="UIC Country Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q33057" start="6349" end="6383" title="International Standard Book Number" label="International Standard Book Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q731100" start="6484" end="6487" title="GS1" label="GS1"/>
<link wikidata="Q856" start="6548" end="6555" title="barcode" label="barcode"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6638" end="6639" title="Country codes: A" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6642" end="6643" title="Country codes: B" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6646" end="6647" title="Country codes: C" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6650" end="6653" title="Country codes: D–E" label="D–E"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6656" end="6657" title="Country codes: F" label="F"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6660" end="6661" title="Country codes: G" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6664" end="6667" title="Country codes: H–I" label="H–I"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6670" end="6673" title="Country codes: J–K" label="J–K"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6676" end="6677" title="Country codes: L" label="L"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6680" end="6681" title="Country codes: M" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6684" end="6685" title="Country codes: N" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6688" end="6691" title="Country codes: O–Q" label="O–Q"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6694" end="6695" title="Country codes: R" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6698" end="6699" title="Country codes: S" label="S"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6702" end="6703" title="Country codes: T" label="T"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6706" end="6709" title="Country codes: U–Z" label="U–Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518430" start="6725" end="6755" title="List of ISO 3166 country codes" label="List of ISO 3166 country codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33547" start="6757" end="6764" title="ISO 639" label="ISO 639"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092812" start="6781" end="6794" title="Language code" label="Language code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005002" start="6796" end="6812" title="Numbering scheme" label="Numbering scheme"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5376" wikidata="Q192210" url="?curid=5376" title="Cladistics">
<text>Cladistics ( ; from Ancient Greek &#x27;branch&#x27;) is an approach to biological classification in which organisms are categorized in groups (&quot;clades&quot;) based on hypotheses of most recent common ancestry. The evidence for hypothesized relationships is typically shared derived characteristics (synapomorphies) that are not present in more distant groups and ancestors. However, from an empirical perspective, common ancestors are inferences based on a cladistic hypothesis of relationships of taxa whose character states can be observed. Theoretically, a last common ancestor and all its descendants constitute a (minimal) clade. Importantly, all descendants stay in their overarching ancestral clade. For example, if the terms &quot;worms&quot; or &quot;fishes&quot; were used within a &quot;strict&quot; cladistic framework, these terms would include humans. Many of these terms are normally used paraphyletically, outside of cladistics, e.g. as a &#x27;grade&#x27;, which are fruitless to precisely delineate, especially when including extinct species. Radiation results in the generation of new subclades by bifurcation, but in practice sexual hybridization may blur very closely related groupings.

As a hypothesis, a clade can be rejected only if some groupings were explicitly excluded. It may then be found that the excluded group did actually descend from the last common ancestor of the group, and thus emerged within the group. (&quot;Evolved from&quot; is misleading, because in cladistics all descendants stay in the ancestral group). To keep only valid clades, upon finding that the group is paraphyletic this way, either such excluded groups should be granted to the clade, or the group should be abolished.

Branches down to the divergence to the next significant (e.g. extant) sister are considered stem-groupings of the clade, but in principle each level stands on its own, to be assigned a unique name. For a fully bifurcated tree, adding a group to a tree also adds an additional (named) clade, and a new level on that branch. Specifically, also extinct groups are always put on a side-branch, not distinguishing whether an actual ancestor of other groupings was found.

The techniques and nomenclature of cladistics have been applied to disciplines other than biology. (See phylogenetic nomenclature.)

Cladistics findings are posing a difficulty for taxonomy, where the rank and (genus-)naming of established groupings may turn out to be inconsistent.

Cladistics is now the most commonly used method to classify organisms.

== History ==


The original methods used in cladistic analysis and the school of taxonomy derived from the work of the German entomologist Willi Hennig, who referred to it as phylogenetic systematics (also the title of his 1966 book); but the terms &quot;cladistics&quot; and &quot;clade&quot; were popularized by other researchers. Cladistics in the original sense refers to a particular set of methods used in phylogenetic analysis, although it is now sometimes used to refer to the whole field.

What is now called the cladistic method appeared as early as 1901 with a work by Peter Chalmers Mitchell for birds and subsequently by Robert John Tillyard (for insects) in 1921, and W. Zimmermann (for plants) in 1943. The term &quot;clade&quot; was introduced in 1958 by Julian Huxley after having been coined by Lucien Cuénot in 1940, &quot;cladogenesis&quot; in 1958, &quot;cladistic&quot; by Arthur Cain and Harrison in 1960, &quot;cladist&quot; (for an adherent of Hennig&#x27;s school) by Ernst Mayr in 1965, and &quot;cladistics&quot; in 1966. Hennig referred to his own approach as &quot;phylogenetic systematics&quot;. From the time of his original formulation until the end of the 1970s, cladistics competed as an analytical and philosophical approach to systematics with phenetics and so-called evolutionary taxonomy. Phenetics was championed at this time by the numerical taxonomists Peter Sneath and Robert Sokal, and evolutionary taxonomy by Ernst Mayr.

Originally conceived, if only in essence, by Willi Hennig in a book published in 1950, cladistics did not flourish until its translation into English in 1966 (Lewin 1997). Today, cladistics is the most popular method for inferring phylogenetic trees from morphological data.

In the 1990s, the development of effective polymerase chain reaction techniques allowed the application of cladistic methods to biochemical and molecular genetic traits of organisms, vastly expanding the amount of data available for phylogenetics. At the same time, cladistics rapidly became popular in evolutionary biology, because computers made it possible to process large quantities of data about organisms and their characteristics.

== Methodology ==


The cladistic method interprets each shared character state transformation as a potential piece of evidence for grouping. Synapomorphies (shared, derived character states) are viewed as evidence of grouping, while symplesiomorphies (shared ancestral character states) are not. The outcome of a cladistic analysis is a cladogram – a tree-shaped diagram (dendrogram) that is interpreted to represent the best hypothesis of phylogenetic relationships. Although traditionally such cladograms were generated largely on the basis of morphological characters and originally calculated by hand, genetic sequencing data and computational phylogenetics are now commonly used in phylogenetic analyses, and the parsimony criterion has been abandoned by many phylogeneticists in favor of more &quot;sophisticated&quot; but less parsimonious evolutionary models of character state transformation. Cladists contend that these models are unjustified because there is no evidence that they recover more &quot;true&quot; or &quot;correct&quot; results from actual empirical data sets 

Every cladogram is based on a particular dataset analyzed with a particular method. Datasets are tables consisting of molecular, morphological, ethological and/or other characters and a list of operational taxonomic units (OTUs), which may be genes, individuals, populations, species, or larger taxa that are presumed to be monophyletic and therefore to form, all together, one large clade; phylogenetic analysis infers the branching pattern within that clade. Different datasets and different methods, not to mention violations of the mentioned assumptions, often result in different cladograms. Only scientific investigation can show which is more likely to be correct.

Until recently, for example, cladograms like the following have generally been accepted as accurate representations of the ancestral relations among turtles, lizards, crocodilians, and birds:
If this phylogenetic hypothesis is correct, then the last common ancestor of turtles and birds, at the branch near the lived earlier than the last common ancestor of lizards and birds, near the . Most molecular evidence, however, produces cladograms more like this:
If this is accurate, then the last common ancestor of turtles and birds lived later than the last common ancestor of lizards and birds. Since the cladograms show two mutually exclusive hypotheses to describe the evolutionary history, at most one of them is correct.

The cladogram to the right represents the current universally accepted hypothesis that all primates, including strepsirrhines like the lemurs and lorises, had a common ancestor all of whose descendants are or were primates, and so form a clade; the name Primates is therefore recognized for this clade. Within the primates, all anthropoids (monkeys, apes, and humans) are hypothesized to have had a common ancestor all of whose descendants are or were anthropoids, so they form the clade called Anthropoidea. The &quot;prosimians&quot;, on the other hand, form a paraphyletic taxon. The name Prosimii is not used in phylogenetic nomenclature, which names only clades; the &quot;prosimians&quot; are instead divided between the clades Strepsirhini and Haplorhini, where the latter contains Tarsiiformes and Anthropoidea.

Lemurs and tarsiers may have looked closely related to humans, in the sense of being close on the evolutionary tree to humans. However, from the perspective of a tarsier, humans and lemurs would have looked close, in the exact same sense. Cladistics forces a neutral perspective, treating all branches (extant or extinct) in the same manner. It also forces one to try to make statements, and honestly take into account findings, about the exact historic relationships between the groups.

== Terminology for character states ==

The following terms, coined by Hennig, are used to identify shared or distinct character states among groups:
* A plesiomorphy (&quot;close form&quot;) or ancestral state is a character state that a taxon has retained from its ancestors. When two or more taxa that are not nested within each other share a plesiomorphy, it is a symplesiomorphy (from &quot;syn-&quot;, &quot;together&quot;). Symplesiomorphies do not mean that the taxa that exhibit that character state are necessarily closely related. For example, Reptilia is traditionally characterized by (among other things) being cold-blooded (i.e., not maintaining a constant high body temperature), whereas birds are warm-blooded. Since cold-bloodedness is a plesiomorphy, inherited from the common ancestor of traditional reptiles and birds, and thus a symplesiomorphy of turtles, snakes and crocodiles (among others), it does not mean that turtles, snakes and crocodiles form a clade that excludes the birds.
* An apomorphy (&quot;separate form&quot;) or derived state is an innovation. It can thus be used to diagnose a clade – or even to help define a clade name in phylogenetic nomenclature. Features that are derived in individual taxa (a single species or a group that is represented by a single terminal in a given phylogenetic analysis) are called autapomorphies (from &quot;auto-&quot;, &quot;self&quot;). Autapomorphies express nothing about relationships among groups; clades are identified (or defined) by synapomorphies (from &quot;syn-&quot;, &quot;together&quot;). For example, the possession of digits that are homologous with those of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; is a synapomorphy within the vertebrates. The tetrapods can be singled out as consisting of the first vertebrate with such digits homologous to those of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; together with all descendants of this vertebrate (an apomorphy-based phylogenetic definition). Importantly, snakes and other tetrapods that do not have digits are nonetheless tetrapods: other characters, such as amniotic eggs and diapsid skulls, indicate that they descended from ancestors that possessed digits which are homologous with ours.
* A character state is homoplastic or &quot;an instance of homoplasy&quot; if it is shared by two or more organisms but is absent from their common ancestor or from a later ancestor in the lineage leading to one of the organisms. It is therefore inferred to have evolved by convergence or reversal. Both mammals and birds are able to maintain a high constant body temperature (i.e., they are warm-blooded). However, the accepted cladogram explaining their significant features indicates that their common ancestor is in a group lacking this character state, so the state must have evolved independently in the two clades. Warm-bloodedness is separately a synapomorphy of mammals (or a larger clade) and of birds (or a larger clade), but it is not a synapomorphy of any group including both these clades. Hennig&#x27;s Auxiliary Principle states that shared character states should be considered evidence of grouping unless they are contradicted by the weight of other evidence; thus, homoplasy of some feature among members of a group may only be inferred after a phylogenetic hypothesis for that group has been established.

The terms plesiomorphy and apomorphy are relative; their application depends on the position of a group within a tree. For example, when trying to decide whether the tetrapods form a clade, an important question is whether having four limbs is a synapomorphy of the earliest taxa to be included within Tetrapoda: did all the earliest members of the Tetrapoda inherit four limbs from a common ancestor, whereas all other vertebrates did not, or at least not homologously? By contrast, for a group within the tetrapods, such as birds, having four limbs is a plesiomorphy. Using these two terms allows a greater precision in the discussion of homology, in particular allowing clear expression of the hierarchical relationships among different homologous features.

It can be difficult to decide whether a character state is in fact the same and thus can be classified as a synapomorphy, which may identify a monophyletic group, or whether it only appears to be the same and is thus a homoplasy, which cannot identify such a group. There is a danger of circular reasoning: assumptions about the shape of a phylogenetic tree are used to justify decisions about character states, which are then used as evidence for the shape of the tree. Phylogenetics uses various forms of parsimony to decide such questions; the conclusions reached often depend on the dataset and the methods. Such is the nature of empirical science, and for this reason, most cladists refer to their cladograms as hypotheses of relationship. Cladograms that are supported by a large number and variety of different kinds of characters are viewed as more robust than those based on more limited evidence.

== Terminology for taxa ==
Mono-, para- and polyphyletic taxa can be understood based on the shape of the tree (as done above), as well as based on their character states. These are compared in the table below.

== Criticism ==

Cladistics, either generally or in specific applications, has been criticized from its beginnings. Decisions as to whether particular character states are homologous, a precondition of their being synapomorphies, have been challenged as involving circular reasoning and subjective judgements. Of course, the potential unreliability of evidence is a problem for any systematic method, or for that matter, for any empirical scientific endeavor at all.

Transformed cladistics arose in the late 1970s in an attempt to resolve some of these problems by removing a priori assumptions about phylogeny from cladistic analysis, but it has remained unpopular.

== Issues ==

=== Ancestors ===
The cladistic method does not identify fossil species as actual ancestors of a clade. Instead, fossil taxa are identified as belonging to separate extinct branches. While a fossil species could be the actual ancestor of a clade, there is no way to know that. Therefore, a more conservative hypothesis is that the fossil taxon is related to other fossil and extant taxa, as implied by the pattern of shared apomorphic features.

=== Extinction status ===
An otherwise extinct group with any extant descendants, is not considered (literally) extinct, and for instance does not have a date of extinction.

=== Hybridization, interbreeding ===
Anything having to do with biology and sex is complicated and messy, and cladistics is no exception. Many species reproduce sexually, and are capable of interbreeding for millions of years. Worse, during such a period, many branches may have radiated, and it may take hundreds of millions of years for them to have whittled down to just two. Only then one can theoretically assign proper last common ancestors of groupings which do not inadvertently include earlier branches. The process of true cladistic bifurcation can thus take a much more extended time than one is usually aware of. In practice, for recent radiations, cladistically guided findings only give a coarse impression of the complexity. A more detailed account will give details about fractions of introgressions between groupings, and even geographic variations thereof. This has been used as an argument for the use of paraphyletic groupings, but typically other reasons are quoted.

=== Horizontal gene transfer ===
Horizontal gene transfer is the mobility of genetic info between different organisms that can have immediate or delayed effects for the reciprocal host. There are several processes in nature which can cause horizontal gene transfer. This does typically not directly interfere with ancestry of the organism, but can complicate the determination of that ancestry. On another level, one can map the horizontal gene transfer processes, by determining the phylogeny of the individual genes using cladistics.

=== Naming stability ===
If there is unclarity in mutual relationships, there are a lot of possible trees. Assigning names to each possible clade may not be prudent. Furthermore, established names are discarded in cladistics, or alternatively carry connotations which may no longer hold, such as when additional groups are found to have emerged in them. Naming changes are the direct result of changes in the recognition of mutual relationships, which often is still in flux, especially for extinct species. Hanging on to older naming and/or connotations is counter-productive, as they typically do not reflect actual mutual relationships precisely at all. E.g. Archaea, Asgard archaea, protists, slime molds, worms, invertebrata, fishes, reptilia, monkeys, &quot;Ardipithecus&quot;, &quot;Australopithecus&quot;, &quot;Homo erectus&quot; all contain &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; cladistically, in their &quot;sensu lato&quot; meaning. For originally extinct stem groups, &quot;sensu lato&quot; generally means generously keeping previously included groups, which then may come to include even living species. A pruned &quot;sensu stricto&quot; meaning is often adopted instead, but the group would need to be restricted to a single branch on the stem. Other branches then get their own name and level. This is commensurate to the fact that more senior stem branches are in fact closer related to the resulting group than the more basal stem branches; that those stem branches only may have lived for a short time does not affect that assessment in cladistics.

== In disciplines other than biology ==
The comparisons used to acquire data on which cladograms can be based are not limited to the field of biology. Any group of individuals or classes that are hypothesized to have a common ancestor, and to which a set of common characteristics may or may not apply, can be compared pairwise. Cladograms can be used to depict the hypothetical descent relationships within groups of items in many different academic realms. The only requirement is that the items have characteristics that can be identified and measured.

Anthropology and archaeology: Cladistic methods have been used to reconstruct the development of cultures or artifacts using groups of cultural traits or artifact features.

Comparative mythology and folktale use cladistic methods to reconstruct the protoversion of many myths. Mythological phylogenies constructed with mythemes clearly support low horizontal transmissions (borrowings), historical (sometimes Palaeolithic) diffusions and punctuated evolution. They also are a powerful way to test hypotheses about cross-cultural relationships among folktales.

Literature: Cladistic methods have been used in the classification of the surviving manuscripts of the &quot;Canterbury Tales&quot;, and the manuscripts of the Sanskrit &quot;Charaka Samhita&quot;.

Historical linguistics: Cladistic methods have been used to reconstruct the phylogeny of languages using linguistic features. This is similar to the traditional comparative method of historical linguistics, but is more explicit in its use of parsimony and allows much faster analysis of large datasets (computational phylogenetics).

Textual criticism or stemmatics: Cladistic methods have been used to reconstruct the phylogeny of manuscripts of the same work (and reconstruct the lost original) using distinctive copying errors as apomorphies. This differs from traditional historical-comparative linguistics in enabling the editor to evaluate and place in genetic relationship large groups of manuscripts with large numbers of variants that would be impossible to handle manually. It also enables parsimony analysis of contaminated traditions of transmission that would be impossible to evaluate manually in a reasonable period of time.

Astrophysics infers the history of relationships between galaxies to create branching diagram hypotheses of galaxy diversification.

== See also ==

* Bioinformatics
* Biomathematics
* Coalescent theory
* Common descent
* Glossary of scientific naming
* Language family
* Patrocladogram
* Phylogenetic network
* Scientific classification
* Stratocladistics
* Subclade
* Systematics
* Three-taxon analysis
* Tree model
* Tree structure


== Notes and references ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* Available free online at Gallica (No direct URL). This is the paper credited by for the first use of the term &#x27;clade&#x27;.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* responding to .
* Translated from manuscript in German eventually published in 1982 (Phylogenetische Systematik, Verlag Paul Parey, Berlin).
* 
* d&#x27;Huy, Julien (2012b), &quot;Le motif de Pygmalion : origine afrasienne et diffusion en Afrique&quot;. &quot;Sahara&quot;, 23: 49-59 .
* d&#x27;Huy, Julien (2013a), &quot;Polyphemus (Aa. Th. 1137).&quot; &quot;A phylogenetic reconstruction of a prehistoric tale&quot;. &quot;Nouvelle Mythologie Comparée / New Comparative Mythology&quot; 1, 
* d&#x27;Huy, Julien (2013c) &quot;Les mythes évolueraient par ponctuations&quot;. &quot;Mythologie française&quot;, 252, 2013c: 8–12. 
* d&#x27;Huy, Julien (2013d) &quot;A Cosmic Hunt in the Berber sky : a phylogenetic reconstruction of Palaeolithic mythology&quot;. &quot;Les Cahiers de l&#x27;AARS&quot;, 15, 2013d: 93–106. 
* 
* 
* 
* Reissued 1997 in paperback. Includes a reprint of Mayr&#x27;s 1974 anti-cladistics paper at pp. 433–476, &quot;Cladistic analysis or cladistic classification.&quot; This is the paper to which is a response.
* 
* .
* 
* 
* 
* Tehrani, Jamshid J., 2013, &quot;The Phylogeny of Little Red Riding Hood&quot;, &quot;PLOS ONE&quot;, 13 November.
* 
* 


== External links ==
* OneZoom: Tree of Life – all living species as intuitive and zoomable fractal explorer (responsive design)
* Willi Hennig Society
* Cladistics (scholarly journal of the Willi Hennig Society)
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="0" end="10" title="Cladistics" label="Cladistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="20" end="33" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="72" end="97" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="biological classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="107" end="115" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="150" end="155" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q333018" start="199" end="214" title="common ancestry" label="common ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243545" start="280" end="287" title="derived (phylogenetics)" label="derived"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="305" end="319" title="synapomorphies" label="synapomorphies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211967" start="515" end="531" title="Phenotypic trait" label="character states"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="910" end="926" title="Paraphyly" label="paraphyletically"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612572" start="967" end="972" title="Evolutionary grade" label="grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q946437" start="1067" end="1076" title="Evolutionary radiation" label="Radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976606" start="2306" end="2331" title="phylogenetic nomenclature" label="phylogenetic nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="2383" end="2391" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39286" start="2685" end="2697" title="entomologist" label="entomologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q57999" start="2698" end="2710" title="Willi Hennig" label="Willi Hennig"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="2971" end="2983" title="Phylogenetics" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q934653" start="3139" end="3162" title="Peter Chalmers Mitchell" label="Peter Chalmers Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q326396" start="3193" end="3213" title="Robert John Tillyard" label="Robert John Tillyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q65811" start="3241" end="3254" title="Walter Max Zimmerman" label="W. Zimmermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="3292" end="3297" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q243419" start="3330" end="3343" title="Julian Huxley" label="Julian Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q923187" start="3372" end="3385" title="Lucien Cuénot" label="Lucien Cuénot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798179" start="3454" end="3465" title="Arthur Cain" label="Arthur Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354" start="3553" end="3563" title="Ernst Mayr" label="Ernst Mayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q277510" start="3840" end="3849" title="phenetics" label="phenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q430465" start="3864" end="3885" title="evolutionary taxonomy" label="evolutionary taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8267601" start="3932" end="3953" title="Numerical taxonomy" label="numerical taxonomists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177013" start="3954" end="3966" title="Peter Sneath" label="Peter Sneath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158553" start="3971" end="3983" title="Robert Sokal" label="Robert Sokal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354" start="4014" end="4024" title="Ernst Mayr" label="Ernst Mayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q176996" start="4346" end="4371" title="polymerase chain reaction" label="polymerase chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="4431" end="4442" title="biochemical" label="biochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q210506" start="4447" end="4464" title="molecular genetics" label="molecular genetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="4636" end="4644" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="4885" end="4899" title="Synapomorphies" label="Synapomorphies"/>
<link wikidata="Q932223" start="4977" end="4994" title="symplesiomorphies" label="symplesiomorphies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="5081" end="5090" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q272735" start="5095" end="5099" title="Tree (graph theory)" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957903" start="5116" end="5126" title="dendrogram" label="dendrogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="5350" end="5368" title="DNA sequencing" label="genetic sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772859" start="5378" end="5405" title="computational phylogenetics" label="computational phylogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805805" start="5462" end="5471" title="Maximum parsimony (phylogenetics)" label="parsimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="5949" end="5958" title="Molecular phylogenetics" label="molecular"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155" start="5975" end="5986" title="Ethology" label="ethological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097792" start="6025" end="6051" title="operational taxonomic unit" label="operational taxonomic unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="6897" end="6915" title="Molecular phylogenetics" label="molecular evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="7320" end="7327" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82265" start="7340" end="7354" title="Strepsirrhini" label="strepsirrhines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192405" start="7364" end="7369" title="lemur" label="lemur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428868" start="7375" end="7380" title="loris" label="loris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976606" start="7845" end="7870" title="phylogenetic nomenclature" label="phylogenetic nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q82265" start="7963" end="7975" title="Strepsirrhini" label="Strepsirhini"/>
<link wikidata="Q82261" start="7980" end="7990" title="Haplorhini" label="Haplorhini"/>
<link wikidata="Q932223" start="8693" end="8705" title="plesiomorphy" label="plesiomorphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25582391" start="9164" end="9176" title="Poikilotherm" label="cold-blooded"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325990" start="9253" end="9265" title="Homeothermy" label="warm-blooded"/>
<link wikidata="Q962872" start="9552" end="9561" title="apomorphy" label="apomorphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976606" start="9706" end="9731" title="phylogenetic nomenclature" label="phylogenetic nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q34583" start="10148" end="10154" title="Digit (anatomy)" label="digits"/>
<link wikidata="Q224180" start="10164" end="10174" title="Homology (biology)" label="homologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159" start="10260" end="10268" title="tetrapod" label="tetrapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976606" start="10461" end="10484" title="Phylogenetic nomenclature" label="phylogenetic definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q14035451" start="10795" end="10804" title="homoplasy" label="homoplasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="13095" end="13108" title="Phylogenetics" label="Phylogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805805" start="13131" end="13140" title="Maximum parsimony (phylogenetics)" label="parsimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q224180" start="13916" end="13926" title="Homology (biology)" label="homologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011160" start="14008" end="14026" title="circular reasoning" label="circular reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353949" start="14212" end="14234" title="Transformed cladistics" label="Transformed cladistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="16277" end="16301" title="horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal gene transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="17548" end="17558" title="Sensu" label="sensu lato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087319" start="17695" end="17708" title="Sensu" label="sensu stricto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="18218" end="18228" title="cladograms" label="cladograms"/>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="18689" end="18701" title="Cultural anthropology" label="Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="18706" end="18717" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q640280" start="18863" end="18884" title="Comparative mythology" label="Comparative mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="18889" end="18897" title="Folklore" label="folktale"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="19251" end="19261" title="Literature" label="Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="19360" end="19376" title="Canterbury Tales" label="Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723566" start="19426" end="19441" title="Charaka Samhita" label="Charaka Samhita"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="19450" end="19472" title="Historical linguistics" label="Historical linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="19611" end="19629" title="comparative method (linguistics)" label="comparative method"/>
<link wikidata="Q131012" start="19692" end="19701" title="Occam&amp;#x27;s razor" label="parsimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772859" start="19753" end="19780" title="computational phylogenetics" label="computational phylogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="19784" end="19801" title="Textual criticism" label="Textual criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="19805" end="19815" title="stemmatics" label="stemmatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805805" start="20250" end="20259" title="Maximum parsimony (phylogenetics)" label="parsimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="20391" end="20403" title="Astrophysics" label="Astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="20542" end="20556" title="Bioinformatics" label="Bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q751611" start="20559" end="20573" title="Biomathematics" label="Biomathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698599" start="20576" end="20593" title="Coalescent theory" label="Coalescent theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q333018" start="20596" end="20610" title="Common descent" label="Common descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023165" start="20613" end="20642" title="Glossary of scientific naming" label="Glossary of scientific naming"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="20645" end="20660" title="Language family" label="Language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335196" start="20663" end="20677" title="Patrocladogram" label="Patrocladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142246" start="20680" end="20700" title="Phylogenetic network" label="Phylogenetic network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7211" start="20703" end="20728" title="Scientific classification" label="Scientific classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622222" start="20731" end="20747" title="Stratocladistics" label="Stratocladistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630927" start="20750" end="20758" title="Subclade" label="Subclade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516404" start="20761" end="20772" title="Systematics" label="Systematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845261" start="20775" end="20795" title="Three-taxon analysis" label="Three-taxon analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q870433" start="20798" end="20808" title="Tree model" label="Tree model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067937" start="20811" end="20825" title="Tree structure" label="Tree structure"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5377" wikidata="Q12132" url="?curid=5377" title="Calendar">
<text>A calendar is a system of organizing days. This is done by giving names to periods of time, typically days, weeks, months and years. A date is the designation of a single and specific day within such a system. A calendar is also a physical record (often paper) of such a system. A calendar can also mean a list of planned events, such as a court calendar, or a partly or fully chronological list of documents, such as a calendar of wills.

Periods in a calendar (such as years and months) are usually, though not necessarily, synchronized with the cycle of the sun or the moon. The most common type of pre-modern calendar was the lunisolar calendar, a lunar calendar that occasionally adds one intercalary month to remain synchronized with the solar year over the long term.

==Etymology==
The term &quot;calendar&quot; is taken from , the term for the first day of the month in the Roman calendar, related to the verb &#x27;to call out&#x27;, referring to the &quot;calling&quot; of the new moon when it was first seen. Latin meant &#x27;account book, register&#x27; (as accounts were settled and debts were collected on the calends of each month). The Latin term was adopted in Old French as and from there in Middle English as by the 13th century (the spelling &quot;calendar&quot; is early modern).

== History ==


The course of the Sun and the Moon are the most salient regularly recurring natural events useful for timekeeping, and in pre-modern societies around the world lunation and the year were most commonly used as time units. Nevertheless, the Roman calendar contained remnants of a very ancient pre-Etruscan 10-month solar year.

The first recorded physical calendars, dependent on the development of writing in the Ancient Near East, are the Bronze Age Egyptian and Sumerian calendars.

During the Vedic period India developed a sophisticated timekeeping methodology and calendars for Vedic rituals. According to Yukio Ohashi, the Vedanga calendar in ancient India was based on astronomical studies during the Vedic Period and was not derived from other cultures.

A large number of calendar systems in the Ancient Near East were based on the Babylonian calendar dating from the Iron Age, among them the calendar system of the Persian Empire, which in turn gave rise to the Zoroastrian calendar and the Hebrew calendar.

A great number of Hellenic calendars were developed in Classical Greece, and during the Hellenistic period they gave rise to the ancient Roman calendar and to various Hindu calendars.

Calendars in antiquity were lunisolar, depending on the introduction of intercalary months to align the solar and the lunar years. This was mostly based on observation, but there may have been early attempts to model the pattern of intercalation algorithmically, as evidenced in the fragmentary 2nd-century Coligny calendar.

The Roman calendar was reformed by Julius Caesar in 46 BC. His &quot;Julian&quot; calendar was no longer dependent on the observation of the new moon, but followed an algorithm of introducing a leap day every four years. This created a dissociation of the calendar month from lunation. The Gregorian calendar, introduced in 1582, corrected most of the remaining difference between the Julian calendar and the solar year.

The Islamic calendar is based on the prohibition of intercalation (&quot;nasi&#x27;&quot;) by Muhammad, in Islamic tradition dated to a sermon given on 9 Dhu al-Hijjah AH 10 (Julian date: 6 March 632). This resulted in an observation-based lunar calendar that shifts relative to the seasons of the solar year.

There have been several modern proposals for reform of the modern calendar, such as the World Calendar, the International Fixed Calendar, the Holocene calendar, and the Hanke–Henry Permanent Calendar. Such ideas are promoted from time to time, but have failed to gain traction because of the loss of continuity and the massive upheaval that implementing them would involve, as well as their effect on cycles of religious activity.

== Systems ==
A full calendar system has a different calendar date for every day. Thus the week cycle is by itself not a full calendar system; neither is a system to name the days within a year without a system for identifying the years.

The simplest calendar system just counts time periods from a reference date. This applies for the Julian day or Unix Time. Virtually the only possible variation is using a different reference date, in particular, one less distant in the past to make the numbers smaller. Computations in these systems are just a matter of addition and subtraction.

Other calendars have one (or multiple) larger units of time.

Calendars that contain one level of cycles:
* week and weekday – this system (without year, the week number keeps on increasing) is not very common
* year and ordinal date within the year, e.g., the ISO 8601 ordinal date system

Calendars with two levels of cycles:
* year, month, and day – most systems, including the Gregorian calendar (and its very similar predecessor, the Julian calendar), the Islamic calendar, the Solar Hijri calendar and the Hebrew calendar
* year, week, and weekday – e.g., the ISO week date

Cycles can be synchronized with periodic phenomena:

* Lunar calendars are synchronized to the motion of the Moon (lunar phases); an example is the Islamic calendar.
* Solar calendars are based on perceived seasonal changes synchronized to the apparent motion of the Sun; an example is the Persian calendar.
* Lunisolar calendars are based on a combination of both solar and lunar reckonings; examples include the traditional calendar of China, the Hindu calendar in India and Nepal, and the Hebrew calendar.
* The week cycle is an example of one that is not synchronized to any external phenomenon (although it may have been derived from lunar phases, beginning anew every month).

Very commonly a calendar includes more than one type of cycle or has both cyclic and non-cyclic elements.

Most calendars incorporate more complex cycles. For example, the vast majority of them track years, months, weeks and days. The seven-day week is practically universal, though its use varies. It has run uninterrupted for millennia.

===Solar===
Solar calendars assign a &quot;date&quot; to each solar day. A day may consist of the period between sunrise and sunset, with a following period of night, or it may be a period between successive events such as two sunsets. The length of the interval between two such successive events may be allowed to vary slightly during the year, or it may be averaged into a mean solar day. Other types of calendar may also use a solar day.

The Egyptians appear to have been the first to develop a solar calendar, using as a fixed point the annual sunrise reappearance of the Dog Star—Sirius, or Sothis—in the eastern sky, which coincided with the annual flooding of the Nile River. They built a calendar with 365 days, divided into 12 months of 30 days each, with 5 extra days at the end of the year. However, they did not include the extra bit of time in each year, and this caused their calendar to slowly become inaccurate.

===Lunar===

Not all calendars use the solar year as a unit. A lunar calendar is one in which days are numbered within each lunar phase cycle. Because the length of the lunar month is not an even fraction of the length of the tropical year, a purely lunar calendar quickly drifts against the seasons, which do not vary much near the equator. It does, however, stay constant with respect to other phenomena, notably tides. An example is the Islamic calendar.
Alexander Marshack, in a controversial reading, believed that marks on a bone baton () represented a lunar calendar. Other marked bones may also represent lunar calendars. Similarly, Michael Rappenglueck believes that marks on a 15,000-year-old cave painting represent a lunar calendar.

===Lunisolar===
A lunisolar calendar is a lunar calendar that compensates by adding an extra month as needed to realign the months with the seasons. Prominent examples of lunisolar calendar are Hindu calendar and Buddhist calendar that are popular in South Asia and Southeast Asia. Another example is the Hebrew calendar, which uses a 19-year cycle.

==Subdivisions==
Nearly all calendar systems group consecutive days into &quot;months&quot; and also into &quot;years&quot;. In a &quot;solar calendar&quot; a &quot;year&quot; approximates Earth&#x27;s tropical year (that is, the time it takes for a complete cycle of seasons), traditionally used to facilitate the planning of agricultural activities. In a &quot;lunar calendar&quot;, the &quot;month&quot; approximates the cycle of the moon phase. Consecutive days may be grouped into other periods such as the week.

Because the number of days in the &quot;tropical year&quot; is not a whole number, a solar calendar must have a different number of days in different years. This may be handled, for example, by adding an extra day in leap years. The same applies to months in a lunar calendar and also the number of months in a year in a lunisolar calendar. This is generally known as intercalation. Even if a calendar is solar, but not lunar, the year cannot be divided entirely into months that never vary in length.

Cultures may define other units of time, such as the week, for the purpose of scheduling regular activities that do not easily coincide with months or years. Many cultures use different baselines for their calendars&#x27; starting years. Historically, several countries have based their calendars on regnal years, a calendar based on the reign of their current sovereign. For example, the year 2006 in Japan is year 18 Heisei, with Heisei being the era name of Emperor Akihito.

==Other types==
===Arithmetical and astronomical===
An &quot;astronomical calendar&quot; is based on ongoing observation; examples are the religious Islamic calendar and the old religious Jewish calendar in the time of the Second Temple. Such a calendar is also referred to as an &quot;observation-based&quot; calendar. The advantage of such a calendar is that it is perfectly and perpetually accurate. The disadvantage is that working out when a particular date would occur is difficult.

An &quot;arithmetic calendar&quot; is one that is based on a strict set of rules; an example is the current Jewish calendar. Such a calendar is also referred to as a &quot;rule-based&quot; calendar. The advantage of such a calendar is the ease of calculating when a particular date occurs. The disadvantage is imperfect accuracy. Furthermore, even if the calendar is very accurate, its accuracy diminishes slowly over time, owing to changes in Earth&#x27;s rotation. This limits the lifetime of an accurate arithmetic calendar to a few thousand years. After then, the rules would need to be modified from observations made since the invention of the calendar.

===Other variants===
The early Roman calendar, created during the reign of Romulus, lumped the 61 days of the winter period together as simply &quot;winter&quot;. Over time, this period became January and February; through further changes over time (including the creation of the Julian calendar) this calendar became the modern Gregorian calendar, introduced in the 1570s.

==Usage==

The primary practical use of a calendar is to identify days: to be informed about or to agree on a future event and to record an event that has happened. Days may be significant for agricultural, civil, religious, or social reasons. For example, a calendar provides a way to determine when to start planting or harvesting, which days are religious or civil holidays, which days mark the beginning and end of business accounting periods, and which days have legal significance, such as the day taxes are due or a contract expires. Also, a calendar may, by identifying a day, provide other useful information about the day such as its season.

Calendars are also used as part of a complete timekeeping system: date and time of day together specify a moment in time. In the modern world, timekeepers can show time, date, and weekday. Some may also show the lunar phase.

===Gregorian===
The Gregorian calendar is the &quot;de facto&quot; international standard and is used almost everywhere in the world for civil purposes. The widely used solar aspect is a cycle of leap days in a 400-year cycle designed to keep the duration of the year aligned with the solar year. There is a lunar aspect which approximates the position of the moon during the year, and is used in the calculation of the date of Easter. Each Gregorian year has either 365 or 366 days (the leap day being inserted as 29 February), amounting to an average Gregorian year of 365.2425 days (compared to a solar year of 365.2422 days).

The Gregorian calendar was introduced in 1582 as a refinement to the Julian calendar, that had been in use throughout the European Middle Ages, amounting to a 0.002% correction in the length of the year. During the Early Modern period, its adoption was mostly limited to Roman Catholic nations, but by the 19th century it had become widely adopted for the sake of convenience in international trade. The last European country to adopt it was Greece, in 1923.

The calendar epoch used by the Gregorian calendar is inherited from the medieval convention established by Dionysius Exiguus and associated with the Julian calendar. The year number is variously given as AD (for &quot;Anno Domini&quot;) or CE (for &quot;Common Era&quot; or &quot;Christian Era&quot;).

===Religious===

The most important use of pre-modern calendars is keeping track of the liturgical year and the observation of religious feast days.

While the Gregorian calendar is itself historically motivated to the calculation of the Easter date, it is now in worldwide secular use as the &quot;de facto&quot; standard. Alongside the use of the Gregorian calendar for secular matters, there remain several calendars in use for religious purposes.

Western Christian liturgical calendars are based on the cycle of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church, and generally include the liturgical seasons of Advent, Christmas, Ordinary Time (Time after Epiphany), Lent, Easter, and Ordinary Time (Time after Pentecost). Some Christian calendars do not include Ordinary Time and every day falls into a denominated season.

The Eastern Orthodox Church employs the use of 2 liturgical calendars; the Julian calendar (often called the Old Calendar) and the Revised Julian Calendar (often called the New Calendar). The Revised Julian Calendar is nearly the same as the Gregorian calendar, with the addition that years divisible by 100 are not leap years, except that years with remainders of 200 or 600 when divided by 900 remain leap years, e.g. 2000 and 2400 as in the Gregorian calendar.

The Islamic calendar or Hijri calendar is a lunar calendar consisting of 12 lunar months in a year of 354 or 355 days. It is used to date events in most of the Muslim countries (concurrently with the Gregorian calendar) and used by Muslims everywhere to determine the proper day on which to celebrate Islamic holy days and festivals. Its epoch is the Hijra (corresponding to AD 622). With an annual drift of 11 or 12 days, the seasonal relation is repeated approximately every 33 Islamic years.

Various Hindu calendars remain in use in the Indian subcontinent, including the Nepali calendars, Bengali calendar, Malayalam calendar, Tamil calendar, Vikrama Samvat used in Northern India, and Shalivahana calendar in the Deccan states.

The Buddhist calendar and the traditional lunisolar calendars of Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Sri Lanka and Thailand are also based on an older version of the Hindu calendar.

Most of the Hindu calendars are inherited from a system first enunciated in Vedanga Jyotisha of Lagadha, standardized in the &quot;Sūrya Siddhānta&quot; and subsequently reformed by astronomers such as Āryabhaṭa (AD 499), Varāhamihira (6th century) and Bhāskara II (12th century).

The Hebrew calendar is used by Jews worldwide for religious and cultural affairs, also influences civil matters in Israel (such as national holidays) and can be used business dealings (such as for the dating of cheques).

Followers of the Baháʼí Faith use the Baháʼí calendar. The Baháʼí Calendar, also known as the Badi Calendar was first established by the Bab in the Kitab-i-Asma. The Baháʼí Calendar is also purely a solar calendar and comprises 19 months each having nineteen days.

===National===
The Chinese, Hebrew, Hindu, and Julian calendars are widely used for religious and social purposes.

The Iranian (Persian) calendar is used in Iran and some parts of Afghanistan. The Assyrian calendar is in use by the members of the Assyrian community in the Middle East (mainly Iraq, Syria, Turkey, and Iran) and the diaspora. The first year of the calendar is exactly 4750 years prior to the start of the Gregorian calendar. The Ethiopian calendar or Ethiopic calendar is the principal calendar used in Ethiopia and Eritrea, with the Oromo calendar also in use in some areas. In neighboring Somalia, the Somali calendar co-exists alongside the Gregorian and Islamic calendars. In Thailand, where the Thai solar calendar is used, the months and days have adopted the western standard, although the years are still based on the traditional Buddhist calendar.

===Fiscal===

A fiscal calendar generally means the accounting year of a government or a business. It is used for budgeting, keeping accounts, and taxation. It is a set of 12 months that may start at any date in a year. The US government&#x27;s fiscal year starts on 1 October and ends on 30 September. The government of India&#x27;s fiscal year starts on 1 April and ends on 31 March. Small traditional businesses in India start the fiscal year on Diwali festival and end the day before the next year&#x27;s Diwali festival.

In accounting (and particularly accounting software), a fiscal calendar (such as a 4/4/5 calendar) fixes each month at a specific number of weeks to facilitate comparisons from month to month and year to year. January always has exactly 4 weeks (Sunday through Saturday), February has 4 weeks, March has 5 weeks, etc. Note that this calendar will normally need to add a 53rd week to every 5th or 6th year, which might be added to December or might not be, depending on how the organization uses those dates. There exists an international standard way to do this (the ISO week). The ISO week starts on a Monday and ends on a Sunday. Week 1 is always the week that contains 4 January in the Gregorian calendar.

==Formats==

The term &quot;calendar&quot; applies not only to a given scheme of timekeeping but also to a specific record or device displaying such a scheme, for example, an appointment book in the form of a pocket calendar (or personal organizer), desktop calendar, a wall calendar, etc.

In a paper calendar, one or two sheets can show a single day, a week, a month, or a year. If a sheet is for a single day, it easily shows the date and the weekday. If a sheet is for multiple days it shows a conversion table to convert from weekday to date and back. With a special pointing device, or by crossing out past days, it may indicate the current date and weekday. This is the most common usage of the word.

In the US Sunday is considered the first day of the week and so appears on the far left and Saturday the last day of the week appearing on the far right. In Britain, the weekend may appear at the end of the week so the first day is Monday and the last day is Sunday. The US calendar display is also used in Britain.

It is common to display the Gregorian calendar in separate monthly grids of seven columns (from Monday to Sunday, or Sunday to Saturday depending on which day is considered to start the week – this varies according to country) and five to six rows (or rarely, four rows when the month of February contains 28 days in common years beginning on the first day of the week), with the day of the month numbered in each cell, beginning with 1. The sixth row is sometimes eliminated by marking 23/30 and 24/31 together as necessary.

When working with weeks rather than months, a continuous format is sometimes more convenient, where no blank cells are inserted to ensure that the first day of a new month begins on a fresh row.

==Software==

Calendaring software provides users with an electronic version of a calendar, and may additionally provide an appointment book, address book, or contact list.
Calendaring is a standard feature of many PDAs, EDAs, and smartphones. The software may be a local package designed for individual use (e.g., Lightning extension for Mozilla Thunderbird, Microsoft Outlook without Exchange Server, or Windows Calendar) or maybe a networked package that allows for the sharing of information between users (e.g., Mozilla Sunbird, Windows Live Calendar, Google Calendar, or Microsoft Outlook with Exchange Server).

== See also ==

* General Roman Calendar
* List of calendars
* Advent calendar
* Calendar reform
* Calendrical calculation
* Docket (court)
* History of calendars
* Horology
* List of international common standards
* List of unofficial observances by date
* Real-time clock (RTC), which underlies the Calendar software on modern computers.
* Unit of time
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* 
*Calendar converter, including all major civil, religious and technical calendars.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12132" start="2" end="10" title="Calendar" label="calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q573" start="37" end="40" title="day" label="day"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="86" end="90" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q23387" start="108" end="113" title="weeks" label="weeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151" start="115" end="120" title="month" label="month"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="126" end="131" title="years" label="years"/>
<link wikidata="Q205892" start="135" end="139" title="calendar date" label="date"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287219" start="340" end="354" title="court calendar" label="court calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q210953" start="561" end="564" title="solar calendar" label="sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q185688" start="572" end="576" title="lunar calendar" label="moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q194235" start="630" end="648" title="lunisolar calendar" label="lunisolar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225911" start="694" end="711" title="intercalary month" label="intercalary month"/>
<link wikidata="Q189607" start="744" end="754" title="solar year" label="solar year"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="1180" end="1190" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="1212" end="1226" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="1422" end="1433" title="timekeeping" label="timekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q591259" start="1480" end="1488" title="lunation" label="lunation"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="1497" end="1501" title="year" label="year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340267" start="1717" end="1724" title="Bronze Age writing" label="writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="1732" end="1749" title="Ancient Near East" label="Ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1759" end="1769" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q254101" start="1770" end="1778" title="Egyptian calendar" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q726847" start="1783" end="1791" title="Sumerian calendar" label="Sumerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="1815" end="1827" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="1902" end="1907" title="Vedas" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q726847" start="2160" end="2179" title="Babylonian calendar" label="Babylonian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2196" end="2204" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q226798" start="2291" end="2311" title="Zoroastrian calendar" label="Zoroastrian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="2320" end="2335" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738499" start="2356" end="2374" title="Hellenic calendars" label="Hellenic calendars"/>
<link wikidata="Q843745" start="2393" end="2409" title="Classical Greece" label="Classical Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="2426" end="2444" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="2475" end="2489" title="Roman calendar" label="Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q190552" start="2505" end="2520" title="Hindu calendars" label="Hindu calendars"/>
<link wikidata="Q194235" start="2551" end="2560" title="lunisolar" label="lunisolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225911" start="2595" end="2612" title="intercalary month" label="intercalary month"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209" start="2830" end="2846" title="Coligny calendar" label="Coligny calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="2853" end="2867" title="Roman calendar" label="Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="2884" end="2897" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151" start="3114" end="3119" title="month" label="month"/>
<link wikidata="Q591259" start="3125" end="3133" title="lunation" label="lunation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="3139" end="3157" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="3275" end="3291" title="Islamic calendar" label="Islamic calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116526" start="3344" end="3354" title="nasi&amp;#x27;" label="nasi&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="3365" end="3373" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q186022" start="3425" end="3438" title="Dhu al-Hijjah" label="Dhu al-Hijjah"/>
<link wikidata="Q693436" start="3670" end="3684" title="World Calendar" label="World Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q649751" start="3690" end="3718" title="International Fixed Calendar" label="International Fixed Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q723716" start="3724" end="3741" title="Holocene calendar" label="Holocene calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5929921" start="3751" end="3781" title="Hanke–Henry Permanent Calendar" label="Hanke–Henry Permanent Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14267" start="4351" end="4361" title="Julian day" label="Julian day"/>
<link wikidata="Q14654" start="4365" end="4374" title="Unix Time" label="Unix Time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4863" end="4891" title="ISO 8601#Ordinal dates" label="ISO 8601 ordinal date system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="4983" end="5001" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="5041" end="5056" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="5063" end="5079" title="Islamic calendar" label="Islamic calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q950135" start="5085" end="5105" title="Solar Hijri calendar" label="Solar Hijri calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="5114" end="5129" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110154" start="5168" end="5181" title="ISO week date" label="ISO week date"/>
<link wikidata="Q185688" start="5238" end="5252" title="Lunar calendar" label="Lunar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="5298" end="5309" title="lunar phase" label="lunar phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q210953" start="5351" end="5365" title="Solar calendar" label="Solar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441921" start="5390" end="5398" title="seasonal year" label="seasonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180311" start="5473" end="5489" title="Persian calendar" label="Persian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q194235" start="5493" end="5511" title="Lunisolar calendar" label="Lunisolar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q134032" start="5597" end="5626" title="Chinese calendar" label="traditional calendar of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q190552" start="5632" end="5646" title="Hindu calendar" label="Hindu calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192854" start="6268" end="6277" title="solar time" label="solar day"/>
<link wikidata="Q193294" start="6319" end="6326" title="sunrise" label="sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q166564" start="6331" end="6337" title="sunset" label="sunset"/>
<link wikidata="Q575" start="6366" end="6371" title="night" label="night"/>
<link wikidata="Q192854" start="6582" end="6596" title="solar time" label="mean solar day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="6793" end="6799" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="7261" end="7272" title="lunar phase" label="lunar phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q591259" start="7306" end="7317" title="lunar month" label="lunar month"/>
<link wikidata="Q189607" start="7363" end="7376" title="tropical year" label="tropical year"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="7552" end="7556" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="7577" end="7593" title="Islamic calendar" label="Islamic calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q194235" start="7901" end="7919" title="lunisolar calendar" label="lunisolar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q190552" start="8077" end="8091" title="Hindu calendar" label="Hindu calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q370752" start="8096" end="8113" title="Buddhist calendar" label="Buddhist calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="8134" end="8144" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="8149" end="8163" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q285682" start="8218" end="8231" title="metonic cycle" label="19-year cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24384" start="8502" end="8508" title="season" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="8561" end="8573" title="agriculture" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="8970" end="8979" title="leap year" label="leap year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225911" start="9121" end="9134" title="Intercalation (timekeeping)" label="intercalation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150160" start="9556" end="9568" title="regnal years" label="regnal years"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="9658" end="9663" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="9717" end="9724" title="Emperor of Japan" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q37979" start="9725" end="9732" title="Akihito" label="Akihito"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="9958" end="9971" title="Second Temple" label="Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="10333" end="10348" title="Jewish calendar" label="Jewish calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="10917" end="10931" title="Roman calendar" label="Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186" start="10961" end="10968" title="Romulus" label="Romulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="11166" end="11181" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445650" start="11610" end="11619" title="religious holiday" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197685" start="11623" end="11636" title="civil holiday" label="civil holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="11960" end="11971" title="timekeeping" label="timekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="12030" end="12034" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="12160" end="12178" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="12192" end="12200" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q189607" start="12425" end="12435" title="solar year" label="solar year"/>
<link wikidata="Q56318457" start="12541" end="12574" title="Computus" label="calculation of the date of Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="12840" end="12855" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350297" start="13007" end="13038" title="Adoption of the Gregorian calendar" label="its adoption was mostly limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="13042" end="13056" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q507810" start="13235" end="13249" title="calendar epoch" label="calendar epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q274091" start="13338" end="13355" title="Dionysius Exiguus" label="Dionysius Exiguus"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="13449" end="13460" title="Anno Domini" label="Anno Domini"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="13485" end="13495" title="Common Era" label="Common Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q51617" start="13622" end="13637" title="liturgical year" label="liturgical year"/>
<link wikidata="Q56318457" start="13772" end="13783" title="Easter date" label="Easter date"/>
<link wikidata="Q83012" start="14138" end="14144" title="Advent" label="Advent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="14146" end="14155" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q132001" start="14183" end="14191" title="Epiphany (holiday)" label="Epiphany"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="14194" end="14198" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="14200" end="14206" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="14238" end="14247" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="14356" end="14379" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="14427" end="14442" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930146" start="14483" end="14506" title="Revised Julian calendar" label="Revised Julian Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="14668" end="14678" title="leap years" label="leap years"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="14821" end="14837" title="Islamic calendar" label="Islamic calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q185688" start="14861" end="14875" title="lunar calendar" label="lunar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146861" start="15168" end="15173" title="Anno Hegirae" label="Hijra"/>
<link wikidata="Q190552" start="15321" end="15335" title="Hindu calendar" label="Hindu calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4317273" start="15393" end="15409" title="Nepali calendar (disambiguation)" label="Nepali calendars"/>
<link wikidata="Q817181" start="15411" end="15427" title="Bengali calendar" label="Bengali calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q358207" start="15429" end="15447" title="Malayalam calendar" label="Malayalam calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293283" start="15449" end="15463" title="Tamil calendar" label="Tamil calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370848" start="15465" end="15479" title="Vikrama Samvat" label="Vikrama Samvat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358959" start="15508" end="15519" title="Shalivahana era" label="Shalivahana"/>
<link wikidata="Q169966" start="15536" end="15542" title="Deccan Plateau" label="Deccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q370752" start="15556" end="15573" title="Buddhist calendar" label="Buddhist calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="15617" end="15625" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="15627" end="15631" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="15633" end="15640" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="15642" end="15651" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="15656" end="15664" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q404199" start="15800" end="15816" title="Vedanga Jyotisha" label="Vedanga Jyotisha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375684" start="15855" end="15870" title="Surya Siddhanta" label="Sūrya Siddhānta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11359" start="15926" end="15935" title="Aryabhata" label="Āryabhaṭa"/>
<link wikidata="Q858348" start="15946" end="15958" title="Varahamihira" label="Varāhamihira"/>
<link wikidata="Q213385" start="15977" end="15988" title="Bhāskara II" label="Bhāskara II"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="16010" end="16025" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="16037" end="16041" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197685" start="16137" end="16154" title="public holiday" label="national holidays"/>
<link wikidata="Q80042" start="16217" end="16223" title="cheque" label="cheque"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="16245" end="16257" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q373037" start="16266" end="16281" title="Baháʼí calendar" label="Baháʼí calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q134032" start="16513" end="16520" title="Chinese calendar" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="16522" end="16528" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q190552" start="16530" end="16535" title="Hindu calendar" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="16541" end="16547" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q950135" start="16614" end="16640" title="Solar Hijri calendar" label="Iranian (Persian) calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="16652" end="16656" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="16675" end="16686" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q746003" start="16692" end="16709" title="Assyrian calendar" label="Assyrian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q215271" start="16940" end="16958" title="Ethiopian calendar" label="Ethiopian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="17014" end="17022" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="17027" end="17034" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q834680" start="17045" end="17059" title="Oromo calendar" label="Oromo calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="17102" end="17109" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255242" start="17115" end="17130" title="Somali calendar" label="Somali calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="17191" end="17199" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130398" start="17211" end="17230" title="Thai solar calendar" label="Thai solar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q370752" start="17349" end="17366" title="Buddhist calendar" label="Buddhist calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="17818" end="17824" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639524" start="17979" end="17993" title="4–4–5 calendar" label="4/4/5 calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q50101" start="18463" end="18471" title="ISO 8601" label="ISO week"/>
<link wikidata="Q4174106" start="18781" end="18797" title="appointment book" label="appointment book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136404" start="18835" end="18853" title="personal organizer" label="personal organizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309927" start="18876" end="18889" title="wall calendar" label="wall calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q235729" start="19949" end="19960" title="common year" label="common year"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="20570" end="20574" title="Personal digital assistant" label="PDAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231366" start="20576" end="20580" title="Enterprise digital assistant" label="EDAs"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="20586" end="20597" title="smartphones" label="smartphones"/>
<link wikidata="Q854029" start="20670" end="20679" title="Lightning (software)" label="Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q483604" start="20694" end="20713" title="Mozilla Thunderbird" label="Mozilla Thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q80911" start="20715" end="20732" title="Microsoft Outlook" label="Microsoft Outlook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330671" start="20761" end="20777" title="Windows Calendar" label="Windows Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q387313" start="20872" end="20887" title="Mozilla Sunbird" label="Mozilla Sunbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q219136" start="20889" end="20910" title="Windows Live Calendar" label="Windows Live Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q223563" start="20912" end="20927" title="Google Calendar" label="Google Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q80911" start="20932" end="20949" title="Microsoft Outlook" label="Microsoft Outlook"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012667" start="20992" end="21014" title="General Roman Calendar" label="General Roman Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287739" start="21017" end="21034" title="List of calendars" label="List of calendars"/>
<link wikidata="Q152862" start="21037" end="21052" title="Advent calendar" label="Advent calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329260" start="21055" end="21070" title="Calendar reform" label="Calendar reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019518" start="21073" end="21096" title="Calendrical calculation" label="Calendrical calculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287219" start="21099" end="21113" title="Docket (court)" label="Docket (court)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867480" start="21116" end="21136" title="History of calendars" label="History of calendars"/>
<link wikidata="Q186398" start="21139" end="21147" title="Horology" label="Horology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624155" start="21150" end="21188" title="List of international common standards" label="List of international common standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111813" start="21191" end="21229" title="List of unofficial observances by date" label="List of unofficial observances by date"/>
<link wikidata="Q862594" start="21232" end="21247" title="Real-time clock" label="Real-time clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790144" start="21316" end="21328" title="Unit of time" label="Unit of time"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5378" wikidata="Q18346" url="?curid=5378" title="Physical cosmology">
<text>Physical cosmology is a branch of cosmology concerned with the study of cosmological models. A cosmological model, or simply cosmology, provides a description of the largest-scale structures and dynamics of the universe and allows study of fundamental questions about its origin, structure, evolution, and ultimate fate. Cosmology as a science originated with the Copernican principle, which implies that celestial bodies obey identical physical laws to those on Earth, and Newtonian mechanics, which first allowed those physical laws to be understood.

Physical cosmology, as it is now understood, began in 1915 with the development of Albert Einstein&#x27;s general theory of relativity, followed by major observational discoveries in the 1920s: first, Edwin Hubble discovered that the universe contains a huge number of external galaxies beyond the Milky Way; then, work by Vesto Slipher and others showed that the universe is expanding. These advances made it possible to speculate about the origin of the universe, and allowed the establishment of the Big Bang theory, by Georges Lemaître, as the leading cosmological model. A few researchers still advocate a handful of alternative cosmologies; however, most cosmologists agree that the Big Bang theory best explains the observations.

Dramatic advances in observational cosmology since the 1990s, including the cosmic microwave background, distant supernovae and galaxy redshift surveys, have led to the development of a standard model of cosmology. This model requires the universe to contain large amounts of dark matter and dark energy whose nature is currently not well understood, but the model gives detailed predictions that are in excellent agreement with many diverse observations.

Cosmology draws heavily on the work of many disparate areas of research in theoretical and applied physics. Areas relevant to cosmology include particle physics experiments and theory, theoretical and observational astrophysics, general relativity, quantum mechanics, and plasma physics.

== Subject history ==

Modern cosmology developed along tandem tracks of theory and observation. In 1916, Albert Einstein published his theory of general relativity, which provided a unified description of gravity as a geometric property of space and time. At the time, Einstein believed in a static universe, but found that his original formulation of the theory did not permit it. This is because masses distributed throughout the universe gravitationally attract, and move toward each other over time. However, he realized that his equations permitted the introduction of a constant term which could counteract the attractive force of gravity on the cosmic scale. Einstein published his first paper on relativistic cosmology in 1917, in which he added this &quot;cosmological constant&quot; to his field equations in order to force them to model a static universe. The Einstein model describes a static universe; space is finite and unbounded (analogous to the surface of a sphere, which has a finite area but no edges). However, this so-called Einstein model is unstable to small perturbations—it will eventually start to expand or contract. It was later realized that Einstein&#x27;s model was just one of a larger set of possibilities, all of which were consistent with general relativity and the cosmological principle. The cosmological solutions of general relativity were found by Alexander Friedmann in the early 1920s. His equations describe the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker universe, which may expand or contract, and whose geometry may be open, flat, or closed.

In the 1910s, Vesto Slipher (and later Carl Wilhelm Wirtz) interpreted the red shift of spiral nebulae as a Doppler shift that indicated they were receding from Earth. However, it is difficult to determine the distance to astronomical objects. One way is to compare the physical size of an object to its angular size, but a physical size must be assumed in order to do this. Another method is to measure the brightness of an object and assume an intrinsic luminosity, from which the distance may be determined using the inverse-square law. Due to the difficulty of using these methods, they did not realize that the nebulae were actually galaxies outside our own Milky Way, nor did they speculate about the cosmological implications. In 1927, the Belgian Roman Catholic priest Georges Lemaître independently derived the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker equations and proposed, on the basis of the recession of spiral nebulae, that the universe began with the &quot;explosion&quot; of a &quot;primeval atom&quot;—which was later called the Big Bang. In 1929, Edwin Hubble provided an observational basis for Lemaître&#x27;s theory. Hubble showed that the spiral nebulae were galaxies by determining their distances using measurements of the brightness of Cepheid variable stars. He discovered a relationship between the redshift of a galaxy and its distance. He interpreted this as evidence that the galaxies are receding from Earth in every direction at speeds proportional to their distance from Earth. This fact is now known as Hubble&#x27;s law, though the numerical factor Hubble found relating recessional velocity and distance was off by a factor of ten, due to not knowing about the types of Cepheid variables.

Given the cosmological principle, Hubble&#x27;s law suggested that the universe was expanding. Two primary explanations were proposed for the expansion. One was Lemaître&#x27;s Big Bang theory, advocated and developed by George Gamow. The other explanation was Fred Hoyle&#x27;s steady state model in which new matter is created as the galaxies move away from each other. In this model, the universe is roughly the same at any point in time.

For a number of years, support for these theories was evenly divided. However, the observational evidence began to support the idea that the universe evolved from a hot dense state. The discovery of the cosmic microwave background in 1965 lent strong support to the Big Bang model, and since the precise measurements of the cosmic microwave background by the Cosmic Background Explorer in the early 1990s, few cosmologists have seriously proposed other theories of the origin and evolution of the cosmos. One consequence of this is that in standard general relativity, the universe began with a singularity, as demonstrated by Roger Penrose and Stephen Hawking in the 1960s.

An alternative view to extend the Big Bang model, suggesting the universe had no beginning or singularity and the age of the universe is infinite, has been presented.

In September 2023, astrophysicists questioned the overall current view of the universe, in the form of the Standard Model of Cosmology, based on the latest James Webb Space Telescope studies.

==Energy of the cosmos==
The lightest chemical elements, primarily hydrogen and helium, were created during the Big Bang through the process of nucleosynthesis. In a sequence of stellar nucleosynthesis reactions, smaller atomic nuclei are then combined into larger atomic nuclei, ultimately forming stable iron group elements such as iron and nickel, which have the highest nuclear binding energies. The net process results in a &quot;later energy release&quot;, meaning subsequent to the Big Bang. Such reactions of nuclear particles can lead to &quot;sudden energy releases&quot; from cataclysmic variable stars such as novae. Gravitational collapse of matter into black holes also powers the most energetic processes, generally seen in the nuclear regions of galaxies, forming &quot;quasars&quot; and &quot;active galaxies&quot;.

Cosmologists cannot explain all cosmic phenomena exactly, such as those related to the accelerating expansion of the universe, using conventional forms of energy. Instead, cosmologists propose a new form of energy called dark energy that permeates all space. One hypothesis is that dark energy is just the vacuum energy, a component of empty space that is associated with the virtual particles that exist due to the uncertainty principle.

There is no clear way to define the total energy in the universe using the most widely accepted theory of gravity, general relativity. Therefore, it remains controversial whether the total energy is conserved in an expanding universe. For instance, each photon that travels through intergalactic space loses energy due to the redshift effect. This energy is not transferred to any other system, so seems to be permanently lost. On the other hand, some cosmologists insist that energy is conserved in some sense; this follows the law of conservation of energy.

Different forms of energy may dominate the cosmos—relativistic particles which are referred to as radiation, or non-relativistic particles referred to as matter. Relativistic particles are particles whose rest mass is zero or negligible compared to their kinetic energy, and so move at the speed of light or very close to it; non-relativistic particles have much higher rest mass than their energy and so move much slower than the speed of light.

As the universe expands, both matter and radiation become diluted. However, the energy densities of radiation and matter dilute at different rates. As a particular volume expands, mass-energy density is changed only by the increase in volume, but the energy density of radiation is changed both by the increase in volume and by the increase in the wavelength of the photons that make it up. Thus the energy of radiation becomes a smaller part of the universe&#x27;s total energy than that of matter as it expands. The very early universe is said to have been &#x27;radiation dominated&#x27; and radiation controlled the deceleration of expansion. Later, as the average energy per photon becomes roughly 10 eV and lower, matter dictates the rate of deceleration and the universe is said to be &#x27;matter dominated&#x27;. The intermediate case is not treated well analytically. As the expansion of the universe continues, matter dilutes even further and the cosmological constant becomes dominant, leading to an acceleration in the universe&#x27;s expansion.

==History of the universe==

The history of the universe is a central issue in cosmology. The history of the universe is divided into different periods called epochs, according to the dominant forces and processes in each period. The standard cosmological model is known as the Lambda-CDM model.

===Equations of motion===
Within the standard cosmological model, the equations of motion governing the universe as a whole are derived from general relativity with a small, positive cosmological constant. The solution is an expanding universe; due to this expansion, the radiation and matter in the universe cool and become diluted. At first, the expansion is slowed down by gravitation attracting the radiation and matter in the universe. However, as these become diluted, the cosmological constant becomes more dominant and the expansion of the universe starts to accelerate rather than decelerate. In our universe this happened billions of years ago.

===Particle physics in cosmology===
During the earliest moments of the universe, the average energy density was very high, making knowledge of particle physics critical to understanding this environment. Hence, scattering processes and decay of unstable elementary particles are important for cosmological models of this period.

As a rule of thumb, a scattering or a decay process is cosmologically important in a certain epoch if the time scale describing that process is smaller than, or comparable to, the time scale of the expansion of the universe. The time scale that describes the expansion of the universe is formula_1 with formula_2 being the Hubble parameter, which varies with time. The expansion timescale formula_1 is roughly equal to the age of the universe at each point in time.

===Timeline of the Big Bang===

Observations suggest that the universe began around 13.8 billion years ago. Since then, the evolution of the universe has passed through three phases. The very early universe, which is still poorly understood, was the split second in which the universe was so hot that particles had energies higher than those currently accessible in particle accelerators on Earth. Therefore, while the basic features of this epoch have been worked out in the Big Bang theory, the details are largely based on educated guesses.

Following this, in the early universe, the evolution of the universe proceeded according to known high energy physics. This is when the first protons, electrons and neutrons formed, then nuclei and finally atoms. With the formation of neutral hydrogen, the cosmic microwave background was emitted. Finally, the epoch of structure formation began, when matter started to aggregate into the first stars and quasars, and ultimately galaxies, clusters of galaxies and superclusters formed. The future of the universe is not yet firmly known, but according to the ΛCDM model it will continue expanding forever.

==Areas of study==
Below, some of the most active areas of inquiry in cosmology are described, in roughly chronological order. This does not include all of the Big Bang cosmology, which is presented in &quot;Timeline of the Big Bang.&quot;

===Very early universe===

The early, hot universe appears to be well explained by the Big Bang from roughly 10−33 seconds onwards, but there are several problems. One is that there is no compelling reason, using current particle physics, for the universe to be flat, homogeneous, and isotropic &quot;(see the cosmological principle)&quot;. Moreover, grand unified theories of particle physics suggest that there should be magnetic monopoles in the universe, which have not been found. These problems are resolved by a brief period of cosmic inflation, which drives the universe to flatness, smooths out anisotropies and inhomogeneities to the observed level, and exponentially dilutes the monopoles. The physical model behind cosmic inflation is extremely simple, but it has not yet been confirmed by particle physics, and there are difficult problems reconciling inflation and quantum field theory. Some cosmologists think that string theory and brane cosmology will provide an alternative to inflation.

Another major problem in cosmology is what caused the universe to contain far more matter than antimatter. Cosmologists can observationally deduce that the universe is not split into regions of matter and antimatter. If it were, there would be X-rays and gamma rays produced as a result of annihilation, but this is not observed. Therefore, some process in the early universe must have created a small excess of matter over antimatter, and this (currently not understood) process is called &quot;baryogenesis&quot;. Three required conditions for baryogenesis were derived by Andrei Sakharov in 1967, and requires a violation of the particle physics symmetry, called CP-symmetry, between matter and antimatter. However, particle accelerators measure too small a violation of CP-symmetry to account for the baryon asymmetry. Cosmologists and particle physicists look for additional violations of the CP-symmetry in the early universe that might account for the baryon asymmetry.

Both the problems of baryogenesis and cosmic inflation are very closely related to particle physics, and their resolution might come from high energy theory and experiment, rather than through observations of the universe.

===Big Bang Theory===

Big Bang nucleosynthesis is the theory of the formation of the elements in the early universe. It finished when the universe was about three minutes old and its temperature dropped below that at which nuclear fusion could occur. Big Bang nucleosynthesis had a brief period during which it could operate, so only the very lightest elements were produced. Starting from hydrogen ions (protons), it principally produced deuterium, helium-4, and lithium. Other elements were produced in only trace abundances. The basic theory of nucleosynthesis was developed in 1948 by George Gamow, Ralph Asher Alpher, and Robert Herman. It was used for many years as a probe of physics at the time of the Big Bang, as the theory of Big Bang nucleosynthesis connects the abundances of primordial light elements with the features of the early universe. Specifically, it can be used to test the equivalence principle, to probe dark matter, and test neutrino physics. Some cosmologists have proposed that Big Bang nucleosynthesis suggests there is a fourth &quot;sterile&quot; species of neutrino.

====Standard model of Big Bang cosmology====
The ΛCDM (Lambda cold dark matter) or Lambda-CDM model is a parametrization of the Big Bang cosmological model in which the universe contains a cosmological constant, denoted by Lambda (Greek Λ), associated with dark energy, and cold dark matter (abbreviated CDM). It is frequently referred to as the standard model of Big Bang cosmology.

===Cosmic microwave background===

The cosmic microwave background is radiation left over from decoupling after the epoch of recombination when neutral atoms first formed. At this point, radiation produced in the Big Bang stopped Thomson scattering from charged ions. The radiation, first observed in 1965 by Arno Penzias and Robert Woodrow Wilson, has a perfect thermal black-body spectrum. It has a temperature of 2.7 kelvins today and is isotropic to one part in 105. Cosmological perturbation theory, which describes the evolution of slight inhomogeneities in the early universe, has allowed cosmologists to precisely calculate the angular power spectrum of the radiation, and it has been measured by the recent satellite experiments (COBE and WMAP) and many ground and balloon-based experiments (such as Degree Angular Scale Interferometer, Cosmic Background Imager, and Boomerang). One of the goals of these efforts is to measure the basic parameters of the Lambda-CDM model with increasing accuracy, as well as to test the predictions of the Big Bang model and look for new physics. The results of measurements made by WMAP, for example, have placed limits on the neutrino masses.

Newer experiments, such as QUIET and the Atacama Cosmology Telescope, are trying to measure the polarization of the cosmic microwave background. These measurements are expected to provide further confirmation of the theory as well as information about cosmic inflation, and the so-called secondary anisotropies, such as the Sunyaev-Zel&#x27;dovich effect and Sachs-Wolfe effect, which are caused by interaction between galaxies and clusters with the cosmic microwave background.

On 17 March 2014, astronomers of the BICEP2 Collaboration announced the apparent detection of &quot;B&quot;-mode polarization of the CMB, considered to be evidence of primordial gravitational waves that are predicted by the theory of inflation to occur during the earliest phase of the Big Bang. However, later that year the Planck collaboration provided a more accurate measurement of cosmic dust, concluding that the B-mode signal from dust is the same strength as that reported from BICEP2. On 30 January 2015, a joint analysis of BICEP2 and Planck data was published and the European Space Agency announced that the signal can be entirely attributed to interstellar dust in the Milky Way.

===Formation and evolution of large-scale structure===

Understanding the formation and evolution of the largest and earliest structures (i.e., quasars, galaxies, clusters and superclusters) is one of the largest efforts in cosmology. Cosmologists study a model of hierarchical structure formation in which structures form from the bottom up, with smaller objects forming first, while the largest objects, such as superclusters, are still assembling. One way to study structure in the universe is to survey the visible galaxies, in order to construct a three-dimensional picture of the galaxies in the universe and measure the matter power spectrum. This is the approach of the &quot;Sloan Digital Sky Survey&quot; and the 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey.

Another tool for understanding structure formation is simulations, which cosmologists use to study the gravitational aggregation of matter in the universe, as it clusters into filaments, superclusters and voids. Most simulations contain only non-baryonic cold dark matter, which should suffice to understand the universe on the largest scales, as there is much more dark matter in the universe than visible, baryonic matter. More advanced simulations are starting to include baryons and study the formation of individual galaxies. Cosmologists study these simulations to see if they agree with the galaxy surveys, and to understand any discrepancy.

Other, complementary observations to measure the distribution of matter in the distant universe and to probe reionization include:
* The Lyman-alpha forest, which allows cosmologists to measure the distribution of neutral atomic hydrogen gas in the early universe, by measuring the absorption of light from distant quasars by the gas.
* The 21-centimeter absorption line of neutral atomic hydrogen also provides a sensitive test of cosmology.
* Weak lensing, the distortion of a distant image by gravitational lensing due to dark matter.

These will help cosmologists settle the question of when and how structure formed in the universe.

===Dark matter===

Evidence from Big Bang nucleosynthesis, the cosmic microwave background, structure formation, and galaxy rotation curves suggests that about 23% of the mass of the universe consists of non-baryonic dark matter, whereas only 4% consists of visible, baryonic matter. The gravitational effects of dark matter are well understood, as it behaves like a cold, non-radiative fluid that forms haloes around galaxies. Dark matter has never been detected in the laboratory, and the particle physics nature of dark matter remains completely unknown. Without observational constraints, there are a number of candidates, such as a stable supersymmetric particle, a weakly interacting massive particle, a gravitationally-interacting massive particle, an axion, and a massive compact halo object. Alternatives to the dark matter hypothesis include a modification of gravity at small accelerations (MOND) or an effect from brane cosmology. TeVeS is a version of MOND that can explain gravitational lensing.

===Dark energy===

If the universe is flat, there must be an additional component making up 73% (in addition to the 23% dark matter and 4% baryons) of the energy density of the universe. This is called dark energy. In order not to interfere with Big Bang nucleosynthesis and the cosmic microwave background, it must not cluster in haloes like baryons and dark matter. There is strong observational evidence for dark energy, as the total energy density of the universe is known through constraints on the flatness of the universe, but the amount of clustering matter is tightly measured, and is much less than this. The case for dark energy was strengthened in 1999, when measurements demonstrated that the expansion of the universe has begun to gradually accelerate.

Apart from its density and its clustering properties, nothing is known about dark energy. &quot;Quantum field theory&quot; predicts a cosmological constant (CC) much like dark energy, but 120 orders of magnitude larger than that observed. Steven Weinberg and a number of string theorists &quot;(see string landscape)&quot; have invoked the &#x27;weak anthropic principle&#x27;: i.e. the reason that physicists observe a universe with such a small cosmological constant is that no physicists (or any life) could exist in a universe with a larger cosmological constant. Many cosmologists find this an unsatisfying explanation: perhaps because while the weak anthropic principle is self-evident (given that living observers exist, there must be at least one universe with a cosmological constant (CC) which allows for life to exist) it does not attempt to explain the context of that universe. For example, the weak anthropic principle alone does not distinguish between:
* Only one universe will ever exist and there is some underlying principle that constrains the CC to the value we observe.
* Only one universe will ever exist and although there is no underlying principle fixing the CC, we got lucky.
* Lots of universes exist (simultaneously or serially) with a range of CC values, and of course ours is one of the life-supporting ones.

Other possible explanations for dark energy include quintessence or a modification of gravity on the largest scales. The effect on cosmology of the dark energy that these models describe is given by the dark energy&#x27;s equation of state, which varies depending upon the theory. The nature of dark energy is one of the most challenging problems in cosmology.

A better understanding of dark energy is likely to solve the problem of the ultimate fate of the universe. In the current cosmological epoch, the accelerated expansion due to dark energy is preventing structures larger than superclusters from forming. It is not known whether the acceleration will continue indefinitely, perhaps even increasing until a big rip, or whether it will eventually reverse, lead to a Big Freeze, or follow some other scenario.

===Gravitational waves===
Gravitational waves are ripples in the curvature of spacetime that propagate as waves at the speed of light, generated in certain gravitational interactions that propagate outward from their source. Gravitational-wave astronomy is an emerging branch of observational astronomy which aims to use gravitational waves to collect observational data about sources of detectable gravitational waves such as binary star systems composed of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes; and events such as supernovae, and the formation of the early universe shortly after the Big Bang.

In 2016, the LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration teams announced that they had made the first observation of gravitational waves, originating from a pair of merging black holes using the Advanced LIGO detectors. On 15 June 2016, a second detection of gravitational waves from coalescing black holes was announced. Besides LIGO, many other gravitational-wave observatories (detectors) are under construction.

===Other areas of inquiry===
Cosmologists also study:
* Whether primordial black holes were formed in our universe, and what happened to them.
* Detection of cosmic rays with energies above the GZK cutoff, and whether it signals a failure of special relativity at high energies.
* The equivalence principle, whether or not Einstein&#x27;s general theory of relativity is the correct theory of gravitation, and if the fundamental laws of physics are the same everywhere in the universe.
*Biophysical cosmology: a type of physical cosmology that studies and understands life as part or an inherent part of physical cosmology. It stresses that life is inherent to the universe and therefore frequent.

==See also==

* Accretion
* Hubble&#x27;s law
* Illustris project
* List of cosmologists
* Physical ontology
* Quantum cosmology
* String cosmology
* Universal Rotation Curve
==References==
==Further reading==

===Popular===
* 
* 
* 

===Textbooks===
* Introductory cosmology and general relativity without the full tensor apparatus, deferred until the last part of the book.
* Modern introduction to cosmology covering the homogeneous and inhomogeneous universe as well as inflation and the CMB.
* An introductory text, released slightly before the WMAP results.
* 
* For undergraduates; mathematically gentle with a strong historical focus.
* An introductory astronomy text.
* The classic reference for researchers.
* Cosmology without general relativity.
* An introduction to cosmology with a thorough discussion of inflation.
* Discusses the formation of large-scale structures in detail.
* An introduction including more on general relativity and quantum field theory than most.
* Strong historical focus.
* The classic work on large-scale structure and correlation functions.
* A standard reference for the mathematical formalism.


==External links==

===From groups===
* Cambridge Cosmology – from Cambridge University (public home page)
* Cosmology 101 – from the NASA WMAP group
* Center for Cosmological Physics. University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
* Origins, Nova Online – Provided by &quot;PBS&quot;

===From individuals===
* Gale, George, &quot;Cosmology: Methodological Debates in the 1930s and 1940s&quot;, &quot;The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot;, Edward N. Zalta (ed.)
* Madore, Barry F., &quot;&quot;Level 5 : A Knowledgebase for Extragalactic Astronomy and Cosmology&quot;. Caltech and Carnegie. Pasadena, California.
* Tyler, Pat, and Newman, Phil, &quot;Beyond Einstein&quot;. Laboratory for High Energy Astrophysics (LHEA) NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.
* Wright, Ned. &quot;Cosmology tutorial and FAQ&quot;&quot;. Division of Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics, UCLA.
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="0" end="18" title="Physical cosmology" label="Physical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="34" end="43" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="95" end="113" title="Physical cosmology" label="cosmological model"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="125" end="134" title="Physical cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="211" end="219" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q170835" start="272" end="278" title="Cosmogony" label="origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q136407" start="291" end="300" title="Chronology of the universe" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q622063" start="306" end="319" title="ultimate fate" label="ultimate fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="336" end="343" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048114" start="364" end="384" title="Copernican principle" label="Copernican principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="405" end="421" title="astronomical object" label="celestial bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="437" end="449" title="physical law" label="physical law"/>
<link wikidata="Q38433" start="474" end="493" title="Newtonian mechanics" label="Newtonian mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="637" end="652" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="660" end="688" title="general relativity" label="general theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="755" end="767" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="832" end="840" title="Galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="852" end="861" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q312248" start="877" end="890" title="Vesto Slipher" label="Vesto Slipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="930" end="939" title="expanding universe" label="expanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="1057" end="1065" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q12998" start="1077" end="1093" title="Georges Lemaître" label="Georges Lemaître"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637913" start="1176" end="1199" title="Non-standard cosmology" label="alternative cosmologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="1368" end="1395" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="1405" end="1415" title="supernovae" label="supernovae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935817" start="1427" end="1442" title="redshift survey" label="redshift survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="1478" end="1505" title="Lambda-CDM model" label="standard model of cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="1568" end="1579" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="1584" end="1595" title="dark energy" label="dark energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="1824" end="1835" title="Theoretical physics" label="theoretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q373065" start="1840" end="1855" title="applied physics" label="applied physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="1893" end="1909" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993342" start="1926" end="1932" title="particle physics phenomenology" label="theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q37547" start="1964" end="1976" title="astrophysics" label="astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="1998" end="2015" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="2021" end="2035" title="plasma physics" label="plasma physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="2184" end="2202" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190516" start="2331" end="2346" title="static universe" label="static universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q59151" start="2804" end="2825" title="cosmological constant" label="cosmological constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="3164" end="3170" title="metric expansion of space" label="expand"/>
<link wikidata="Q319903" start="3341" end="3363" title="cosmological principle" label="cosmological principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q205981" start="3428" end="3447" title="Alexander Friedmann" label="Alexander Friedmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q742982" start="3495" end="3530" title="Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker" label="Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q312248" start="3635" end="3648" title="Vesto Melvin Slipher" label="Vesto Slipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q85234" start="3660" end="3678" title="Carl Wilhelm Wirtz" label="Carl Wilhelm Wirtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="3696" end="3705" title="red shift" label="red shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="3709" end="3723" title="nebula" label="spiral nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q76436" start="3729" end="3742" title="Doppler shift" label="Doppler shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q718647" start="3925" end="3937" title="angular size" label="angular size"/>
<link wikidata="Q221656" start="4029" end="4039" title="brightness" label="brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="4077" end="4087" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q333094" start="4141" end="4159" title="inverse-square law" label="inverse-square law"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="4284" end="4293" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="4368" end="4375" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4376" end="4390" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="4391" end="4397" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12998" start="4398" end="4414" title="Georges Lemaître" label="Georges Lemaître"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="4625" end="4629" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="4682" end="4694" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="4878" end="4894" title="Cepheid variable" label="Cepheid variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="5154" end="5171" title="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law" label="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q59478" start="5564" end="5576" title="George Gamow" label="George Gamow"/>
<link wikidata="Q183397" start="5604" end="5614" title="Fred Hoyle" label="Fred Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q272612" start="5622" end="5640" title="steady state model" label="steady state model"/>
<link wikidata="Q49445" start="6145" end="6171" title="Cosmic Background Explorer" label="Cosmic Background Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201721" start="6381" end="6392" title="Gravitational singularity" label="singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193803" start="6413" end="6426" title="Roger Penrose" label="Roger Penrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q17714" start="6431" end="6446" title="Stephen Hawking" label="Stephen Hawking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="6708" end="6716" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="6737" end="6764" title="Standard Model of Cosmology" label="Standard Model of Cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q186447" start="6786" end="6812" title="James Webb Space Telescope" label="James Webb Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="6861" end="6878" title="chemical elements" label="chemical elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="6890" end="6898" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="6903" end="6909" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q471702" start="6967" end="6982" title="nucleosynthesis" label="nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057093" start="7001" end="7024" title="stellar nucleosynthesis" label="stellar nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072968" start="7129" end="7139" title="iron group" label="iron group"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="7157" end="7161" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="7166" end="7172" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q420754" start="7205" end="7221" title="binding energies" label="binding energies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059564" start="7410" end="7435" title="cataclysmic variable star" label="cataclysmic variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458" start="7445" end="7449" title="nova" label="nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="7490" end="7500" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="7609" end="7615" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46587" start="7633" end="7648" title="active galaxies" label="active galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049613" start="7744" end="7782" title="Accelerating universe" label="accelerating expansion of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="7803" end="7818" title="Energy forms" label="forms of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="7878" end="7889" title="dark energy" label="dark energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143773" start="7963" end="7976" title="vacuum energy" label="vacuum energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q849940" start="8033" end="8049" title="virtual particle" label="virtual particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="8073" end="8094" title="uncertainty principle" label="uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="8351" end="8357" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="8423" end="8431" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q11382" start="8633" end="8655" title="conservation of energy" label="conservation of energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022629" start="8708" end="8729" title="relativistic particle" label="relativistic particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="8756" end="8765" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097654" start="8863" end="8872" title="rest mass" label="rest mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="8913" end="8927" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q828402" start="9186" end="9202" title="energy density" label="energy densities"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="9454" end="9464" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="9812" end="9814" title="electronvolt" label="eV"/>
<link wikidata="Q777407" start="9970" end="9982" title="analytic solution" label="analytically"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="10444" end="10460" title="Lambda-CDM model" label="Lambda-CDM model"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="10500" end="10527" title="standard cosmological model" label="standard cosmological model"/>
<link wikidata="Q215007" start="10533" end="10552" title="equations of motion" label="equations of motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="10839" end="10850" title="gravitation" label="gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="11262" end="11278" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q210028" start="11330" end="11340" title="scattering" label="scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7778426" start="11355" end="11360" title="particle decay" label="decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="11373" end="11393" title="elementary particles" label="elementary particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="11772" end="11788" title="Hubble parameter" label="Hubble parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q177013" start="12217" end="12226" title="subatomic particle" label="particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="12282" end="12302" title="particle accelerator" label="particle accelerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="12559" end="12578" title="high energy physics" label="high energy physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="12718" end="12745" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="12856" end="12860" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q83373" start="12866" end="12872" title="quasar" label="quasar"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="12900" end="12920" title="clusters of galaxies" label="clusters of galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q27521" start="12925" end="12937" title="supercluster" label="supercluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="13020" end="13024" title="ΛCDM" label="ΛCDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q136407" start="13276" end="13300" title="Timeline of the Big Bang" label="Timeline of the Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13463" end="13471" title="Big Bang#Problems" label="problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647152" start="13571" end="13575" title="shape of the universe" label="flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q273163" start="13594" end="13603" title="isotropic" label="isotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q319903" start="13619" end="13641" title="cosmological principle" label="cosmological principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q382037" start="13660" end="13682" title="grand unified theory" label="grand unified theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q219708" start="13732" end="13749" title="magnetic monopole" label="magnetic monopole"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="13844" end="13860" title="cosmic inflation" label="cosmic inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457948" start="13891" end="13899" title="Flatness (cosmology)" label="flatness"/>
<link wikidata="Q466686" start="13913" end="13925" title="Anisotropy" label="anisotropies"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="14188" end="14208" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="14239" end="14252" title="string theory" label="string theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12986210" start="14257" end="14272" title="brane cosmology" label="brane cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83197" start="14411" end="14421" title="antimatter" label="antimatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="14560" end="14565" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="14571" end="14580" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q188721" start="14606" end="14618" title="annihilation" label="annihilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q790454" start="14812" end="14824" title="baryogenesis" label="baryogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q997" start="14891" end="14906" title="Andrei Sakharov" label="Andrei Sakharov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14965" end="14973" title="Symmetry#In physics" label="symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12794416" start="14982" end="14993" title="CP-symmetry" label="CP-symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q809677" start="15275" end="15291" title="baryon asymmetry" label="baryon asymmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="15455" end="15465" title="particle accelerator" label="experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="15702" end="15713" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="15742" end="15756" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="15918" end="15921" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="15924" end="15930" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="15958" end="15967" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="15969" end="15977" title="helium" label="helium-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="15983" end="15990" title="lithium" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q142049" start="16122" end="16140" title="Ralph Asher Alpher" label="Ralph Asher Alpher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339278" start="16146" end="16159" title="Robert Herman" label="Robert Herman"/>
<link wikidata="Q210546" start="16416" end="16437" title="equivalence principle" label="equivalence principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="16448" end="16459" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="16470" end="16478" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="16702" end="16712" title="Lambda-CDM" label="Lambda-CDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q35889" start="16724" end="16739" title="Parametric equation" label="parametrization"/>
<link wikidata="Q10897" start="16842" end="16848" title="Lambda" label="Lambda"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="16850" end="16855" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153477" start="16893" end="16909" title="cold dark matter" label="cold dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249638" start="17099" end="17109" title="Decoupling (cosmology)" label="decoupling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373825" start="17129" end="17142" title="recombination (cosmology)" label="recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477639" start="17234" end="17252" title="Thomson scattering" label="Thomson scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q172877" start="17313" end="17325" title="Arno Penzias" label="Arno Penzias"/>
<link wikidata="Q171034" start="17330" end="17351" title="Robert Woodrow Wilson" label="Robert Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="17375" end="17385" title="black body" label="black-body"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="17424" end="17430" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005905" start="17475" end="17507" title="Cosmological perturbation theory" label="Cosmological perturbation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331626" start="17648" end="17662" title="power spectrum" label="power spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49445" start="17743" end="17747" title="Cosmic Background Explorer" label="COBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q274106" start="17752" end="17756" title="WMAP" label="WMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627109" start="17813" end="17848" title="Degree Angular Scale Interferometer" label="Degree Angular Scale Interferometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982934" start="17850" end="17874" title="Cosmic Background Imager" label="Cosmic Background Imager"/>
<link wikidata="Q796870" start="17880" end="17889" title="BOOMERanG experiment" label="Boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265603" start="18220" end="18225" title="QUIET" label="QUIET"/>
<link wikidata="Q753067" start="18234" end="18261" title="Atacama Cosmology Telescope" label="Atacama Cosmology Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="18289" end="18301" title="polarization (waves)" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519204" start="18517" end="18547" title="Sunyaev-Zel&amp;#x27;dovich effect" label="Sunyaev-Zel&amp;#x27;dovich effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617362" start="18552" end="18570" title="Sachs-Wolfe effect" label="Sachs-Wolfe effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="18612" end="18620" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q204107" start="18625" end="18633" title="galaxy cluster" label="clusters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18710" end="18730" title="BICEP and Keck Array#BICEP2" label="BICEP2 Collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="18767" end="18785" title="B-modes" label="&amp;quot;B&amp;quot;-mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="18840" end="18869" title="primordial gravitational wave" label="primordial gravitational wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="18907" end="18916" title="inflation (cosmology)" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q725309" start="18998" end="19004" title="Planck spacecraft" label="Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="19059" end="19070" title="cosmic dust" label="cosmic dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q725309" start="19218" end="19224" title="Planck (spacecraft)" label="Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="19252" end="19273" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q14515149" start="19530" end="19538" title="galaxy groups and clusters" label="clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q27521" start="19543" end="19555" title="supercluster" label="supercluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331626" start="20001" end="20015" title="power spectrum" label="power spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q840332" start="20051" end="20075" title="Sloan Digital Sky Survey" label="Sloan Digital Sky Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815842" start="20090" end="20116" title="2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey" label="2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133705" start="20295" end="20304" title="Galaxy filament" label="filaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q845371" start="20324" end="20329" title="void (astronomy)" label="voids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153477" start="20374" end="20390" title="cold dark matter" label="cold dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670901" start="20878" end="20890" title="reionization" label="reionization"/>
<link wikidata="Q142939" start="20906" end="20924" title="Lyman-alpha forest" label="Lyman-alpha forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406191" start="21110" end="21123" title="Hydrogen line" label="21-centimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q905921" start="21124" end="21134" title="Absorption (electromagnetic radiation)" label="absorption"/>
<link wikidata="Q13073796" start="21214" end="21226" title="Weak lensing" label="Weak lensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q185243" start="21265" end="21286" title="gravitational lensing" label="gravitational lensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q837317" start="21441" end="21465" title="Big Bang nucleosynthesis" label="Big Bang nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="21471" end="21498" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475614" start="21525" end="21546" title="galaxy rotation curve" label="galaxy rotation curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q159731" start="21675" end="21690" title="baryonic matter" label="baryonic matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="21781" end="21794" title="Radioactive decay" label="non-radiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q631379" start="21812" end="21818" title="galactic halo" label="haloes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193442" start="22052" end="22066" title="supersymmetry" label="supersymmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129252" start="22079" end="22114" title="weakly interacting massive particle" label="weakly interacting massive particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q792548" start="22167" end="22172" title="axion" label="axion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457669" start="22180" end="22207" title="massive compact halo object" label="massive compact halo object"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503556" start="22310" end="22314" title="MOND" label="MOND"/>
<link wikidata="Q673834" start="22351" end="22356" title="TeVeS" label="TeVeS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457948" start="22457" end="22461" title="Flatness (cosmology)" label="flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="23283" end="23303" title="Quantum field theory" label="Quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="23379" end="23398" title="orders of magnitude" label="orders of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q179282" start="23426" end="23441" title="Steven Weinberg" label="Steven Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4253887" start="23486" end="23502" title="string landscape" label="string landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q240581" start="23538" end="23557" title="anthropic principle" label="anthropic principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777391" start="24580" end="24592" title="quintessence (physics)" label="quintessence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653702" start="24750" end="24767" title="equation of state (cosmology)" label="equation of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q622063" start="24966" end="24995" title="ultimate fate of the universe" label="ultimate fate of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27521" start="25114" end="25126" title="supercluster" label="supercluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q261585" start="25243" end="25250" title="big rip" label="big rip"/>
<link wikidata="Q139931" start="25301" end="25311" title="Heat death of the universe" label="Big Freeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="25371" end="25389" title="Gravitational wave" label="Gravitational wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q214881" start="25410" end="25419" title="curvature" label="curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="25423" end="25432" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="25451" end="25455" title="wave" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392871" start="25570" end="25598" title="Gravitational-wave astronomy" label="Gravitational-wave astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q818557" start="25624" end="25647" title="observational astronomy" label="observational astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50053" start="25772" end="25783" title="binary star" label="binary star"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="25804" end="25815" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="25818" end="25830" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="25837" end="25847" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="25869" end="25878" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q136407" start="25906" end="25920" title="chronology of the universe" label="early universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q255371" start="25963" end="25967" title="LIGO" label="LIGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063130" start="25997" end="26002" title="Virgo interferometer" label="Virgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22683173" start="26056" end="26096" title="first observation of gravitational waves" label="first observation of gravitational waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913879" start="26117" end="26121" title="Binary black hole" label="pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q748327" start="26125" end="26132" title="Stellar collision" label="merging"/>
<link wikidata="Q24641210" start="26199" end="26215" title="GW151226" label="second detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302080" start="26307" end="26351" title="Gravitational-wave observatory" label="gravitational-wave observatories (detectors)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155939" start="26441" end="26462" title="primordial black hole" label="primordial black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487746" start="26571" end="26581" title="GZK cutoff" label="GZK cutoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="26619" end="26637" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q210546" start="26662" end="26683" title="equivalence principle" label="equivalence principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="26770" end="26781" title="gravitation" label="gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="26806" end="26821" title="laws of physics" label="laws of physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="26945" end="26949" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27018" end="27050" title="Universe#Habitability" label="life is inherent to the universe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27065" end="27073" title="Life#In the universe" label="frequent"/>
<link wikidata="Q419978" start="27092" end="27101" title="Accretion (astrophysics)" label="Accretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="27104" end="27121" title="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law" label="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q18193875" start="27124" end="27141" title="Illustris project" label="Illustris project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363101" start="27144" end="27164" title="List of cosmologists" label="List of cosmologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q269114" start="27167" end="27184" title="Physical ontology" label="Physical ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q780685" start="27187" end="27204" title="Quantum cosmology" label="Quantum cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q279029" start="27207" end="27223" title="String cosmology" label="String cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475614" start="27226" end="27250" title="Universal Rotation Curve" label="Universal Rotation Curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q274106" start="27626" end="27630" title="Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe" label="WMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="27895" end="27904" title="inflation (cosmology)" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="28109" end="28130" title="large-scale structure of the Universe" label="large-scale structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q274106" start="28354" end="28358" title="WMAP" label="WMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="28400" end="28421" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="28484" end="28487" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q52152" start="28943" end="28970" title="Goddard Space Flight Center" label="Goddard Space Flight Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048595" start="28974" end="28985" title="Edward L. Wright" label="Wright, Ned"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5382" wikidata="Q273508" url="?curid=5382" title="Cosmic inflation">
<text>In physical cosmology, cosmic inflation, cosmological inflation, or just inflation, is a theory of exponential expansion of space in the very early universe. Following the inflationary period, the universe continued to expand, but at a slower rate. The re-acceleration of this slowing expansion due to dark energy began after the universe was already over 7.7 billion years old (5.4 billion years ago).

Inflation theory was developed in the late 1970s and early 1980s, with notable contributions by several theoretical physicists, including Alexei Starobinsky at Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics, Alan Guth at Cornell University, and Andrei Linde at Lebedev Physical Institute. Starobinsky, Guth, and Linde won the 2014 Kavli Prize &quot;for pioneering the theory of cosmic inflation&quot;. It was developed further in the early 1980s. It explains the origin of the large-scale structure of the cosmos. Quantum fluctuations in the microscopic inflationary region, magnified to cosmic size, become the seeds for the growth of structure in the Universe (see galaxy formation and evolution and structure formation). Many physicists also believe that inflation explains why the universe appears to be the same in all directions (isotropic), why the cosmic microwave background radiation is distributed evenly, why the universe is flat, and why no magnetic monopoles have been observed.

The detailed particle physics mechanism responsible for inflation is unknown. A number of inflation model predictions have been confirmed by observation; for example temperature anisotropies observed by the COBE satellite in 1992 exhibit nearly scale-invariant spectra as predicted by the inflationary paradigm and WMAP results also show strong evidence for inflation. However, some scientists dissent from this position. The hypothetical field thought to be responsible for inflation is called the inflaton.

In 2002, three of the original architects of the theory were recognized for their major contributions; physicists Alan Guth of M.I.T., Andrei Linde of Stanford, and Paul Steinhardt of Princeton shared the Dirac Prize &quot;for development of the concept of inflation in cosmology&quot;. In 2012, Guth and Linde were awarded the Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics for their invention and development of inflationary cosmology.

== Overview ==

Around 1930, Edwin Hubble discovered that light from remote galaxies was redshifted; the more remote, the more shifted. This implies that the galaxies are receding from the Earth, with more distant galaxies receding more rapidly, such that galaxies also recede from each other. This expansion of the universe was previously predicted by Alexander Friedmann and Georges Lemaître from the theory of general relativity. It can be understood as a consequence of an initial impulse, which sent the contents of the universe flying apart at such a rate that their mutual gravitational attraction has not reversed their increasing separation.

Inflation may have provided this initial impulse. According to the Friedmann equations that describe the dynamics of an expanding universe, a fluid with sufficiently negative pressure exerts gravitational repulsion in the cosmological context. A field in a positive-energy false vacuum state could represent such a fluid, and the resulting repulsion would set the universe into exponential expansion. This &quot;inflation&quot; phase was originally proposed by Alan Guth in 1979 because the exponential expansion could dilute exotic relics, such as magnetic monopoles, that were predicted by grand unified theories at the time. This would explain why such relics were not seen. It was quickly realized that such accelerated expansion would resolve the horizon problem and the flatness problem. These problems arise from the notion that to look like it does &quot;today&quot;, the Universe must have started from very finely tuned, or &quot;special&quot;, initial conditions at the Big Bang.

== Theory ==
An expanding universe generally has a cosmological horizon, which, by analogy with the more familiar horizon caused by the curvature of Earth&#x27;s surface, marks the boundary of the part of the Universe that an observer can see. Light (or other radiation) emitted by objects beyond the cosmological horizon in an accelerating universe never reaches the observer, because the space in between the observer and the object is expanding too rapidly.

The observable universe is one &quot;causal patch&quot; of a much larger unobservable universe; other parts of the Universe cannot communicate with Earth yet. These parts of the Universe are outside our current cosmological horizon, which is believed to be 46 billion light years in all directions from Earth. In the standard hot big bang model, without inflation, the cosmological horizon moves out, bringing new regions into view. Yet as a local observer sees such a region for the first time, it looks no different from any other region of space the local observer has already seen: Its background radiation is at nearly the same temperature as the background radiation of other regions, and its space-time curvature is evolving lock-step with the others. This presents a mystery: how did these new regions know what temperature and curvature they were supposed to have? They could not have learned it by getting signals, because they were not previously in communication with our past light cone.

Inflation answers this question by postulating that all the regions come from an earlier era with a big vacuum energy, or cosmological constant. A space with a cosmological constant is qualitatively different: instead of moving outward, the cosmological horizon stays put. For any one observer, the distance to the cosmological horizon is constant. With exponentially expanding space, two nearby observers are separated very quickly; so much so, that the distance between them quickly exceeds the limits of communication. The spatial slices are expanding very fast to cover huge volumes. Things are constantly moving beyond the cosmological horizon, which is a fixed distance away, and everything becomes homogeneous.

As the inflationary field slowly relaxes to the vacuum, the cosmological constant goes to zero and space begins to expand normally. The new regions that come into view during the normal expansion phase are exactly the same regions that were pushed out of the horizon during inflation, and so they are at nearly the same temperature and curvature, because they come from the same originally small patch of space.

The theory of inflation thus explains why the temperatures and curvatures of different regions are so nearly equal. It also predicts that the total curvature of a space-slice at constant global time is zero. This prediction implies that the total ordinary matter, dark matter and residual vacuum energy in the Universe have to add up to the critical density, and the evidence supports this. More strikingly, inflation allows physicists to calculate the minute differences in temperature of different regions from quantum fluctuations during the inflationary era, and many of these quantitative predictions have been confirmed.

===Space expands===
In a space that expands exponentially (or nearly exponentially) with time, any pair of free-floating objects that are initially at rest will move apart from each other at an accelerating rate, at least as long as they are not bound together by any force. From the point of view of one such object, the spacetime is something like an inside-out Schwarzschild black hole—each object is surrounded by a spherical event horizon. Once the other object has fallen through this horizon it can never return, and even light signals it sends will never reach the first object (at least so long as the space continues to expand exponentially).

In the approximation that the expansion is exactly exponential, the horizon is static and remains a fixed physical distance away. This patch of an inflating universe can be described by the following metric:

:formula_1

This exponentially expanding spacetime is called a de Sitter space, and to sustain it there must be a cosmological constant, a vacuum energy density that is constant in space and time and proportional to Λ in the above metric. For the case of exactly exponential expansion, the vacuum energy has a negative pressure &quot;p&quot; equal in magnitude to its energy density &quot;ρ&quot;; the equation of state is &quot;p=−ρ&quot;.

Inflation is typically not an exactly exponential expansion, but rather quasi- or near-exponential. In such a universe the horizon will slowly grow with time as the vacuum energy density gradually decreases.

===Few inhomogeneities remain===
Because the accelerating expansion of space stretches out any initial variations in density or temperature to very large length scales, an essential feature of inflation is that it smooths out inhomogeneities and anisotropies, and reduces the curvature of space. This pushes the Universe into a very simple state in which it is completely dominated by the inflaton field and the only significant inhomogeneities are tiny quantum fluctuations. Inflation also dilutes exotic heavy particles, such as the magnetic monopoles predicted by many extensions to the Standard Model of particle physics. If the Universe was only hot enough to form such particles &quot;before&quot; a period of inflation, they would not be observed in nature, as they would be so rare that it is quite likely that there are none in the observable universe. Together, these effects are called the inflationary &quot;no-hair theorem&quot; by analogy with the no hair theorem for black holes.

The &quot;no-hair&quot; theorem works essentially because the cosmological horizon is no different from a black-hole horizon, except for not testable disagreements about what is on the other side. The interpretation of the no-hair theorem is that the Universe (observable and unobservable) expands by an enormous factor during inflation. In an expanding universe, energy densities generally fall, or get diluted, as the volume of the Universe increases. For example, the density of ordinary &quot;cold&quot; matter (dust) declines as the inverse of the volume: when linear dimensions double, the energy density declines by a factor of eight; the radiation energy density declines even more rapidly as the Universe expands since the wavelength of each photon is stretched (redshifted), in addition to the photons being dispersed by the expansion. When linear dimensions are doubled, the energy density in radiation falls by a factor of sixteen (see the solution of the energy density continuity equation for an ultra-relativistic fluid). During inflation, the energy density in the inflaton field is roughly constant. However, the energy density in everything else, including inhomogeneities, curvature, anisotropies, exotic particles, and standard-model particles is falling, and through sufficient inflation these all become negligible. This leaves the Universe flat and symmetric, and (apart from the homogeneous inflaton field) mostly empty, at the moment inflation ends and reheating begins.

===Reheating===
Inflation is a period of supercooled expansion, when the temperature drops by a factor of 100,000 or so. (The exact drop is model-dependent, but in the first models it was typically from  K down to  K.) This relatively low temperature is maintained during the inflationary phase. When inflation ends, the temperature returns to the pre-inflationary temperature; this is called &quot;reheating&quot; or thermalization because the large potential energy of the inflaton field decays into particles and fills the Universe with Standard Model particles, including electromagnetic radiation, starting the radiation dominated phase of the Universe. Because the nature of the inflaton field is not known, this process is still poorly understood, although it is believed to take place through a parametric resonance.

==Motivations==
Inflation tries to resolve several problems in Big Bang cosmology that were discovered in the 1970s. Inflation was first proposed by Alan Guth in 1979 while investigating the problem of why no magnetic monopoles are seen today; he found that a positive-energy false vacuum would, according to general relativity, generate an exponential expansion of space. It was quickly realised that such an expansion would resolve many other long-standing problems. These problems arise from the observation that to look like it does &quot;today&quot;, the Universe would have to have started from very finely tuned, or &quot;special&quot; initial conditions at the Big Bang. Inflation attempts to resolve these problems by providing a dynamical mechanism that drives the Universe to this special state, thus making a universe like ours much more likely in the context of the Big Bang theory.

===Horizon problem===

The horizon problem is the problem of determining why the universe appears statistically homogeneous and isotropic in accordance with the cosmological principle. For example, molecules in a canister of gas are distributed homogeneously and isotropically because they are in thermal equilibrium: gas throughout the canister has had enough time to interact to dissipate inhomogeneities and anisotropies. The situation is quite different in the big bang model without inflation, because gravitational expansion does not give the early universe enough time to equilibrate. In a big bang with only the matter and radiation known in the Standard Model, two widely separated regions of the observable universe cannot have equilibrated because they move apart from each other faster than the speed of light and thus have never come into causal contact. In the early Universe, it was not possible to send a light signal between the two regions. Because they have had no interaction, it is difficult to explain why they have the same temperature (are thermally equilibrated). Historically, proposed solutions included the &quot;Phoenix universe&quot; of Georges Lemaître, the related oscillatory universe of Richard Chase Tolman, and the Mixmaster universe of Charles Misner. Lemaître and Tolman proposed that a universe undergoing a number of cycles of contraction and expansion could come into thermal equilibrium. Their models failed, however, because of the buildup of entropy over several cycles. Misner made the (ultimately incorrect) conjecture that the Mixmaster mechanism, which made the Universe &quot;more&quot; chaotic, could lead to statistical homogeneity and isotropy.

===Flatness problem===

The flatness problem is sometimes called one of the Dicke coincidences (along with the cosmological constant problem). It became known in the 1960s that the density of matter in the Universe was comparable to the critical density necessary for a flat universe (that is, a universe whose large-scale geometry is the usual Euclidean geometry, rather than a non-Euclidean hyperbolic or spherical geometry).

Therefore, regardless of the shape of the universe, the contribution of spatial curvature to the expansion of the Universe could not be much greater than the contribution of matter. But as the Universe expands, the curvature redshifts away more slowly than matter and radiation. Extrapolated into the past, this presents a fine-tuning problem because the contribution of curvature to the Universe must be exponentially small (sixteen orders of magnitude less than the density of radiation at Big Bang nucleosynthesis, for example). Observations of the cosmic microwave background have demonstrated that the Universe is flat to within a few percent.

===Magnetic-monopole problem===
Stable magnetic monopoles are a problem for Grand Unified Theories, which propose that at high temperatures (such as in the early universe), the electromagnetic force, strong, and weak nuclear forces are not actually fundamental forces but arise due to spontaneous symmetry breaking from a single gauge theory. These theories predict a number of heavy, stable particles that have not been observed in nature. The most notorious is the magnetic monopole, a kind of stable, heavy &quot;charge&quot; of magnetic field.

Monopoles are predicted to be copiously produced following Grand Unified Theories at high temperature, and they should have persisted to the present day, to such an extent that they would become the primary constituent of the Universe. Not only is that not the case, but all searches for them have failed, placing stringent limits on the density of relic magnetic monopoles in the Universe.

A period of inflation that occurs below the temperature where magnetic monopoles can be produced would offer a possible resolution of this problem: Monopoles would be separated from each other as the Universe around them expands, potentially lowering their observed density by many orders of magnitude. Though, as cosmologist Martin Rees has written,
: &quot;Skeptics about exotic physics might not be hugely impressed by a theoretical argument to explain the absence of particles that are themselves only hypothetical. Preventive medicine can readily seem 100 percent effective against a disease that doesn&#x27;t exist!&quot;

==History==

===Precursors===
In the early days of general relativity, Albert Einstein introduced the cosmological constant to allow a static solution, which was a three-dimensional sphere with a uniform density of matter. Later, Willem de Sitter found a highly symmetric inflating universe, which described a universe with a cosmological constant that is otherwise empty. It was discovered that Einstein&#x27;s universe is unstable, and that small fluctuations cause it to collapse or turn into a de Sitter universe.

In 1965, Erast Gliner proposed a unique assumption regarding the early Universe&#x27;s pressure in the context of the Einstein–Friedmann equations. According to his idea, the pressure was negatively proportional to the energy density. This relationship between pressure and energy density served as the initial theoretical prediction of dark energy.

In the early 1970s, Yakov Zeldovich noticed the flatness and horizon problems of Big Bang cosmology; before his work, cosmology was presumed to be symmetrical on purely philosophical grounds. In the Soviet Union, this and other considerations led Vladimir Belinski and Isaak Khalatnikov to analyze the chaotic BKL singularity in general relativity. Misner&#x27;s Mixmaster universe attempted to use this chaotic behavior to solve the cosmological problems, with limited success.

====False vacuum====

In the late 1970s, Sidney Coleman applied the instanton techniques developed by Alexander Polyakov and collaborators to study the fate of the false vacuum in quantum field theory. Like a metastable phase in statistical mechanics—water below the freezing temperature or above the boiling point—a quantum field would need to nucleate a large enough bubble of the new vacuum, the new phase, in order to make a transition. Coleman found the most likely decay pathway for vacuum decay and calculated the inverse lifetime per unit volume. He eventually noted that gravitational effects would be significant, but he did not calculate these effects and did not apply the results to cosmology.

The universe could have been spontaneously created from nothing (no space, time, nor matter) by quantum fluctuations of metastable false vacuum causing an expanding bubble of true vacuum.

====The Causal Universe of Brout Englert and Gunzig====
In 1978 and 1979, Robert Brout, François Englert and Edgard Gunzig suggested that the universe could originate from a fluctuation of Minkowski space which would be followed by a period in which the geometry would resemble De Sitter space.
This initial period would then evolve into the standard expanding universe. They noted that their proposal makes the universe causal, as there are neither particle nor event horizons in their model. 
====Starobinsky inflation====

In the Soviet Union, Alexei Starobinsky noted that quantum corrections to general relativity should be important for the early universe. These generically lead to curvature-squared corrections to the Einstein–Hilbert action and a form of modified gravity. The solution to Einstein&#x27;s equations in the presence of curvature squared terms, when the curvatures are large, leads to an effective cosmological constant. Therefore, he proposed that the early universe went through an inflationary de Sitter era. This resolved the cosmology problems and led to specific predictions for the corrections to the microwave background radiation, corrections that were then calculated in detail. Starobinsky used the action 
:formula_2
which corresponds to the potential
:formula_3
in the Einstein frame. This results in the observables: formula_4

====Monopole problem====
In 1978, Zeldovich noted the magnetic monopole problem, which was an unambiguous quantitative version of the horizon problem, this time in a subfield of particle physics, which led to several speculative attempts to resolve it. In 1980, Alan Guth realized that false vacuum decay in the early universe would solve the problem, leading him to propose a scalar-driven inflation. Starobinsky&#x27;s and Guth&#x27;s scenarios both predicted an initial de Sitter phase, differing only in mechanistic details.

===Early inflationary models===

Guth proposed inflation in January 1981 to explain the nonexistence of magnetic monopoles; it was Guth who coined the term &quot;inflation&quot;. At the same time, Starobinsky argued that quantum corrections to gravity would replace the supposed initial singularity of the Universe with an exponentially expanding de Sitter phase. In October 1980, Demosthenes Kazanas suggested that exponential expansion could eliminate the particle horizon and perhaps solve the horizon problem, while Katsuhiko Sato suggested that an exponential expansion could eliminate domain walls (another kind of exotic relic). In 1981, Einhorn and Sato published a model similar to Guth&#x27;s and showed that it would resolve the puzzle of the magnetic monopole abundance in Grand Unified Theories. Like Guth, they concluded that such a model not only required fine tuning of the cosmological constant, but also would likely lead to a much too granular universe, i.e., to large density variations resulting from bubble wall collisions.

Guth proposed that as the early universe cooled, it was trapped in a false vacuum with a high energy density, which is much like a cosmological constant. As the very early universe cooled it was trapped in a metastable state (it was supercooled), which it could only decay out of through the process of bubble nucleation via quantum tunneling. Bubbles of true vacuum spontaneously form in the sea of false vacuum and rapidly begin expanding at the speed of light. Guth recognized that this model was problematic because the model did not reheat properly: when the bubbles nucleated, they did not generate radiation. Radiation could only be generated in collisions between bubble walls. But if inflation lasted long enough to solve the initial conditions problems, collisions between bubbles became exceedingly rare. In any one causal patch it is likely that only one bubble would nucleate.

===Slow-roll inflation===
The bubble collision problem was solved by Andrei Linde and independently by Andreas Albrecht and Paul Steinhardt in a model named &quot;new inflation&quot; or &quot;slow-roll inflation&quot; (Guth&#x27;s model then became known as &quot;old inflation&quot;). In this model, instead of tunneling out of a false vacuum state, inflation occurred by a scalar field rolling down a potential energy hill. When the field rolls very slowly compared to the expansion of the Universe, inflation occurs. However, when the hill becomes steeper, inflation ends and reheating can occur.

===Effects of asymmetries===

Eventually, it was shown that new inflation does not produce a perfectly symmetric universe, but that quantum fluctuations in the inflaton are created. These fluctuations form the primordial seeds for all structure created in the later universe. These fluctuations were first calculated by Viatcheslav Mukhanov and G. V. Chibisov in analyzing Starobinsky&#x27;s similar model. In the context of inflation, they were worked out independently of the work of Mukhanov and Chibisov at the three-week 1982 Nuffield Workshop on the Very Early Universe at Cambridge University. The fluctuations were calculated by four groups working separately over the course of the workshop: Stephen Hawking; Starobinsky; Alan Guth and So-Young Pi; and James Bardeen, Paul Steinhardt and Michael Turner.

==Observational status==
Inflation is a mechanism for realizing the cosmological principle, which is the basis of the standard model of physical cosmology: it accounts for the homogeneity and isotropy of the observable universe. In addition, it accounts for the observed flatness and absence of magnetic monopoles. Since Guth&#x27;s early work, each of these observations has received further confirmation, most impressively by the detailed observations of the cosmic microwave background made by the Planck spacecraft. This analysis shows that the Universe is flat to within percent, and that it is homogeneous and isotropic to one part in 100,000.

Inflation predicts that the structures visible in the Universe today formed through the gravitational collapse of perturbations that were formed as quantum mechanical fluctuations in the inflationary epoch. The detailed form of the spectrum of perturbations, called a nearly-scale-invariant Gaussian random field is very specific and has only two free parameters. One is the amplitude of the spectrum and the &quot;spectral index&quot;, which measures the slight deviation from scale invariance predicted by inflation (perfect scale invariance corresponds to the idealized de Sitter universe).
The other free parameter is the tensor to scalar ratio. The simplest inflation models, those without fine-tuning, predict a tensor to scalar ratio near 0.1 .

Inflation predicts that the observed perturbations should be in thermal equilibrium with each other (these are called &quot;adiabatic&quot; or &quot;isentropic&quot; perturbations). This structure for the perturbations has been confirmed by the Planck spacecraft, WMAP spacecraft and other cosmic microwave background (CMB) experiments, and galaxy surveys, especially the ongoing Sloan Digital Sky Survey. These experiments have shown that the one part in 100,000 inhomogeneities observed have exactly the form predicted by theory. There is evidence for a slight deviation from scale invariance. The &quot;spectral index&quot;, is one for a scale-invariant Harrison–Zel&#x27;dovich spectrum. The simplest inflation models predict that is between 0.92 and 0.98 . This is the range that is possible without fine-tuning of the parameters related to energy. From Planck data it can be inferred that =0.968 ± 0.006, and a tensor to scalar ratio that is less than 0.11 . These are considered an important confirmation of the theory of inflation.

Various inflation theories have been proposed that make radically different predictions, but they generally have much more fine-tuning than should be necessary. As a physical model, however, inflation is most valuable in that it robustly predicts the initial conditions of the Universe based on only two adjustable parameters: the spectral index (that can only change in a small range) and the amplitude of the perturbations. Except in contrived models, this is true regardless of how inflation is realized in particle physics.

Occasionally, effects are observed that appear to contradict the simplest models of inflation. The first-year WMAP data suggested that the spectrum might not be nearly scale-invariant, but might instead have a slight curvature. However, the third-year data revealed that the effect was a statistical anomaly. Another effect remarked upon since the first cosmic microwave background satellite, the Cosmic Background Explorer is that the amplitude of the quadrupole moment of the CMB is unexpectedly low and the other low multipoles appear to be preferentially aligned with the ecliptic plane. Some have claimed that this is a signature of non-Gaussianity and thus contradicts the simplest models of inflation. Others have suggested that the effect may be due to other new physics, foreground contamination, or even publication bias.

An experimental program is underway to further test inflation with more precise CMB measurements. In particular, high precision measurements of the so-called &quot;B-modes&quot; of the polarization of the background radiation could provide evidence of the gravitational radiation produced by inflation, and could also show whether the energy scale of inflation predicted by the simplest models (~ GeV) is correct. In March 2014, the BICEP2 team announced B-mode CMB polarization confirming inflation had been demonstrated. The team announced the tensor-to-scalar power ratio was between 0.15 and 0.27 (rejecting the null hypothesis; is expected to be 0 in the absence of inflation). However, on 19 June 2014, lowered confidence in confirming the findings was reported; on 19 September 2014, a further reduction in confidence was reported and, on 30 January 2015, even less confidence yet was reported. By 2018, additional data suggested, with 95% confidence, that formula_5 is 0.06 or lower: Consistent with the null hypothesis, but still also consistent with many remaining models of inflation.

Other potentially corroborating measurements are expected from the Planck spacecraft, although it is unclear if the signal will be visible, or if contamination from foreground sources will interfere.
Other forthcoming measurements, such as those of 21 centimeter radiation (radiation emitted and absorbed from neutral hydrogen before the first stars formed), may measure the power spectrum with even greater resolution than the CMB and galaxy surveys, although it is not known if these measurements will be possible or if interference with radio sources on Earth and in the galaxy will be too great.

==Theoretical status==

In Guth&#x27;s early proposal, it was thought that the inflaton was the Higgs field, the field that explains the mass of the elementary particles. It is now believed by some that the inflaton cannot be the Higgs field. One problem of this identification is the current tension with experimental data at the electroweak scale. Other models of inflation relied on the properties of Grand Unified Theories.

===Fine-tuning problem===
One of the most severe challenges for inflation arises from the need for fine tuning. In new inflation, the &quot;slow-roll conditions&quot; must be satisfied for inflation to occur. The slow-roll conditions say that the inflaton potential must be flat (compared to the large vacuum energy) and that the inflaton particles must have a small mass.
New inflation requires the Universe to have a scalar field with an especially flat potential and special initial conditions. However, explanations for these fine-tunings have been proposed. For example, classically scale invariant field theories, where scale invariance is broken by quantum effects, provide an explanation of the flatness of inflationary potentials, as long as the theory can be studied through perturbation theory.

Linde proposed a theory known as &quot;chaotic inflation&quot; in which he suggested that the conditions for inflation were actually satisfied quite generically. Inflation will occur in virtually any universe that begins in a chaotic, high energy state that has a scalar field with unbounded potential energy.
However, in his model, the inflaton field necessarily takes values larger than one Planck unit: For this reason, these are often called &quot;large field&quot; models and the competing new inflation models are called &quot;small field&quot; models. In this situation, the predictions of effective field theory are thought to be invalid, as renormalization should cause large corrections that could prevent inflation.
This problem has not yet been resolved and some cosmologists argue that the small field models, in which inflation can occur at a much lower energy scale, are better models.
While inflation depends on quantum field theory (and the semiclassical approximation to quantum gravity) in an important way, it has not been completely reconciled with these theories.

Brandenberger commented on fine-tuning in another situation.
The amplitude of the primordial inhomogeneities produced in inflation is directly tied to the energy scale of inflation. This scale is suggested to be around GeV or times the Planck energy. The natural scale is naïvely the Planck scale so this small value could be seen as another form of fine-tuning (called a hierarchy problem): The energy density given by the scalar potential is down by compared to the Planck density. This is not usually considered to be a critical problem, however, because the scale of inflation corresponds naturally to the scale of gauge unification.

===Eternal inflation===
In many models, the inflationary phase of the Universe&#x27;s expansion lasts forever in at least some regions of the Universe. This occurs because inflating regions expand very rapidly, reproducing themselves. Unless the rate of decay to the non-inflating phase is sufficiently fast, new inflating regions are produced more rapidly than non-inflating regions. In such models, most of the volume of the Universe is continuously inflating at any given time.

All models of eternal inflation produce an infinite, hypothetical multiverse, typically a fractal. The multiverse theory has created significant dissension in the scientific community about the viability of the inflationary model.

Paul Steinhardt, one of the original architects of the inflationary model, introduced the first example of eternal inflation in 1983. He showed that the inflation could proceed forever by producing bubbles of non-inflating space filled with hot matter and radiation surrounded by empty space that continues to inflate. The bubbles could not grow fast enough to keep up with the inflation. Later that same year, Alexander Vilenkin showed that eternal inflation is generic.

Although new inflation is classically rolling down the potential, quantum fluctuations can sometimes lift it to previous levels. These regions in which the inflaton fluctuates upwards, expand much faster than regions in which the inflaton has a lower potential energy, and tend to dominate in terms of physical volume. It has been shown that any inflationary theory with an unbounded potential is eternal. There are well-known theorems that this steady state cannot continue forever into the past. Inflationary spacetime, which is similar to de Sitter space, is incomplete without a contracting region. However, unlike de Sitter space, fluctuations in a contracting inflationary space collapse to form a gravitational singularity, a point where densities become infinite. Therefore, it is necessary to have a theory for the Universe&#x27;s initial conditions.

In eternal inflation, regions with inflation have an exponentially growing volume, while regions that are not inflating do not. This suggests that the volume of the inflating part of the Universe in the global picture is always unimaginably larger than the part that has stopped inflating, even though inflation eventually ends as seen by any single pre-inflationary observer. Scientists disagree about how to assign a probability distribution to this hypothetical anthropic landscape. If the probability of different regions is counted by volume, one should expect that inflation will never end or applying boundary conditions that a local observer exists to observe it, that inflation will end as late as possible.

Some physicists believe this paradox can be resolved by weighting observers by their pre-inflationary volume. Others believe that there is no resolution to the paradox and that the multiverse is a critical flaw in the inflationary paradigm. Paul Steinhardt, who first introduced the eternal inflationary model, later became one of its most vocal critics for this reason.

===Initial conditions===
Some physicists have tried to avoid the initial conditions problem by proposing models for an eternally inflating universe with no origin. These models propose that while the Universe, on the largest scales, expands exponentially it was, is and always will be, spatially infinite and has existed, and will exist, forever.

Other proposals attempt to describe the ex nihilo creation of the Universe based on quantum cosmology and the following inflation. Vilenkin put forth one such scenario. Hartle and Hawking offered the no-boundary proposal for the initial creation of the Universe in which inflation comes about naturally.

Guth described the inflationary universe as the &quot;ultimate free lunch&quot;: new universes, similar to our own, are continually produced in a vast inflating background. Gravitational interactions, in this case, circumvent (but do not violate) the first law of thermodynamics (energy conservation) and the second law of thermodynamics (entropy and the arrow of time problem). However, while there is consensus that this solves the initial conditions problem, some have disputed this, as it is much more likely that the Universe came about by a quantum fluctuation. Don Page was an outspoken critic of inflation because of this anomaly. He stressed that the thermodynamic arrow of time necessitates low entropy initial conditions, which would be highly unlikely. According to them, rather than solving this problem, the inflation theory aggravates it – the reheating at the end of the inflation era increases entropy, making it necessary for the initial state of the Universe to be even more orderly than in other Big Bang theories with no inflation phase.

Hawking and Page later found ambiguous results when they attempted to compute the probability of inflation in the Hartle–Hawking initial state. Other authors have argued that, since inflation is eternal, the probability doesn&#x27;t matter as long as it is not precisely zero: once it starts, inflation perpetuates itself and quickly dominates the Universe. However, Albrecht and Lorenzo Sorbo argued that the probability of an inflationary cosmos, consistent with today&#x27;s observations, emerging by a random fluctuation from some pre-existent state is much higher than that of a non-inflationary cosmos. This is because the &quot;seed&quot; amount of non-gravitational energy required for the inflationary cosmos is so much less than that for a non-inflationary alternative, which outweighs any entropic considerations.

Another problem that has occasionally been mentioned is the trans-Planckian problem or trans-Planckian effects. Since the energy scale of inflation and the Planck scale are relatively close, some of the quantum fluctuations that have made up the structure in our universe were smaller than the Planck length before inflation. Therefore, there ought to be corrections from Planck-scale physics, in particular the unknown quantum theory of gravity. Some disagreement remains about the magnitude of this effect: about whether it is just on the threshold of detectability or completely undetectable.

===Hybrid inflation===
Another kind of inflation, called &quot;hybrid inflation&quot;, is an extension of new inflation. It introduces additional scalar fields, so that while one of the scalar fields is responsible for normal slow roll inflation, another triggers the end of inflation: when inflation has continued for sufficiently long, it becomes favorable to the second field to decay into a much lower energy state.

In hybrid inflation, one scalar field is responsible for most of the energy density (thus determining the rate of expansion), while another is responsible for the slow roll (thus determining the period of inflation and its termination). Thus fluctuations in the former inflaton would not affect inflation termination, while fluctuations in the latter would not affect the rate of expansion. Therefore, hybrid inflation is not eternal. When the second (slow-rolling) inflaton reaches the bottom of its potential, it changes the location of the minimum of the first inflaton&#x27;s potential, which leads to a fast roll of the inflaton down its potential, leading to termination of inflation.

===Relation to dark energy===
Dark energy is broadly similar to inflation and is thought to be causing the expansion of the present-day universe to accelerate. However, the energy scale of dark energy is much lower,  GeV, roughly 27 orders of magnitude less than the scale of inflation.

===Inflation and string cosmology===
The discovery of flux compactifications opened the way for reconciling inflation and string theory. &quot;Brane inflation&quot; suggests that inflation arises from the motion of D-branes in the compactified geometry, usually towards a stack of anti-D-branes. This theory, governed by the &quot;Dirac–Born–Infeld action&quot;, is different from ordinary inflation. The dynamics are not completely understood. It appears that special conditions are necessary since inflation occurs in tunneling between two vacua in the string landscape. The process of tunneling between two vacua is a form of old inflation, but new inflation must then occur by some other mechanism.

===Inflation and loop quantum gravity===
When investigating the effects the theory of loop quantum gravity would have on cosmology, a loop quantum cosmology model has evolved that provides a possible mechanism for cosmological inflation. Loop quantum gravity assumes a quantized spacetime. If the energy density is larger than can be held by the quantized spacetime, it is thought to bounce back.

==Alternatives and adjuncts==
Other models have been advanced that are claimed to explain some or all of the observations addressed by inflation.

=== Big bounce ===
The big bounce hypothesis attempts to replace the cosmic singularity with a cosmic contraction and bounce, thereby explaining the initial conditions that led to the big bang. The flatness and horizon problems are naturally solved in the Einstein–Cartan–Sciama–Kibble theory of gravity, without needing an exotic form of matter or free parameters. This theory extends general relativity by removing a constraint of the symmetry of the affine connection and regarding its antisymmetric part, the torsion tensor, as a dynamical variable. The minimal coupling between torsion and Dirac spinors generates a spin-spin interaction that is significant in fermionic matter at extremely high densities. Such an interaction averts the unphysical Big Bang singularity, replacing it with a cusp-like bounce at a finite minimum scale factor, before which the Universe was contracting. The rapid expansion immediately after the Big Bounce explains why the present Universe at largest scales appears spatially flat, homogeneous and isotropic. As the density of the Universe decreases, the effects of torsion weaken and the Universe smoothly enters the radiation-dominated era.

=== Ekpyrotic and cyclic models ===
The ekpyrotic and cyclic models are also considered adjuncts to inflation. These models solve the horizon problem through an expanding epoch well &quot;before&quot; the Big Bang, and then generate the required spectrum of primordial density perturbations during a contracting phase leading to a Big Crunch. The Universe passes through the Big Crunch and emerges in a hot Big Bang phase. In this sense they are reminiscent of Richard Chace Tolman&#x27;s oscillatory universe; in Tolman&#x27;s model, however, the total age of the Universe is necessarily finite, while in these models this is not necessarily so. Whether the correct spectrum of density fluctuations can be produced, and whether the Universe can successfully navigate the Big Bang/Big Crunch transition, remains a topic of controversy and current research. Ekpyrotic models avoid the magnetic monopole problem as long as the temperature at the Big Crunch/Big Bang transition remains below the Grand Unified Scale, as this is the temperature required to produce magnetic monopoles in the first place. As things stand, there is no evidence of any &#x27;slowing down&#x27; of the expansion, but this is not surprising as each cycle is expected to last on the order of a trillion years.

=== String gas cosmology ===
String theory requires that, in addition to the three observable spatial dimensions, additional dimensions exist that are curled up or compactified (see also Kaluza–Klein theory). Extra dimensions appear as a frequent component of supergravity models and other approaches to quantum gravity. This raised the contingent question of why four space-time dimensions became large and the rest became unobservably small. An attempt to address this question, called &quot;string gas cosmology&quot;, was proposed by Robert Brandenberger and Cumrun Vafa. This model focuses on the dynamics of the early universe considered as a hot gas of strings. Brandenberger and Vafa show that a dimension of spacetime can only expand if the strings that wind around it can efficiently annihilate each other. Each string is a one-dimensional object, and the largest number of dimensions in which two strings will generically intersect (and, presumably, annihilate) is three. Therefore, the most likely number of non-compact (large) spatial dimensions is three. Current work on this model centers on whether it can succeed in stabilizing the size of the compactified dimensions and produce the correct spectrum of primordial density perturbations. The original model did not &quot;solve the entropy and flatness problems of standard cosmology&quot;, although Brandenburger and coauthors later argued that these problems can be eliminated by implementing string gas cosmology in the context of a bouncing-universe scenario.

=== Varying &quot;c&quot; ===

Cosmological models employing a variable speed of light have been proposed to resolve the horizon problem of and provide an alternative to cosmic inflation. In the VSL models, the fundamental constant &quot;c&quot;, denoting the speed of light in vacuum, is greater in the early universe than its present value, effectively increasing the particle horizon at the time of decoupling sufficiently to account for the observed isotropy of the CMB.

==Criticisms==
Since its introduction by Alan Guth in 1980, the inflationary paradigm has become widely accepted. Nevertheless, many physicists, mathematicians, and philosophers of science have voiced criticisms, claiming untestable predictions and a lack of serious empirical support. In 1999, John Earman and Jesús Mosterín published a thorough critical review of inflationary cosmology, concluding,
: &quot;we do not think that there are, as yet, good grounds for admitting any of the models of inflation into the standard core of cosmology.&quot;

As pointed out by Roger Penrose from 1986 on, in order to work, inflation requires extremely specific initial conditions of its own, so that the problem (or pseudo-problem) of initial conditions is not solved:
: &quot;There is something fundamentally misconceived about trying to explain the uniformity of the early universe as resulting from a thermalization process. ... For, if the thermalization is actually doing anything ... then it represents a definite increasing of the entropy. Thus, the universe would have been even more special before the thermalization than after.&quot;

The problem of specific or &quot;fine-tuned&quot; initial conditions would not have been solved; it would have gotten worse. At a conference in 2015, Penrose said that
: &quot;inflation isn&#x27;t falsifiable, it&#x27;s falsified. ... BICEP did a wonderful service by bringing all the inflation-ists out of their shell, and giving them a black eye.&quot;

A recurrent criticism of inflation is that the invoked inflaton field does not correspond to any known physical field, and that its potential energy curve seems to be an ad hoc contrivance to accommodate almost any data obtainable. Paul Steinhardt, one of the founding fathers of inflationary cosmology, calls &#x27;bad inflation&#x27; a period of accelerated expansion whose outcome conflicts with observations, and &#x27;good inflation&#x27; one compatible with them:
: &quot;Not only is bad inflation more likely than good inflation, but no inflation is more likely than either ... Roger Penrose considered all the possible configurations of the inflaton and gravitational fields. Some of these configurations lead to inflation ... Other configurations lead to a uniform, flat universe directly – without inflation. Obtaining a flat universe is unlikely overall. Penrose&#x27;s shocking conclusion, though, was that obtaining a flat universe without inflation is much more likely than with inflation – by a factor of 10 to the googol power!&quot;
Together with Anna Ijjas and Abraham Loeb, he wrote articles claiming that the inflationary paradigm is in trouble in view of the data from the Planck satellite.

Counter-arguments were presented by Alan Guth, David Kaiser, and Yasunori Nomura and by Linde, saying that
: &quot;cosmic inflation is on a stronger footing than ever before&quot;.

==See also==

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* Was Cosmic Inflation The &#x27;Bang&#x27; Of The Big Bang?, by Alan Guth, 1997
* update 2004 by Andrew Liddle
* 
* The Growth of Inflation &quot;Symmetry&quot;, December 2004
* Guth&#x27;s logbook showing the original idea
* WMAP Bolsters Case for Cosmic Inflation, March 2006
* NASA March 2006 WMAP press release 
* Max Tegmark. &quot;Our Mathematical Universe&quot; (2014), &quot;Chapter 5: Inflation&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="3" end="21" title="physical cosmology" label="physical cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="23" end="39" title="Cosmic inflation" label="cosmic inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="41" end="63" title="Cosmic inflation" label="cosmological inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="73" end="82" title="Cosmic inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="111" end="129" title="expansion of the universe" label="expansion of space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="148" end="156" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="302" end="313" title="dark energy" label="dark energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="508" end="530" title="theoretical physics" label="theoretical physicists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643921" start="542" end="560" title="Alexei Starobinsky" label="Alexei Starobinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q688932" start="564" end="604" title="Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics" label="Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q323316" start="606" end="615" title="Alan Guth" label="Alan Guth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="619" end="637" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q368087" start="643" end="655" title="Andrei Linde" label="Andrei Linde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810862" start="659" end="685" title="Lebedev Physical Institute" label="Lebedev Physical Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094530" start="729" end="740" title="Kavli Prize" label="Kavli Prize"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="875" end="910" title="Observable universe#Large-scale structure" label="large-scale structure of the cosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193821" start="912" end="931" title="Quantum fluctuation" label="Quantum fluctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995140" start="1065" end="1095" title="galaxy formation and evolution" label="galaxy formation and evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914363" start="1100" end="1119" title="structure formation" label="structure formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q273163" start="1234" end="1243" title="isotropic" label="isotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="1254" end="1281" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="1282" end="1291" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647152" start="1335" end="1339" title="flat universe" label="flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q219708" start="1352" end="1369" title="magnetic monopole" label="magnetic monopole"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="1405" end="1421" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q274106" start="1707" end="1711" title="WMAP" label="WMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q185674" start="1831" end="1836" title="field (physics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576923" start="1891" end="1899" title="inflaton" label="inflaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q323316" start="2016" end="2025" title="Alan Guth" label="Alan Guth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="2029" end="2035" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="M.I.T."/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="2053" end="2061" title="Stanford" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q964294" start="2067" end="2082" title="Paul Steinhardt" label="Paul Steinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="2086" end="2095" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20049851" start="2107" end="2118" title="Dirac Medal (ICTP)" label="Dirac Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314470" start="2230" end="2271" title="Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics" label="Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="2365" end="2377" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="2425" end="2433" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129469" start="2635" end="2660" title="expansion of the universe" label="expansion of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q205981" start="2689" end="2708" title="Alexander Friedmann" label="Alexander Friedmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q12998" start="2713" end="2729" title="Georges Lemaître" label="Georges Lemaître"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="2749" end="2767" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q467736" start="3055" end="3074" title="Friedmann equations" label="Friedmann equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q613845" start="3130" end="3135" title="perfect fluid" label="fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q185674" start="3234" end="3239" title="field (physics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538708" start="3261" end="3273" title="false vacuum" label="false vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q323316" start="3449" end="3458" title="Alan Guth" label="Alan Guth"/>
<link wikidata="Q219708" start="3537" end="3555" title="magnetic monopoles" label="magnetic monopoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q382037" start="3580" end="3602" title="grand unified theories" label="grand unified theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q590581" start="3740" end="3755" title="horizon problem" label="horizon problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078326" start="3764" end="3780" title="flatness problem" label="flatness problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401749" start="3905" end="3917" title="fine tuned universe" label="finely tuned"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4031" end="4051" title="Cosmological horizon#Cosmological horizon" label="cosmological horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43261" start="4094" end="4101" title="horizon" label="horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="4129" end="4134" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049613" start="4308" end="4329" title="accelerating expansion of the universe" label="accelerating universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="4446" end="4465" title="observable universe" label="observable universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137903" start="5431" end="5441" title="light cone" label="light cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q59151" start="5566" end="5587" title="cosmological constant" label="cosmological constant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5759" end="5779" title="Observable universe#Horizons" label="cosmological horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="6840" end="6851" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143773" start="6865" end="6878" title="vacuum energy" label="vacuum energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q467736" start="6917" end="6933" title="Critical density (cosmology)" label="critical density"/>
<link wikidata="Q742969" start="7568" end="7592" title="Schwarzschild metric" label="Schwarzschild black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q757269" start="8058" end="8064" title="metric tensor" label="metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179448" start="8130" end="8145" title="de Sitter space" label="de Sitter space"/>
<link wikidata="Q59151" start="8181" end="8202" title="cosmological constant" label="cosmological constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="8206" end="8219" title="dark energy" label="vacuum energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653702" start="8469" end="8486" title="Equation of state (cosmology)" label="equation of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q904929" start="8944" end="8959" title="homogeneity (physics)" label="inhomogeneities"/>
<link wikidata="Q466686" start="8964" end="8976" title="anisotropy" label="anisotropies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647152" start="8994" end="9012" title="shape of the universe" label="curvature of space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576923" start="9107" end="9115" title="inflaton" label="inflaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193821" start="9172" end="9191" title="quantum fluctuation" label="quantum fluctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q219708" start="9253" end="9270" title="magnetic monopole" label="magnetic monopole"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="9308" end="9322" title="Standard Model" label="Standard Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="9326" end="9342" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="9559" end="9578" title="observable universe" label="observable universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376515" start="9680" end="9695" title="no hair theorem" label="no hair theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="9700" end="9710" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q828402" start="10078" end="10094" title="energy density" label="energy densities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="10465" end="10471" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="10486" end="10494" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10662" end="10748" title="Equation of state (cosmology)#Ultra-relativistic matter" label="the solution of the energy density continuity equation for an ultra-relativistic fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="11751" end="11765" title="Standard Model" label="Standard Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="11787" end="11812" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332997" start="11827" end="11852" title="radiation-dominated era" label="radiation dominated phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632607" start="12014" end="12034" title="parametric oscillator" label="parametric resonance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12080" end="12096" title="Big Bang#Problems" label="several problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="12100" end="12108" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q219708" start="12246" end="12264" title="magnetic monopoles" label="magnetic monopoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538708" start="12313" end="12325" title="false vacuum" label="false vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="12346" end="12364" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401749" start="12643" end="12655" title="fine tuned universe" label="finely tuned"/>
<link wikidata="Q590581" start="12961" end="12976" title="horizon problem" label="horizon problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q319903" start="13095" end="13117" title="cosmological principle" label="cosmological principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="13554" end="13560" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="13565" end="13574" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="13741" end="13755" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q12600589" start="13786" end="13800" title="causal contact" label="causal contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304023" start="14131" end="14151" title="oscillatory universe" label="oscillatory universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q714440" start="14155" end="14175" title="Richard Chase Tolman" label="Richard Chase Tolman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551264" start="14185" end="14203" title="Mixmaster universe" label="Mixmaster universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q364238" start="14207" end="14221" title="Charles Misner" label="Charles Misner"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="14420" end="14427" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078326" start="14660" end="14676" title="flatness problem" label="flatness problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q504473" start="14708" end="14713" title="Robert H. Dicke" label="Dicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379531" start="14743" end="14772" title="cosmological constant problem" label="cosmological constant problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q467736" start="14869" end="14885" title="Critical density (cosmology)" label="critical density"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="14955" end="14963" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q162886" start="14977" end="14995" title="Euclidean geometry" label="Euclidean geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q233858" start="15011" end="15024" title="non-Euclidean geometry" label="non-Euclidean"/>
<link wikidata="Q209306" start="15025" end="15035" title="hyperbolic geometry" label="hyperbolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q326905" start="15039" end="15057" title="spherical geometry" label="spherical geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647152" start="15090" end="15111" title="shape of the universe" label="shape of the universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="15286" end="15294" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828883" start="15384" end="15395" title="Fine-tuning (physics)" label="fine-tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q837317" start="15553" end="15577" title="Big Bang nucleosynthesis" label="Big Bang nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q382037" start="15787" end="15809" title="Grand Unified Theory" label="Grand Unified Theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="15888" end="15909" title="electromagnetic force" label="electromagnetic force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11415" start="15911" end="15917" title="strong nuclear force" label="strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11418" start="15923" end="15927" title="weak nuclear force" label="weak"/>
<link wikidata="Q749467" start="15928" end="15941" title="nuclear force" label="nuclear force"/>
<link wikidata="Q736716" start="15996" end="16025" title="spontaneous symmetry breaking" label="spontaneous symmetry breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="16040" end="16052" title="gauge theory" label="gauge theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q335213" start="16978" end="16989" title="Martin Rees" label="Martin Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="17332" end="17350" title="General Relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="17352" end="17367" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q59151" start="17383" end="17404" title="cosmological constant" label="cosmological constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190516" start="17416" end="17431" title="Einstein static universe" label="static solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274197" start="17445" end="17469" title="3-sphere" label="three-dimensional sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q313059" start="17511" end="17527" title="Willem de Sitter" label="Willem de Sitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q366471" start="18171" end="18186" title="Yakov Zeldovich" label="Yakov Zeldovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q23956" start="18398" end="18415" title="Vladimir Belinski" label="Vladimir Belinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q780498" start="18420" end="18437" title="Isaak Khalatnikov" label="Isaak Khalatnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484987" start="18461" end="18476" title="BKL singularity" label="BKL singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551264" start="18514" end="18532" title="Mixmaster universe" label="Mixmaster universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357688" start="18672" end="18686" title="Sidney Coleman" label="Sidney Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192916" start="18699" end="18708" title="instanton" label="instanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q277221" start="18733" end="18751" title="Alexander Markovich Polyakov" label="Alexander Polyakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538708" start="18795" end="18807" title="false vacuum" label="false vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="18811" end="18831" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="18860" end="18881" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="19407" end="19412" title="space" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="19414" end="19418" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="19424" end="19430" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193821" start="19435" end="19454" title="quantum fluctuation" label="quantum fluctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q151833" start="19602" end="19614" title="Robert Brout" label="Robert Brout"/>
<link wikidata="Q151746" start="19616" end="19632" title="François Englert" label="François Englert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643921" start="20075" end="20093" title="Alexei Starobinsky" label="Alexei Starobinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q239224" start="20254" end="20277" title="Einstein–Hilbert action" label="Einstein–Hilbert action"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266751" start="20292" end="20308" title="f(R) gravity" label="modified gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482717" start="21881" end="21897" title="particle horizon" label="particle horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11383763" start="21943" end="21957" title="Katsuhiko Sato (physicist)" label="Katsuhiko Sato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289836" start="22014" end="22026" title="Domain wall (string theory)" label="domain walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q219708" start="22177" end="22194" title="magnetic monopole" label="magnetic monopole"/>
<link wikidata="Q849516" start="22678" end="22688" title="metastability" label="metastable"/>
<link wikidata="Q909022" start="22773" end="22790" title="nucleation" label="bubble nucleation"/>
<link wikidata="Q175751" start="22795" end="22812" title="quantum tunneling" label="quantum tunneling"/>
<link wikidata="Q766202" start="22825" end="22836" title="vacuum state" label="true vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="22918" end="22932" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q368087" start="23430" end="23442" title="Andrei Linde" label="Andrei Linde"/>
<link wikidata="Q495718" start="23464" end="23480" title="Andreas Albrecht (cosmologist)" label="Andreas Albrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q964294" start="23485" end="23500" title="Paul Steinhardt" label="Paul Steinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q193460" start="23736" end="23748" title="scalar field" label="scalar field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844592" start="24282" end="24302" title="Viatcheslav Mukhanov" label="Viatcheslav Mukhanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="24541" end="24561" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17714" start="24663" end="24678" title="Stephen Hawking" label="Stephen Hawking"/>
<link wikidata="Q323316" start="24693" end="24702" title="Alan Guth" label="Alan Guth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17314933" start="24707" end="24718" title="So-Young Pi" label="So-Young Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161262" start="24724" end="24737" title="James M. Bardeen" label="James Bardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q964294" start="24739" end="24754" title="Paul Steinhardt" label="Paul Steinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372347" start="24759" end="24773" title="Michael Turner (cosmologist)" label="Michael Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q319903" start="24844" end="24866" title="cosmological principle" label="cosmological principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15605" start="25237" end="25264" title="cosmic microwave background" label="cosmic microwave background"/>
<link wikidata="Q725309" start="25277" end="25294" title="Planck (spacecraft)" label="Planck spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q329273" start="25515" end="25537" title="gravitational collapse" label="gravitational collapse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25695" end="25717" title="Scale invariance#Cosmology" label="nearly-scale-invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527848" start="25718" end="25739" title="Gaussian random field" label="Gaussian random field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280060" start="25842" end="25856" title="spectral index" label="spectral index"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036474" start="26000" end="26018" title="de Sitter universe" label="de Sitter universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401749" start="26122" end="26133" title="Fine-tuned universe" label="fine-tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758924" start="26145" end="26151" title="Tensor field" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175122" start="26244" end="26263" title="thermal equilibrium" label="thermal equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q182453" start="26304" end="26313" title="adiabatic" label="adiabatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q907271" start="26329" end="26339" title="Isentropic process" label="isentropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q725309" start="26425" end="26442" title="Planck (spacecraft)" label="Planck spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q274106" start="26444" end="26448" title="Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe" label="WMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935817" start="26521" end="26534" title="galaxy survey" label="galaxy survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q840332" start="26560" end="26584" title="Sloan Digital Sky Survey" label="Sloan Digital Sky Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280060" start="26786" end="26800" title="spectral index" label="spectral index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401749" start="26985" end="26996" title="Fine-tuned universe" label="fine-tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758924" start="27097" end="27103" title="Tensor field" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828883" start="27344" end="27355" title="Fine-tuning (physics)" label="fine-tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q274106" start="27860" end="27864" title="Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe" label="WMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q49445" start="28147" end="28173" title="Cosmic Background Explorer" label="Cosmic Background Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121987" start="28203" end="28220" title="quadrupole moment" label="quadrupole moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="28326" end="28340" title="plane of the ecliptic" label="ecliptic plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048759" start="28388" end="28403" title="non-Gaussianity" label="non-Gaussianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q919364" start="28564" end="28580" title="publication bias" label="publication bias"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28768" end="28780" title="Cosmic microwave background radiation#Polarization" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="28839" end="28862" title="gravitational radiation" label="gravitational radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="28980" end="28983" title="GeV" label="GeV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835636" start="29016" end="29022" title="BICEP2" label="BICEP2"/>
<link wikidata="Q628374" start="29199" end="29214" title="null hypothesis" label="null hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q725309" start="29747" end="29764" title="Planck (spacecraft)" label="Planck spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406191" start="29929" end="29952" title="21 centimeter radiation" label="21 centimeter radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436016" start="30018" end="30029" title="population III star" label="first stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="30220" end="30233" title="radio frequency" label="radio sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576923" start="30360" end="30368" title="inflaton" label="inflaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q402" start="30377" end="30388" title="Higgs field" label="Higgs field"/>
<link wikidata="Q466416" start="30612" end="30623" title="Electroweak interaction" label="electroweak"/>
<link wikidata="Q382037" start="30685" end="30707" title="Grand Unified Theory" label="Grand Unified Theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2828883" start="30809" end="30820" title="Fine-tuning (physics)" label="fine tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856609" start="30966" end="30975" title="scalar potential" label="potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q10886678" start="31495" end="31514" title="perturbation theory" label="perturbation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060947" start="31556" end="31573" title="Chaotic inflation theory" label="chaotic inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327819" start="31713" end="31725" title="Multiverse" label="any universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q468999" start="31910" end="31921" title="Planck unit" label="Planck unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q281778" start="32114" end="32136" title="effective field theory" label="effective field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047702" start="32167" end="32182" title="renormalization" label="renormalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775955" start="32475" end="32502" title="semiclassical gravity" label="semiclassical approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q234181" start="32506" end="32521" title="quantum gravity" label="quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342315" start="32604" end="32617" title="Robert Brandenberger" label="Brandenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="32823" end="32826" title="GeV" label="GeV"/>
<link wikidata="Q468999" start="32840" end="32853" title="Planck energy" label="Planck energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q601556" start="32976" end="32993" title="hierarchy problem" label="hierarchy problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q468999" start="33072" end="33086" title="Planck density" label="Planck density"/>
<link wikidata="Q964294" start="33957" end="33972" title="Paul Steinhardt" label="Paul Steinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399445" start="34368" end="34386" title="Alexander Vilenkin" label="Alexander Vilenkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327819" start="36190" end="36200" title="multiverse" label="multiverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q780685" start="36813" end="36830" title="quantum cosmology" label="quantum cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q958793" start="36898" end="36916" title="Hartle–Hawking state" label="Hartle and Hawking"/>
<link wikidata="Q958793" start="36929" end="36949" title="no-boundary proposal" label="no-boundary proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179380" start="37285" end="37312" title="first law of thermodynamics" label="first law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q380170" start="37314" end="37333" title="energy conservation" label="energy conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177045" start="37343" end="37371" title="second law of thermodynamics" label="second law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="37373" end="37380" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186559" start="37389" end="37402" title="arrow of time" label="arrow of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193821" start="37581" end="37600" title="quantum fluctuation" label="quantum fluctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035873" start="37602" end="37610" title="Don Page (physicist)" label="Don Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q186559" start="37708" end="37721" title="arrow of time" label="arrow of time"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="37739" end="37746" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18343" start="40660" end="40671" title="Dark energy" label="Dark energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="40863" end="40882" title="orders of magnitude" label="orders of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40972" end="40993" title="Compactification (physics)#Flux compactification" label="flux compactification"/>
<link wikidata="Q137880" start="41133" end="41140" title="D-brane" label="D-brane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4253887" start="41473" end="41489" title="string landscape" label="string landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q739962" start="41708" end="41728" title="loop quantum gravity" label="loop quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675857" start="41756" end="41778" title="loop quantum cosmology" label="loop quantum cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067602" start="42423" end="42438" title="Einstein–Cartan theory" label="Einstein–Cartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13229797" start="42680" end="42694" title="torsion tensor" label="torsion tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q688945" start="42762" end="42774" title="Dirac spinor" label="Dirac spinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q858624" start="43099" end="43109" title="Big Bounce" label="Big Bounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323473" start="43388" end="43397" title="Ekpyrotic universe" label="ekpyrotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304023" start="43402" end="43414" title="cyclic model" label="cyclic model"/>
<link wikidata="Q590581" start="43482" end="43497" title="horizon problem" label="horizon problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q221037" start="43679" end="43689" title="Big Crunch" label="Big Crunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="43755" end="43763" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q714440" start="43809" end="43829" title="Richard Chace Tolman" label="Richard Chace Tolman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304023" start="43837" end="43857" title="oscillatory universe" label="oscillatory universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q219708" start="44232" end="44249" title="magnetic monopole" label="magnetic monopole"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="44661" end="44674" title="String theory" label="String theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187705" start="44796" end="44808" title="compactification (physics)" label="compactified"/>
<link wikidata="Q944095" start="44819" end="44838" title="Kaluza–Klein theory" label="Kaluza–Klein theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q958871" start="44892" end="44904" title="supergravity" label="supergravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q234181" start="44936" end="44951" title="quantum gravity" label="quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342315" start="45170" end="45190" title="Robert Brandenberger" label="Robert Brandenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143841" start="45195" end="45206" title="Cumrun Vafa" label="Cumrun Vafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="45349" end="45358" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300767" start="45553" end="45574" title="Transversality (mathematics)" label="generically intersect"/>
<link wikidata="Q247276" start="46226" end="46249" title="variable speed of light" label="variable speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="46423" end="46437" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q136407" start="46467" end="46481" title="early universe" label="early universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482717" start="46533" end="46549" title="particle horizon" label="particle horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193803" start="47209" end="47222" title="Roger Penrose" label="Roger Penrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835636" start="48012" end="48017" title="BICEP and Keck Array" label="BICEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q155640" start="48265" end="48281" title="potential energy" label="potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q964294" start="48365" end="48380" title="Paul Steinhardt" label="Paul Steinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q508" start="49153" end="49169" title="googolplex" label="10 to the googol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821842" start="49212" end="49224" title="Abraham Loeb" label="Abraham Loeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q725309" start="49327" end="49343" title="Planck (spacecraft)" label="Planck satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q323316" start="49382" end="49391" title="Alan Guth" label="Alan Guth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235818" start="49393" end="49405" title="David Kaiser (physicist)" label="David Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q11645639" start="49411" end="49426" title="Yasunori Nomura" label="Yasunori Nomura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076321" start="49938" end="49949" title="Max Tegmark" label="Max Tegmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358743" start="49957" end="49982" title="Our Mathematical Universe" label="Our Mathematical Universe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5385" wikidata="Q83216" url="?curid=5385" title="Candela">
<text>The candela (symbol: cd) is the unit of luminous intensity in the International System of Units (SI). It measures luminous power per unit solid angle emitted by a light source in a particular direction. Luminous intensity is analogous to radiant intensity, but instead of simply adding up the contributions of every wavelength of light in the source&#x27;s spectrum, the contribution of each wavelength is weighted by the luminous efficiency function, the model of the sensitivity of the human eye to different wavelengths, standardized by the CIE and ISO. A common wax candle emits light with a luminous intensity of roughly one candela. If emission in some directions is blocked by an opaque barrier, the emission would still be approximately one candela in the directions that are not obscured.

The word &quot;candela&quot; is Latin for &quot;candle&quot;. The old name &quot;candle&quot; is still sometimes used, as in &quot;foot-candle&quot; and the modern definition of &quot;candlepower&quot;.

== Definition ==
The 26th General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) redefined the candela in 2018. The new definition, which took effect on 20 May 2019, is:

The candela [...] is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the luminous efficacy of monochromatic radiation of frequency , &quot;K&quot;cd, to be 683 when expressed in the unit lm W−1, which is equal to , or , where the kilogram, metre and second are defined in terms of &quot;h&quot;, &quot;c&quot; and Δ&quot;ν&quot;Cs.

=== Explanation ===

The frequency chosen is in the visible spectrum near green, corresponding to a wavelength of about 555 nanometres. The human eye, when adapted for bright conditions, is most sensitive near this frequency. Under these conditions, photopic vision dominates the visual perception of our eyes over the scotopic vision. At other frequencies, more radiant intensity is required to achieve the same luminous intensity, according to the frequency response of the human eye. The luminous intensity for light of a particular wavelength &quot;λ&quot; is given by
formula_1
where is the luminous intensity, is the radiant intensity and formula_2 is the photopic luminous efficiency function. If more than one wavelength is present (as is usually the case), one must integrate over the spectrum of wavelengths to get the total luminous intensity.

=== Examples ===
* A common candle emits light with roughly 1 cd luminous intensity. 
* A 25 W compact fluorescent light bulb puts out around 1700 lumens; if that light is radiated equally in all directions (i.e. over 4 steradians), it will have an intensity of formula_3
* Focused into a 20° beam (0.095 steradians), the same light bulb would have an intensity of around 18,000 cd or 18 kcd within the beam.

== History ==
Prior to 1948, various standards for luminous intensity were in use in a number of countries. These were typically based on the brightness of the flame from a &quot;standard candle&quot; of defined composition, or the brightness of an incandescent filament of specific design. One of the best-known of these was the English standard of candlepower. One candlepower was the light produced by a pure spermaceti candle weighing one sixth of a pound and burning at a rate of 120 grains per hour. Germany, Austria and Scandinavia used the Hefnerkerze, a unit based on the output of a Hefner lamp.

A better standard for luminous intensity was needed. In 1884, Jules Violle had proposed a standard based on the light emitted by 1 cm2 of platinum at its melting point (or freezing point). The resulting unit of intensity, called the &quot;violle&quot;, was roughly equal to 60 English candlepower. Platinum was convenient for this purpose because it had a high enough melting point, was not prone to oxidation, and could be obtained in pure form. Violle showed that the intensity emitted by pure platinum was strictly dependent on its temperature, and so platinum at its melting point should have a consistent luminous intensity. 

In practice, realizing a standard based on Violle&#x27;s proposal turned out to be more difficult than expected. Impurities on the surface of the platinum could directly affect its emissivity, and in addition impurities could affect the luminous intensity by altering the melting point. Over the following half century various scientists tried to make a practical intensity standard based on incandescent platinum. The successful approach was to suspend a hollow shell of thorium dioxide with a small hole in it in a bath of molten platinum. The shell (cavity) serves as a black body, producing black-body radiation that depends on the temperature and is not sensitive to details of how the device is constructed.

In 1937, the &quot;Commission Internationale de l&#x27;Éclairage&quot; (International Commission on Illumination) and the CIPM proposed a &quot;new candle&quot; based on this concept, with value chosen to make it similar to the earlier unit candlepower. The decision was promulgated by the CIPM in 1946:
The value of the new candle is such that the brightness of the full radiator at the temperature of solidification of platinum is 60 new candles per square centimetre.

It was then ratified in 1948 by the 9th CGPM which adopted a new name for this unit, the &quot;candela&quot;. In 1967 the 13th CGPM removed the term &quot;new candle&quot; and gave an amended version of the candela definition, specifying the atmospheric pressure applied to the freezing platinum:
The candela is the luminous intensity, in the perpendicular direction, of a surface of square metre of a black body at the temperature of freezing platinum under a pressure of  newtons per square metre.

In 1979, because of the difficulties in realizing a Planck radiator at high temperatures and the new possibilities offered by radiometry, the 16th CGPM adopted a new definition of the candela:
The candela is the luminous intensity, in a given direction, of a source that emits monochromatic radiation of frequency and that has a radiant intensity in that direction of  watt per steradian.
The definition describes how to produce a light source that (by definition) emits one candela, but does not specify the luminous efficiency function for weighting radiation at other frequencies. Such a source could then be used to calibrate instruments designed to measure luminous intensity with reference to a specified luminous efficiency function. An appendix to the SI Brochure makes it clear that the luminous efficiency function is not uniquely specified, but must be selected to fully define the candela.

The arbitrary (1/683) term was chosen so that the new definition would precisely match the old definition. Although the candela is now defined in terms of the second (an SI base unit) and the watt (a derived SI unit), the candela remains a base unit of the SI system, by definition.

The 26th CGPM approved the modern definition of the candela in 2018 as part of the 2019 revision of the SI, which redefined the SI base units in terms of fundamental physical constants.

== SI photometric light units ==
=== Relationships between luminous intensity, luminous flux, and illuminance ===
If a source emits a known luminous intensity (in candelas) in a well-defined cone, the total luminous flux in lumens is given by
formula_4
where is the &quot;radiation angle&quot; of the lamp—the full vertex angle of the emission cone. For example, a lamp that emits 590 cd with a radiation angle of 40° emits about 224 lumens. See MR16 for emission angles of some common lamps.

If the source emits light uniformly in all directions, the flux can be found by multiplying the intensity by 4: a uniform 1 candela source emits 4 lumens (approximately 12.566 lumens).

For the purpose of measuring illumination, the candela is not a practical unit, as it only applies to idealized point light sources, each approximated by a source small compared to the distance from which its luminous radiation is measured, also assuming that it is done so in the absence of other light sources. What gets directly measured by a light meter is incident light on a sensor of finite area, i.e. illuminance in lm/m2 (lux). However, if designing illumination from many point light sources, like light bulbs, of known approximate omnidirectionally uniform intensities, the contributions to illuminance from incoherent light being additive, it is mathematically estimated as follows. If is the position of the &quot;i&quot;th source of uniform intensity , and is the unit vector normal to the illuminated elemental opaque area being measured, and provided that all light sources lie in the same half-space divided by the plane of this area,
formula_5
In the case of a single point light source of intensity &quot;Iv&quot;, at a distance &quot;r&quot; and normally incident, this reduces to
formula_6

== SI multiples ==
Like other SI units, the candela can also be modified by adding a metric prefix that multiplies it by a power of 10, for example millicandela (mcd) for 10−3 candela.

== Notes ==

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83216" start="4" end="11" title="Candela" label="candela"/>
<link wikidata="Q83216" start="21" end="23" title="Candela" label="cd"/>
<link wikidata="Q104831" start="40" end="58" title="luminous intensity" label="luminous intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="66" end="95" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q208476" start="138" end="149" title="solid angle" label="solid angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253365" start="238" end="255" title="radiant intensity" label="radiant intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="316" end="326" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q856577" start="406" end="414" title="weighting" label="weighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q899219" start="422" end="450" title="luminous efficiency function" label="luminous efficiency function"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="552" end="555" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="ISO"/>
<link wikidata="Q12888135" start="570" end="576" title="candle" label="candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="831" end="836" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064166" start="930" end="941" title="foot-candle" label="foot-candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q902274" start="983" end="994" title="candlepower" label="candlepower"/>
<link wikidata="Q215650" start="1029" end="1071" title="General Conference on Weights and Measures" label="General Conference on Weights and Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504173" start="1241" end="1258" title="luminous efficacy" label="luminous efficacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="1455" end="1456" title="Planck constant" label="h"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="1470" end="1471" title="Speed of light in vacuum" label="c"/>
<link wikidata="Q24638" start="1482" end="1498" title="unperturbed ground state hyperfine transition frequency of the caesium 133 atom" label="Δ&amp;quot;ν&amp;quot;Cs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="1553" end="1569" title="visible light" label="visible spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133" start="1575" end="1580" title="green" label="green"/>
<link wikidata="Q430024" start="1641" end="1650" title="human eye" label="human eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q352374" start="1657" end="1664" title="Adaptation (eye)" label="adapted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474732" start="1751" end="1766" title="photopic vision" label="photopic vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343133" start="1820" end="1835" title="scotopic vision" label="scotopic vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q104831" start="2097" end="2115" title="luminous intensity" label="luminous intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253365" start="2124" end="2141" title="radiant intensity" label="radiant intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474732" start="2163" end="2171" title="photopic" label="photopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q899219" start="2172" end="2200" title="luminous efficiency function" label="luminous efficiency function"/>
<link wikidata="Q654182" start="2295" end="2303" title="spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207571" start="2452" end="2482" title="compact fluorescent light bulb" label="compact fluorescent light bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q484092" start="2504" end="2509" title="lumen (unit)" label="lumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q177612" start="2577" end="2586" title="steradian" label="steradian"/>
<link wikidata="Q369682" start="3179" end="3189" title="spermaceti" label="spermaceti"/>
<link wikidata="Q693944" start="3256" end="3262" title="Grain (unit)" label="grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q904582" start="3315" end="3326" title="Hefnerkerze" label="Hefnerkerze"/>
<link wikidata="Q904582" start="3360" end="3371" title="Hefner lamp" label="Hefner lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q716352" start="3436" end="3448" title="Jules Violle" label="Jules Violle"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="3512" end="3520" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="3774" end="3783" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q420634" start="4478" end="4493" title="thorium dioxide" label="thorium dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q161424" start="4579" end="4589" title="black body" label="black body"/>
<link wikidata="Q900097" start="4601" end="4621" title="black-body radiation" label="black-body radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q374677" start="4740" end="4785" title="Commission Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Éclairage" label="Commission Internationale de l&amp;#x27;Éclairage"/>
<link wikidata="Q25343" start="5173" end="5190" title="square centimetre" label="square centimetre"/>
<link wikidata="Q247760" start="5820" end="5830" title="radiometry" label="radiometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253365" start="6023" end="6040" title="radiant intensity" label="radiant intensity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="6063" end="6067" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q177612" start="6072" end="6081" title="steradian" label="steradian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11574" start="6756" end="6762" title="second" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076763" start="6964" end="6987" title="2019 revision of the SI" label="2019 revision of the SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q107780" start="7275" end="7288" title="luminous flux" label="luminous flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q484092" start="7292" end="7297" title="lumen (unit)" label="lumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881808" start="7514" end="7518" title="MR16" label="MR16"/>
<link wikidata="Q607093" start="8094" end="8105" title="light meter" label="light meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q194411" start="8157" end="8168" title="illuminance" label="illuminance"/>
<link wikidata="Q193147" start="8367" end="8383" title="incoherent light" label="incoherent light"/>
<link wikidata="Q273176" start="8538" end="8544" title="normal (geometry)" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="8945" end="8958" title="metric prefix" label="metric prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q184611" start="8983" end="8994" title="power of 10" label="power of 10"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5387" wikidata="Q214781" url="?curid=5387" title="Condensed matter physics">
<text>Condensed matter physics is the field of physics that deals with the macroscopic and microscopic physical properties of matter, especially the solid and liquid phases, that arise from electromagnetic forces between atoms and electrons. More generally, the subject deals with condensed phases of matter: systems of many constituents with strong interactions among them. More exotic condensed phases include the superconducting phase exhibited by certain materials at extremely low cryogenic temperatures, the ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic phases of spins on crystal lattices of atoms, the Bose–Einstein condensates found in ultracold atomic systems, and liquid crystals. Condensed matter physicists seek to understand the behavior of these phases by experiments to measure various material properties, and by applying the physical laws of quantum mechanics, electromagnetism, statistical mechanics, and other physics theories to develop mathematical models and predict the properties of extremely large groups of atoms.

The diversity of systems and phenomena available for study makes condensed matter physics the most active field of contemporary physics: one third of all American physicists self-identify as condensed matter physicists, and the Division of Condensed Matter Physics is the largest division of the American Physical Society. These include solid state and soft matter physicists, who study quantum and non-quantum physical properties of matter respectively. Both types study a great range of materials, providing many research, funding and employment opportunities. The field overlaps with chemistry, materials science, engineering and nanotechnology, and relates closely to atomic physics and biophysics. The theoretical physics of condensed matter shares important concepts and methods with that of particle physics and nuclear physics.

A variety of topics in physics such as crystallography, metallurgy, elasticity, magnetism, etc., were treated as distinct areas until the 1940s, when they were grouped together as &quot;solid-state physics&quot;. Around the 1960s, the study of physical properties of liquids was added to this list, forming the basis for the more comprehensive specialty of condensed matter physics. The Bell Telephone Laboratories was one of the first institutes to conduct a research program in condensed matter physics. According to the founding director of the Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, physics professor Manuel Cardona, it was Albert Einstein who created the modern field of condensed matter physics starting with his seminal 1905 article on the photoelectric effect and photoluminescence which opened the fields of photoelectron spectroscopy and photoluminescence spectroscopy, and later his 1907 article on the specific heat of solids which introduced, for the first time, the effect of lattice vibrations on the thermodynamic properties of crystals, in particular the specific heat. Deputy Director of the Yale Quantum Institute A. Douglas Stone makes a similar priority case for Einstein in his work on the synthetic history of quantum mechanics.

==Etymology==
According to physicist Philip Warren Anderson, the use of the term &quot;condensed matter&quot; to designate a field of study was coined by him and Volker Heine, when they changed the name of their group at the Cavendish Laboratories, Cambridge, from &quot;Solid state theory&quot; to &quot;Theory of Condensed Matter&quot; in 1967, as they felt it better included their interest in liquids, nuclear matter, and so on. Although Anderson and Heine helped popularize the name &quot;condensed matter&quot;, it had been used in Europe for some years, most prominently in the Springer-Verlag journal &quot;Physics of Condensed Matter&quot;, launched in 1963. The name &quot;condensed matter physics&quot; emphasized the commonality of scientific problems encountered by physicists working on solids, liquids, plasmas, and other complex matter, whereas &quot;solid state physics&quot; was often associated with restricted industrial applications of metals and semiconductors. In the 1960s and 70s, some physicists felt the more comprehensive name better fit the funding environment and Cold War politics of the time.

References to &quot;condensed&quot; states can be traced to earlier sources. For example, in the introduction to his 1947 book &quot;Kinetic Theory of Liquids&quot;, Yakov Frenkel proposed that &quot;The kinetic theory of liquids must accordingly be developed as a generalization and extension of the kinetic theory of solid bodies. As a matter of fact, it would be more correct to unify them under the title of &#x27;condensed bodies.

==History==
===Classical physics===
One of the first studies of condensed states of matter was by English chemist Humphry Davy, in the first decades of the nineteenth century. Davy observed that of the forty chemical elements known at the time, twenty-six had metallic properties such as lustre, ductility and high electrical and thermal conductivity. This indicated that the atoms in John Dalton&#x27;s atomic theory were not indivisible as Dalton claimed, but had inner structure. Davy further claimed that elements that were then believed to be gases, such as nitrogen and hydrogen could be liquefied under the right conditions and would then behave as metals.

In 1823, Michael Faraday, then an assistant in Davy&#x27;s lab, successfully liquefied chlorine and went on to liquefy all known gaseous elements, except for nitrogen, hydrogen, and oxygen. Shortly after, in 1869, Irish chemist Thomas Andrews studied the phase transition from a liquid to a gas and coined the term critical point to describe the condition where a gas and a liquid were indistinguishable as phases, and Dutch physicist Johannes van der Waals supplied the theoretical framework which allowed the prediction of critical behavior based on measurements at much higher temperatures. By 1908, James Dewar and Heike Kamerlingh Onnes were successfully able to liquefy hydrogen and the then newly discovered helium respectively.

Paul Drude in 1900 proposed the first theoretical model for a classical electron moving through a metallic solid. Drude&#x27;s model described properties of metals in terms of a gas of free electrons, and was the first microscopic model to explain empirical observations such as the Wiedemann–Franz law. However, despite the success of Drude&#x27;s model, it had one notable problem: it was unable to correctly explain the electronic contribution to the specific heat and magnetic properties of metals, and the temperature dependence of resistivity at low temperatures.

In 1911, three years after helium was first liquefied, Onnes working at University of Leiden discovered superconductivity in mercury, when he observed the electrical resistivity of mercury to vanish at temperatures below a certain value. The phenomenon completely surprised the best theoretical physicists of the time, and it remained unexplained for several decades. Albert Einstein, in 1922, said regarding contemporary theories of superconductivity that &quot;with our far-reaching ignorance of the quantum mechanics of composite systems we are very far from being able to compose a theory out of these vague ideas.&quot;

===Advent of quantum mechanics===
Drude&#x27;s classical model was augmented by Wolfgang Pauli, Arnold Sommerfeld, Felix Bloch and other physicists. Pauli realized that the free electrons in metal must obey the Fermi–Dirac statistics. Using this idea, he developed the theory of paramagnetism in 1926. Shortly after, Sommerfeld incorporated the Fermi–Dirac statistics into the free electron model and made it better to explain the heat capacity. Two years later, Bloch used quantum mechanics to describe the motion of an electron in a periodic lattice.

The mathematics of crystal structures developed by Auguste Bravais, Yevgraf Fyodorov and others was used to classify crystals by their symmetry group, and tables of crystal structures were the basis for the series &quot;International Tables of Crystallography&quot;, first published in 1935. Band structure calculations were first used in 1930 to predict the properties of new materials, and in 1947 John Bardeen, Walter Brattain and William Shockley developed the first semiconductor-based transistor, heralding a revolution in electronics.
In 1879, Edwin Herbert Hall working at the Johns Hopkins University discovered that a voltage developed across conductors which was transverse to both an electric current in the conductor and a magnetic field applied perpendicular to the current. This phenomenon, arising due to the nature of charge carriers in the conductor, came to be termed the Hall effect, but it was not properly explained at the time because the electron was not experimentally discovered until 18 years later. After the advent of quantum mechanics, Lev Landau in 1930 developed the theory of Landau quantization and laid the foundation for a theoretical explanation of the quantum Hall effect which was discovered half a century later.

Magnetism as a property of matter has been known in China since 4000 BC. However, the first modern studies of magnetism only started with the development of electrodynamics by Faraday, Maxwell and others in the nineteenth century, which included classifying materials as ferromagnetic, paramagnetic and diamagnetic based on their response to magnetization. Pierre Curie studied the dependence of magnetization on temperature and discovered the Curie point phase transition in ferromagnetic materials. In 1906, Pierre Weiss introduced the concept of magnetic domains to explain the main properties of ferromagnets. The first attempt at a microscopic description of magnetism was by Wilhelm Lenz and Ernst Ising through the Ising model that described magnetic materials as consisting of a periodic lattice of spins that collectively acquired magnetization. The Ising model was solved exactly to show that spontaneous magnetization can occur in one dimension and it is possible in higher-dimensional lattices. Further research such as by Bloch on spin waves and Néel on antiferromagnetism led to developing new magnetic materials with applications to magnetic storage devices.

===Modern many-body physics===

The Sommerfeld model and spin models for ferromagnetism illustrated the successful application of quantum mechanics to condensed matter problems in the 1930s. However, there still were several unsolved problems, most notably the description of superconductivity and the Kondo effect. After World War II, several ideas from quantum field theory were applied to condensed matter problems. These included recognition of collective excitation modes of solids and the important notion of a quasiparticle. Soviet physicist Lev Landau used the idea for the Fermi liquid theory wherein low energy properties of interacting fermion systems were given in terms of what are now termed Landau-quasiparticles. Landau also developed a mean-field theory for continuous phase transitions, which described ordered phases as spontaneous breakdown of symmetry. The theory also introduced the notion of an order parameter to distinguish between ordered phases. Eventually in 1956, John Bardeen, Leon Cooper and Robert Schrieffer developed the so-called BCS theory of superconductivity, based on the discovery that arbitrarily small attraction between two electrons of opposite spin mediated by phonons in the lattice can give rise to a bound state called a Cooper pair.
The study of phase transitions and the critical behavior of observables, termed critical phenomena, was a major field of interest in the 1960s. Leo Kadanoff, Benjamin Widom and Michael Fisher developed the ideas of critical exponents and widom scaling. These ideas were unified by Kenneth G. Wilson in 1972, under the formalism of the renormalization group in the context of quantum field theory.

The quantum Hall effect was discovered by Klaus von Klitzing, Dorda and Pepper in 1980 when they observed the Hall conductance to be integer multiples of a fundamental constant formula_1.(see figure) The effect was observed to be independent of parameters such as system size and impurities. In 1981, theorist Robert Laughlin proposed a theory explaining the unanticipated precision of the integral plateau. It also implied that the Hall conductance is proportional to a topological invariant, called Chern number, whose relevance for the band structure of solids was formulated by David J. Thouless and collaborators. Shortly after, in 1982, Horst Störmer and Daniel Tsui observed the fractional quantum Hall effect where the conductance was now a rational multiple of the constant formula_1. Laughlin, in 1983, realized that this was a consequence of quasiparticle interaction in the Hall states and formulated a variational method solution, named the Laughlin wavefunction. The study of topological properties of the fractional Hall effect remains an active field of research. Decades later, the aforementioned topological band theory advanced by David J. Thouless and collaborators was further expanded leading to the discovery of topological insulators. 
In 1986, Karl Müller and Johannes Bednorz discovered the first high temperature superconductor, La2-xBaxCuO4, which is superconducting at temperatures as high as 39 kelvin. It was realized that the high temperature superconductors are examples of strongly correlated materials where the electron–electron interactions play an important role. A satisfactory theoretical description of high-temperature superconductors is still not known and the field of strongly correlated materials continues to be an active research topic.
In 2012, several groups released preprints which suggest that samarium hexaboride has the properties of a topological insulator in accord with the earlier theoretical predictions. Since samarium hexaboride is an established Kondo insulator, i.e. a strongly correlated electron material, it is expected that the existence of a topological Dirac surface state in this material would lead to a topological insulator with strong electronic correlations.

==Theoretical==
Theoretical condensed matter physics involves the use of theoretical models to understand properties of states of matter. These include models to study the electronic properties of solids, such as the Drude model, the band structure and the density functional theory. Theoretical models have also been developed to study the physics of phase transitions, such as the Ginzburg–Landau theory, critical exponents and the use of mathematical methods of quantum field theory and the renormalization group. Modern theoretical studies involve the use of numerical computation of electronic structure and mathematical tools to understand phenomena such as high-temperature superconductivity, topological phases, and gauge symmetries.

===Emergence===
Theoretical understanding of condensed matter physics is closely related to the notion of emergence, wherein complex assemblies of particles behave in ways dramatically different from their individual constituents. For example, a range of phenomena related to high temperature superconductivity are understood poorly, although the microscopic physics of individual electrons and lattices is well known. Similarly, models of condensed matter systems have been studied where collective excitations behave like photons and electrons, thereby describing electromagnetism as an emergent phenomenon. Emergent properties can also occur at the interface between materials: one example is the lanthanum aluminate-strontium titanate interface, where two band-insulators are joined to create conductivity and superconductivity.

===Electronic theory of solids===
The metallic state has historically been an important building block for studying properties of solids. The first theoretical description of metals was given by Paul Drude in 1900 with the Drude model, which explained electrical and thermal properties by describing a metal as an ideal gas of then-newly discovered electrons. He was able to derive the empirical Wiedemann-Franz law and get results in close agreement with the experiments. This classical model was then improved by Arnold Sommerfeld who incorporated the Fermi–Dirac statistics of electrons and was able to explain the anomalous behavior of the specific heat of metals in the Wiedemann–Franz law. In 1912, The structure of crystalline solids was studied by Max von Laue and Paul Knipping, when they observed the X-ray diffraction pattern of crystals, and concluded that crystals get their structure from periodic lattices of atoms. In 1928, Swiss physicist Felix Bloch provided a wave function solution to the Schrödinger equation with a periodic potential, known as Bloch&#x27;s theorem.

Calculating electronic properties of metals by solving the many-body wavefunction is often computationally hard, and hence, approximation methods are needed to obtain meaningful predictions. The Thomas–Fermi theory, developed in the 1920s, was used to estimate system energy and electronic density by treating the local electron density as a variational parameter. Later in the 1930s, Douglas Hartree, Vladimir Fock and John Slater developed the so-called Hartree–Fock wavefunction as an improvement over the Thomas–Fermi model. The Hartree–Fock method accounted for exchange statistics of single particle electron wavefunctions. In general, it is very difficult to solve the Hartree–Fock equation. Only the free electron gas case can be solved exactly. Finally in 1964–65, Walter Kohn, Pierre Hohenberg and Lu Jeu Sham proposed the density functional theory (DFT) which gave realistic descriptions for bulk and surface properties of metals. The density functional theory has been widely used since the 1970s for band structure calculations of variety of solids.

===Symmetry breaking===
Some states of matter exhibit &quot;symmetry breaking&quot;, where the relevant laws of physics possess some form of symmetry that is broken. A common example is crystalline solids, which break continuous translational symmetry. Other examples include magnetized ferromagnets, which break rotational symmetry, and more exotic states such as the ground state of a BCS superconductor, that breaks U(1) phase rotational symmetry.

Goldstone&#x27;s theorem in quantum field theory states that in a system with broken continuous symmetry, there may exist excitations with arbitrarily low energy, called the Goldstone bosons. For example, in crystalline solids, these correspond to phonons, which are quantized versions of lattice vibrations.

===Phase transition===
Phase transition refers to the change of phase of a system, which is brought about by change in an external parameter such as temperature, pressure, or molar composition. In a single-component system, a classical phase transition occurs at a temperature (at a specific pressure) where there is an abrupt change in the order of the system. For example, when ice melts and becomes water, the ordered hexagonal crystal structure of ice is modified to a hydrogen bonded, mobile arrangement of water molecules.

In quantum phase transitions, the temperature is set to absolute zero, and the non-thermal control parameter, such as pressure or magnetic field, causes the phase transitions when order is destroyed by quantum fluctuations originating from the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Here, the different quantum phases of the system refer to distinct ground states of the Hamiltonian matrix. Understanding the behavior of quantum phase transition is important in the difficult tasks of explaining the properties of rare-earth magnetic insulators, high-temperature superconductors, and other substances.

Two classes of phase transitions occur: &quot;first-order transitions&quot; and &quot;second-order&quot; or &quot;continuous transitions&quot;. For the latter, the two phases involved do not co-exist at the transition temperature, also called the critical point. Near the critical point, systems undergo critical behavior, wherein several of their properties such as correlation length, specific heat, and magnetic susceptibility diverge exponentially. These critical phenomena present serious challenges to physicists because normal macroscopic laws are no longer valid in the region, and novel ideas and methods must be invented to find the new laws that can describe the system.

The simplest theory that can describe continuous phase transitions is the Ginzburg–Landau theory, which works in the so-called mean-field approximation. However, it can only roughly explain continuous phase transition for ferroelectrics and type I superconductors which involves long range microscopic interactions. For other types of systems that involves short range interactions near the critical point, a better theory is needed.

Near the critical point, the fluctuations happen over broad range of size scales while the feature of the whole system is scale invariant. Renormalization group methods successively average out the shortest wavelength fluctuations in stages while retaining their effects into the next stage. Thus, the changes of a physical system as viewed at different size scales can be investigated systematically. The methods, together with powerful computer simulation, contribute greatly to the explanation of the critical phenomena associated with continuous phase transition.

==Experimental==
Experimental condensed matter physics involves the use of experimental probes to try to discover new properties of materials. Such probes include effects of electric and magnetic fields, measuring response functions, transport properties and thermometry. Commonly used experimental methods include spectroscopy, with probes such as X-rays, infrared light and inelastic neutron scattering; study of thermal response, such as specific heat and measuring transport via thermal and heat conduction.
===Scattering===
Several condensed matter experiments involve scattering of an experimental probe, such as X-ray, optical photons, neutrons, etc., on constituents of a material. The choice of scattering probe depends on the observation energy scale of interest. Visible light has energy on the scale of 1 electron volt (eV) and is used as a scattering probe to measure variations in material properties such as the dielectric constant and refractive index. X-rays have energies of the order of 10 keV and hence are able to probe atomic length scales, and are used to measure variations in electron charge density and crystal structure.

Neutrons can also probe atomic length scales and are used to study the scattering off nuclei and electron spins and magnetization (as neutrons have spin but no charge). Coulomb and Mott scattering measurements can be made by using electron beams as scattering probes. Similarly, positron annihilation can be used as an indirect measurement of local electron density. Laser spectroscopy is an excellent tool for studying the microscopic properties of a medium, for example, to study forbidden transitions in media with nonlinear optical spectroscopy. 

===External magnetic fields===
In experimental condensed matter physics, external magnetic fields act as thermodynamic variables that control the state, phase transitions and properties of material systems. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a method by which external magnetic fields are used to find resonance modes of individual nuclei, thus giving information about the atomic, molecular, and bond structure of their environment. NMR experiments can be made in magnetic fields with strengths up to 60 tesla. Higher magnetic fields can improve the quality of NMR measurement data. Quantum oscillations is another experimental method where high magnetic fields are used to study material properties such as the geometry of the Fermi surface. High magnetic fields will be useful in experimental testing of the various theoretical predictions such as the quantized magnetoelectric effect, image magnetic monopole, and the half-integer quantum Hall effect.

===Magnetic resonance spectroscopy===
The local structure, as well as the structure of the nearest neighbour atoms, can be investigated in condensed matter with magnetic resonance methods, such as electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), which are very sensitive to the details of the surrounding of nuclei and electrons by means of the hyperfine coupling. Both localized electrons and specific stable or unstable isotopes of the nuclei become the probe of these hyperfine interactions), which couple the electron or nuclear spin to the local electric and magnetic fields. These methods are suitable to study defects, diffusion, phase transitions and magnetic order. Common experimental methods include NMR, nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR), implanted radioactive probes as in the case of muon spin spectroscopy (formula_3SR), Mössbauer spectroscopy, formula_4NMR and perturbed angular correlation (PAC). PAC is especially ideal for the study of phase changes at extreme temperatures above 2000 °C due to the temperature independence of the method.

===Cold atomic gases===


Ultracold atom trapping in optical lattices is an experimental tool commonly used in condensed matter physics, and in atomic, molecular, and optical physics. The method involves using optical lasers to form an interference pattern, which acts as a &quot;lattice&quot;, in which ions or atoms can be placed at very low temperatures. Cold atoms in optical lattices are used as &quot;quantum simulators&quot;, that is, they act as controllable systems that can model behavior of more complicated systems, such as frustrated magnets. In particular, they are used to engineer one-, two- and three-dimensional lattices for a Hubbard model with pre-specified parameters, and to study phase transitions for antiferromagnetic and spin liquid ordering.

In 1995, a gas of rubidium atoms cooled down to a temperature of 170 nK was used to experimentally realize the Bose–Einstein condensate, a novel state of matter originally predicted by S. N. Bose and Albert Einstein, wherein a large number of atoms occupy one quantum state.

==Applications==
Research in condensed matter physics has given rise to several device applications, such as the development of the semiconductor transistor, laser technology, magnetic storage, liquid crystals, optical fibres and several phenomena studied in the context of nanotechnology. Methods such as scanning-tunneling microscopy can be used to control processes at the nanometer scale, and have given rise to the study of nanofabrication. Such molecular machines were developed for example by Nobel laureates in chemistry Ben Feringa, Jean-Pierre Sauvage and Fraser Stoddart. Feringa and his team developed multiple molecular machines such as the molecular car, molecular windmill and many more.

In quantum computation, information is represented by quantum bits, or qubits. The qubits may decohere quickly before useful computation is completed. This serious problem must be solved before quantum computing may be realized. To solve this problem, several promising approaches are proposed in condensed matter physics, including Josephson junction qubits, spintronic qubits using the spin orientation of magnetic materials, and the topological non-Abelian anyons from fractional quantum Hall effect states.

Condensed matter physics also has important uses for biomedicine. For example, magnetic resonance imaging is widely used in medical imaging of soft tissue and other physiological features which cannot be viewed with traditional x-ray imaging.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Anderson, Philip W. (2018-03-09). &quot;Basic Notions Of Condensed Matter Physics&quot;. CRC Press. .
*Girvin, Steven M.; Yang, Kun (2019-02-28). &quot;Modern Condensed Matter Physics&quot;. Cambridge University Press. .
*Coleman, Piers (2015). &quot; Introduction to Many-Body Physics&quot;, Cambridge University Press, .
*P. M. Chaikin and T. C. Lubensky (2000). &quot;Principles of Condensed Matter Physics&quot;, Cambridge University Press; 1st edition, 
* Alexander Altland and Ben Simons (2006). &quot;Condensed Matter Field Theory&quot;, Cambridge University Press, .
* Michael P. Marder (2010). &quot;Condensed Matter Physics, second edition&quot;, John Wiley and Sons, .
*Lillian Hoddeson, Ernest Braun, Jürgen Teichmann and Spencer Weart, eds. (1992). &quot;Out of the Crystal Maze: Chapters from the History of Solid State Physics&quot;, Oxford University Press, .

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q214781" start="0" end="24" title="Condensed matter physics" label="Condensed matter physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="41" end="48" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="120" end="126" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="143" end="148" title="solid" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="153" end="159" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11430" start="160" end="166" title="State of matter" label="phases"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="184" end="199" title="electromagnetic" label="electromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="215" end="219" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="225" end="234" title="electrons" label="electrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="410" end="425" title="superconductivity" label="superconducting"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="480" end="489" title="cryogenic" label="cryogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="490" end="501" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="508" end="519" title="ferromagnet" label="ferromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q575224" start="526" end="541" title="antiferromagnet" label="antiferromagnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="554" end="559" title="Spin (physics)" label="spins"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="563" end="578" title="crystal lattice" label="crystal lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q46202" start="594" end="619" title="Bose–Einstein condensates" label="Bose–Einstein condensates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880521" start="629" end="643" title="ultracold atom" label="ultracold atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q203989" start="659" end="674" title="liquid crystals" label="liquid crystals"/>
<link wikidata="Q408891" start="827" end="839" title="physical law" label="physical law"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="844" end="861" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="863" end="879" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="881" end="902" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="914" end="930" title="theoretical physics" label="physics theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q466113" start="1322" end="1347" title="American Physical Society" label="American Physical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q902144" start="1379" end="1390" title="soft matter" label="soft matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="1413" end="1420" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="1613" end="1622" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="1624" end="1641" title="materials science" label="materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="1643" end="1654" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="1659" end="1673" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q26383" start="1698" end="1712" title="atomic physics" label="atomic physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100" start="1717" end="1727" title="biophysics" label="biophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="1733" end="1752" title="theoretical physics" label="theoretical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="1824" end="1840" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="1845" end="1860" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q160398" start="1902" end="1917" title="crystallography" label="crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="1919" end="1929" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q62932" start="1931" end="1941" title="elasticity (physics)" label="elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="1943" end="1952" title="magnetism" label="magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q715396" start="2049" end="2068" title="solid-state physics" label="solid-state physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11435" start="2130" end="2136" title="liquid" label="liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="2250" end="2277" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Telephone Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q835529" start="2411" end="2456" title="Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research" label="Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="2499" end="2514" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q83213" start="2618" end="2638" title="photoelectric effect" label="photoelectric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q614893" start="2643" end="2660" title="photoluminescence" label="photoluminescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139350" start="2688" end="2714" title="photoelectron spectroscopy" label="photoelectron spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q614893" start="2719" end="2749" title="photoluminescence spectroscopy" label="photoluminescence spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179388" start="2785" end="2808" title="specific heat of solids" label="specific heat of solids"/>
<link wikidata="Q487756" start="2943" end="2956" title="specific heat" label="specific heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q69542644" start="3004" end="3020" title="A. Douglas Stone" label="A. Douglas Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="3104" end="3121" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190770" start="3161" end="3183" title="Philip Warren Anderson" label="Philip Warren Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419397" start="3286" end="3298" title="Volker Heine" label="Volker Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181892" start="3349" end="3371" title="Cavendish Laboratories" label="Cavendish Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="3373" end="3382" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068141" start="3530" end="3544" title="nuclear matter" label="nuclear matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q176916" start="3709" end="3724" title="Springer Science+Business Media" label="Springer-Verlag"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="4218" end="4226" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q951957" start="4416" end="4429" title="Yakov Frenkel" label="Yakov Frenkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42406" start="4785" end="4792" title="People of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="4793" end="4800" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="4801" end="4813" title="Humphry Davy" label="Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="4895" end="4911" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="4947" end="4952" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998326" start="4975" end="4981" title="lustre (mineralogy)" label="lustre"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="4983" end="4992" title="ductility" label="ductility"/>
<link wikidata="Q41284" start="5072" end="5083" title="John Dalton" label="John Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q210553" start="5091" end="5104" title="atomic theory" label="atomic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="5250" end="5258" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="5263" end="5271" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8750" start="5361" end="5376" title="Michael Faraday" label="Michael Faraday"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="5439" end="5447" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="5534" end="5540" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="5566" end="5571" title="People of Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q500440" start="5580" end="5594" title="Thomas Andrews (scientist)" label="Thomas Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="5607" end="5623" title="phase transition" label="phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q111059" start="5667" end="5681" title="Critical point (thermodynamics)" label="critical point"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="5771" end="5776" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q131721" start="5787" end="5809" title="Johannes van der Waals" label="Johannes van der Waals"/>
<link wikidata="Q277579" start="5955" end="5966" title="James Dewar" label="James Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q62891" start="5971" end="5993" title="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes" label="Heike Kamerlingh Onnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="6067" end="6073" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q61755" start="6089" end="6099" title="Paul Drude" label="Paul Drude"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="6161" end="6169" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q944030" start="6372" end="6391" title="Wiedemann–Franz law" label="Wiedemann–Franz law"/>
<link wikidata="Q910043" start="6425" end="6443" title="Drude model" label="Drude&amp;#x27;s model"/>
<link wikidata="Q487756" start="6543" end="6556" title="specific heat" label="specific heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q156598" start="6732" end="6752" title="University of Leiden" label="University of Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="6764" end="6781" title="superconductivity" label="superconductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="6785" end="6792" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="7028" end="7043" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q65989" start="7366" end="7380" title="Wolfgang Pauli" label="Wolfgang Pauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q77078" start="7382" end="7399" title="Arnold Sommerfeld" label="Arnold Sommerfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q123022" start="7401" end="7412" title="Felix Bloch" label="Felix Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q274072" start="7497" end="7519" title="Fermi–Dirac statistics" label="Fermi–Dirac statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="7565" end="7578" title="paramagnetism" label="paramagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q274072" start="7631" end="7653" title="Fermi–Dirac statistics" label="Fermi–Dirac statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q940391" start="7663" end="7682" title="free electron model" label="free electron model"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="7760" end="7777" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q351400" start="7891" end="7906" title="Auguste Bravais" label="Auguste Bravais"/>
<link wikidata="Q726827" start="7908" end="7924" title="Yevgraf Fyodorov" label="Yevgraf Fyodorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q902019" start="7975" end="7989" title="symmetry group" label="symmetry group"/>
<link wikidata="Q806380" start="8132" end="8159" title="Band theory" label="Band structure calculations"/>
<link wikidata="Q949" start="8240" end="8252" title="John Bardeen" label="John Bardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q184577" start="8254" end="8269" title="Walter Brattain" label="Walter Brattain"/>
<link wikidata="Q163415" start="8274" end="8290" title="William Shockley" label="William Shockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="8311" end="8324" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="8331" end="8341" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q535860" start="8391" end="8409" title="Edwin Herbert Hall" label="Edwin Herbert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="8425" end="8449" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q10656" start="8731" end="8742" title="Hall effect" label="Hall effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q133267" start="8906" end="8916" title="Lev Landau" label="Lev Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q277967" start="8949" end="8968" title="Landau quantization" label="Landau quantization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047822" start="9030" end="9049" title="quantum Hall effect" label="quantum Hall effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="9251" end="9266" title="electrodynamics" label="electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9095" start="9279" end="9286" title="James Clerk Maxwell" label="Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="9365" end="9378" title="ferromagnetic" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="9380" end="9392" title="paramagnetic" label="paramagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q201048" start="9397" end="9408" title="diamagnetic" label="diamagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37463" start="9451" end="9463" title="Pierre Curie" label="Pierre Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q191073" start="9538" end="9549" title="Curie point" label="Curie point"/>
<link wikidata="Q299841" start="9604" end="9616" title="Pierre Weiss" label="Pierre Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069637" start="9643" end="9658" title="magnetic domain" label="magnetic domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q638320" start="9775" end="9787" title="Wilhelm Lenz" label="Wilhelm Lenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q69856" start="9792" end="9803" title="Ernst Ising" label="Ernst Ising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076349" start="9816" end="9827" title="Ising model" label="Ising model"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="9901" end="9906" title="Spin (physics)" label="spins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579060" start="9997" end="10022" title="spontaneous magnetization" label="spontaneous magnetization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431229" start="10138" end="10147" title="spin wave" label="spin wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q155781" start="10153" end="10157" title="Néel" label="Néel"/>
<link wikidata="Q575224" start="10161" end="10179" title="antiferromagnetism" label="antiferromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364527" start="10242" end="10258" title="magnetic storage" label="magnetic storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="10545" end="10562" title="superconductivity" label="superconductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156490" start="10571" end="10583" title="Kondo effect" label="Kondo effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10591" end="10603" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047683" start="10718" end="10739" title="collective excitation" label="collective excitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q133267" start="10818" end="10828" title="Lev Landau" label="Lev Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890239" start="10851" end="10870" title="Fermi liquid theory" label="Fermi liquid theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q626011" start="11022" end="11039" title="mean-field theory" label="mean-field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q736716" start="11108" end="11141" title="Spontaneous symmetry breaking" label="spontaneous breakdown of symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="11187" end="11202" title="order parameter" label="order parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q949" start="11262" end="11274" title="John Bardeen" label="John Bardeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q82563" start="11276" end="11287" title="Leon Cooper" label="Leon Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q153201" start="11292" end="11309" title="Robert Schrieffer" label="Robert Schrieffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q722131" start="11334" end="11344" title="BCS theory" label="BCS theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="11475" end="11481" title="phonon" label="phonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q620057" start="11538" end="11549" title="Cooper pair" label="Cooper pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q900634" start="11631" end="11649" title="critical phenomena" label="critical phenomena"/>
<link wikidata="Q981454" start="11695" end="11707" title="Leo Kadanoff" label="Leo Kadanoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q775666" start="11709" end="11723" title="Benjamin Widom" label="Benjamin Widom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364884" start="11728" end="11742" title="Michael Fisher" label="Michael Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q901927" start="11766" end="11783" title="critical exponent" label="critical exponent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998780" start="11789" end="11802" title="widom scaling" label="widom scaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q193503" start="11832" end="11849" title="Kenneth G. Wilson" label="Kenneth G. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203669" start="11886" end="11907" title="renormalization group" label="renormalization group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047822" start="11953" end="11972" title="quantum Hall effect" label="quantum Hall effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q71024" start="11991" end="12009" title="Klaus von Klitzing" label="Klaus von Klitzing"/>
<link wikidata="Q189997" start="12259" end="12274" title="Robert Laughlin" label="Robert Laughlin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12450" end="12462" title="Chern class#Chern numbers" label="Chern number"/>
<link wikidata="Q726394" start="12531" end="12548" title="David J. Thouless" label="David J. Thouless"/>
<link wikidata="Q71015" start="12592" end="12605" title="Horst Störmer" label="Horst Störmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q202138" start="12610" end="12621" title="Daniel Tsui" label="Daniel Tsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030113" start="12635" end="12665" title="fractional quantum Hall effect" label="fractional quantum Hall effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q216861" start="12864" end="12882" title="variational method" label="variational method"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498183" start="12903" end="12924" title="Laughlin wavefunction" label="Laughlin wavefunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q726394" start="13099" end="13116" title="David J. Thouless" label="David J. Thouless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488689" start="13184" end="13205" title="topological insulator" label="topological insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q122298" start="13218" end="13229" title="Karl Alexander Müller" label="Karl Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q76687" start="13234" end="13250" title="Johannes Bednorz" label="Johannes Bednorz"/>
<link wikidata="Q846667" start="13272" end="13303" title="high temperature superconductor" label="high temperature superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="13374" end="13380" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624687" start="13662" end="13690" title="strongly correlated material" label="strongly correlated material"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13796" end="13815" title="Samarium#Samarium hexaboride" label="samarium hexaboride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488689" start="13840" end="13861" title="topological insulator" label="topological insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6429007" start="13958" end="13973" title="Kondo insulator" label="Kondo insulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q910043" start="14402" end="14413" title="Drude model" label="Drude model"/>
<link wikidata="Q806380" start="14419" end="14433" title="Electronic band structure" label="band structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048589" start="14442" end="14467" title="density functional theory" label="density functional theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q185357" start="14537" end="14553" title="phase transition" label="phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q900905" start="14568" end="14590" title="Ginzburg–Landau theory" label="Ginzburg–Landau theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q901927" start="14592" end="14609" title="critical exponent" label="critical exponent"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="14650" end="14670" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203669" start="14679" end="14700" title="renormalization group" label="renormalization group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="14748" end="14769" title="numerical computation" label="numerical computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q846667" start="14849" end="14883" title="high-temperature superconductivity" label="high-temperature superconductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17165159" start="14885" end="14902" title="topological phase" label="topological phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="14909" end="14925" title="gauge symmetry" label="gauge symmetries"/>
<link wikidata="Q215772" start="15034" end="15043" title="emergence" label="emergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047683" start="15417" end="15438" title="collective excitation" label="collective excitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="15452" end="15458" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="15464" end="15472" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="15494" end="15510" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064016" start="15628" end="15676" title="lanthanum aluminate-strontium titanate interface" label="lanthanum aluminate-strontium titanate interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="15742" end="15759" title="superconductivity" label="superconductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q61755" start="15957" end="15967" title="Paul Drude" label="Paul Drude"/>
<link wikidata="Q910043" start="15985" end="15996" title="Drude model" label="Drude model"/>
<link wikidata="Q172280" start="16076" end="16085" title="ideal gas" label="ideal gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="16111" end="16119" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q944030" start="16158" end="16177" title="Wiedemann-Franz law" label="Wiedemann-Franz law"/>
<link wikidata="Q77078" start="16277" end="16294" title="Arnold Sommerfeld" label="Arnold Sommerfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q274072" start="16316" end="16338" title="Fermi–Dirac statistics" label="Fermi–Dirac statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q487756" start="16406" end="16419" title="specific heat" label="specific heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q944030" start="16437" end="16456" title="Wiedemann–Franz law" label="Wiedemann–Franz law"/>
<link wikidata="Q57067" start="16518" end="16530" title="Max von Laue" label="Max von Laue"/>
<link wikidata="Q12101244" start="16573" end="16590" title="X-ray diffraction" label="X-ray diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394145" start="16674" end="16682" title="lattice model (physics)" label="lattices"/>
<link wikidata="Q123022" start="16718" end="16729" title="Felix Bloch" label="Felix Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="16771" end="16791" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184743" start="16799" end="16807" title="Periodic function" label="periodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454926" start="16828" end="16848" title="Bloch&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Bloch&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q900431" start="17046" end="17065" title="Thomas–Fermi model" label="Thomas–Fermi theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q216861" start="17193" end="17214" title="Variational method" label="variational parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q451770" start="17236" end="17251" title="Douglas Hartree" label="Douglas Hartree"/>
<link wikidata="Q553176" start="17253" end="17266" title="Vladimir Fock" label="Vladimir Fock"/>
<link wikidata="Q711519" start="17271" end="17282" title="John C. Slater" label="John Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879841" start="17307" end="17332" title="Hartree–Fock method" label="Hartree–Fock wavefunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q898351" start="17418" end="17437" title="Exchange symmetry" label="exchange statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q78510" start="17625" end="17636" title="Walter Kohn" label="Walter Kohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q833685" start="17638" end="17654" title="Pierre Hohenberg" label="Pierre Hohenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872743" start="17659" end="17670" title="Lu Jeu Sham" label="Lu Jeu Sham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048589" start="17684" end="17709" title="density functional theory" label="density functional theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455736" start="18056" end="18064" title="Symmetry (physics)" label="symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="18101" end="18118" title="crystal" label="crystalline solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116709" start="18144" end="18166" title="translational symmetry" label="translational symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="18202" end="18214" title="ferromagnetism" label="ferromagnets"/>
<link wikidata="Q593950" start="18228" end="18247" title="rotational symmetry" label="rotational symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q722131" start="18302" end="18305" title="BCS theory" label="BCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="18306" end="18320" title="superconductor" label="superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q105356493" start="18334" end="18338" title="U(1)" label="U(1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153441" start="18367" end="18391" title="Goldstone&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Goldstone&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="18395" end="18415" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="18551" end="18556" title="boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q186608" start="18615" end="18621" title="phonon" label="phonon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="18826" end="18837" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="18839" end="18847" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18852" end="18869" title="molar composition" label="molar composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118253" start="19210" end="19234" title="quantum phase transition" label="quantum phase transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q81182" start="19263" end="19276" title="absolute zero" label="absolute zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193821" start="19409" end="19428" title="quantum fluctuation" label="quantum fluctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44746" start="19451" end="19483" title="Heisenberg uncertainty principle" label="Heisenberg uncertainty principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4480008" start="19552" end="19564" title="ground state" label="ground state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299275" start="19573" end="19591" title="Hamiltonian matrix" label="Hamiltonian matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q111059" start="20052" end="20066" title="Critical point (thermodynamics)" label="critical point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276790" start="20172" end="20190" title="correlation length" label="correlation length"/>
<link wikidata="Q487756" start="20192" end="20205" title="specific heat" label="specific heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q691463" start="20211" end="20234" title="magnetic susceptibility" label="magnetic susceptibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q674038" start="20339" end="20350" title="Macroscopic scale" label="macroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q900905" start="20562" end="20584" title="Ginzburg–Landau theory" label="Ginzburg–Landau theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q626011" start="20615" end="20639" title="mean-field approximation" label="mean-field approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203669" start="21062" end="21083" title="Renormalization group" label="Renormalization group"/>
<link wikidata="Q46221" start="21666" end="21674" title="electric field" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="21679" end="21693" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054694" start="21706" end="21723" title="response function" label="response function"/>
<link wikidata="Q679643" start="21726" end="21746" title="transport theory (statistical physics)" label="transport properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q909741" start="21751" end="21762" title="thermometry" label="thermometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="21807" end="21819" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q901775" start="21841" end="21847" title="X-ray spectroscopy" label="X-rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q70906" start="21849" end="21863" title="infrared spectroscopy" label="infrared light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451740" start="21868" end="21896" title="inelastic neutron scattering" label="inelastic neutron scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q487756" start="21933" end="21946" title="specific heat" label="specific heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7465774" start="21992" end="22002" title="conduction (heat)" label="conduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="22111" end="22116" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="22126" end="22132" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="22135" end="22142" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="22266" end="22279" title="Visible light" label="Visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="22309" end="22322" title="electron volt" label="electron volt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027242" start="22419" end="22438" title="dielectric constant" label="dielectric constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="22443" end="22459" title="refractive index" label="refractive index"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="22501" end="22504" title="electron volt" label="keV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="22641" end="22648" title="Neutron" label="Neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="22747" end="22752" title="Spin (physics)" label="spins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950046" start="22822" end="22837" title="Mott scattering" label="Mott scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q207340" start="22872" end="22886" title="electron beams" label="electron beams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229" start="22920" end="22928" title="positron" label="positron"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="23008" end="23026" title="Laser spectroscopy" label="Laser spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q932483" start="23123" end="23143" title="forbidden transition" label="forbidden transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q756033" start="23159" end="23189" title="non-linear optics" label="nonlinear optical spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="23275" end="23289" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q230875" start="23298" end="23320" title="thermodynamic variable" label="thermodynamic variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q209402" start="23400" end="23426" title="Nuclear magnetic resonance" label="Nuclear magnetic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="23463" end="23478" title="magnetic fields" label="magnetic fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q163343" start="23699" end="23704" title="Tesla (unit)" label="tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269081" start="23778" end="23798" title="Quantum oscillations" label="Quantum oscillations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406417" start="23923" end="23936" title="Fermi surface" label="Fermi surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q6578855" start="24059" end="24081" title="magnetoelectric effect" label="magnetoelectric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q219708" start="24089" end="24106" title="magnetic monopole" label="magnetic monopole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047822" start="24129" end="24148" title="quantum Hall effect" label="quantum Hall effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q77870413" start="24193" end="24208" title="local structure" label="local structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q260463" start="24348" end="24379" title="electron paramagnetic resonance" label="electron paramagnetic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q209402" start="24390" end="24416" title="nuclear magnetic resonance" label="nuclear magnetic resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="24616" end="24622" title="Atomic nucleus" label="nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413102" start="24649" end="24671" title="hyperfine structure" label="hyperfine interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q209402" start="24889" end="24892" title="nuclear magnetic resonance" label="NMR"/>
<link wikidata="Q638540" start="24894" end="24922" title="nuclear quadrupole resonance" label="nuclear quadrupole resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937068" start="24977" end="24999" title="muon spin spectroscopy" label="muon spin spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q899927" start="25015" end="25037" title="Mössbauer spectroscopy" label="Mössbauer spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76416136" start="25056" end="25085" title="perturbed angular correlation" label="perturbed angular correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880521" start="25264" end="25278" title="Ultracold atom" label="Ultracold atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151533" start="25382" end="25420" title="atomic, molecular, and optical physics" label="atomic, molecular, and optical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q136980" start="25474" end="25494" title="interference (wave propagation)" label="interference pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q902635" start="25774" end="25792" title="Geometrical frustration" label="frustrated magnets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571298" start="25883" end="25896" title="Hubbard model" label="Hubbard model"/>
<link wikidata="Q575224" start="25963" end="25980" title="antiferromagnetism" label="antiferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661413" start="25985" end="25996" title="spin liquid" label="spin liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="26026" end="26034" title="rubidium" label="rubidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="26077" end="26079" title="Kelvin" label="nK"/>
<link wikidata="Q46202" start="26119" end="26143" title="Bose–Einstein condensate" label="Bose–Einstein condensate"/>
<link wikidata="Q45789" start="26193" end="26203" title="S. N. Bose" label="S. N. Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="26208" end="26223" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q230883" start="26268" end="26281" title="quantum state" label="quantum state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="26416" end="26429" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="26430" end="26440" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="26442" end="26447" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364527" start="26460" end="26476" title="magnetic storage" label="magnetic storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q203989" start="26478" end="26493" title="liquid crystals" label="liquid crystals"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="26495" end="26509" title="optical fibres" label="optical fibres"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="26558" end="26572" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q175646" start="26590" end="26619" title="Scanning tunneling microscope" label="scanning-tunneling microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="26660" end="26669" title="nanometer" label="nanometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259614" start="26813" end="26824" title="Ben Feringa" label="Ben Feringa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3169751" start="26826" end="26845" title="Jean-Pierre Sauvage" label="Jean-Pierre Sauvage"/>
<link wikidata="Q376243" start="26850" end="26865" title="Fraser Stoddart" label="Fraser Stoddart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964671" start="26938" end="26951" title="molecular car" label="molecular car"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="26991" end="27010" title="quantum computation" label="quantum computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q378201" start="27059" end="27064" title="qubit" label="qubit"/>
<link wikidata="Q578430" start="27082" end="27090" title="quantum decoherence" label="decohere"/>
<link wikidata="Q764228" start="27321" end="27339" title="Josephson junction" label="Josephson junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q258659" start="27348" end="27358" title="spintronic" label="spintronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="27376" end="27380" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528" start="27448" end="27453" title="anyon" label="anyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030113" start="27460" end="27490" title="fractional quantum Hall effect" label="fractional quantum Hall effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q864601" start="27553" end="27564" title="biomedicine" label="biomedicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="27579" end="27605" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5388" wikidata="Q28598" url="?curid=5388" title="Cultural anthropology">
<text>Cultural anthropology is a branch of anthropology focused on the study of cultural variation among humans. It is in contrast to social anthropology, which perceives cultural variation as a subset of a posited anthropological constant. The term sociocultural anthropology includes both cultural and social anthropology traditions.

Anthropologists have pointed out that through culture, people can adapt to their environment in non-genetic ways, so people living in different environments will often have different cultures. Much of anthropological theory has originated in an appreciation of and interest in the tension between the local (particular cultures) and the global (a universal human nature, or the web of connections between people in distinct places/circumstances).

Cultural anthropology has a rich methodology, including participant observation (often called fieldwork because it requires the anthropologist spending an extended period of time at the research location), interviews, and surveys.

==History==
Modern anthropology emerged in the 19th century coinciding with significant developments in the Western world. These changes sparked a renewed interest in understanding humankind, particularly, its origins, unity, and plurality. However, it was in the 20th century that cultural anthropology began to adopt a more pluralistic perspective on cultures and societies.

Cultural anthropology emerged in the late 19th century, shaped by debates over what constituted &quot;primitive&quot; versus &quot;civilized&quot; societies, an issue that preoccupied not only Freud, but many of his contemporaries. Colonialism expansion increasingly brought European thinkers into direct or indirect contact with &quot;primitive others&quot;. The first generation of cultural anthropologists were interested in the relative status of various humans, some of whom had modern advanced technologies, while others lacked anything but face-to-face communication techniques and still lived a Paleolithic lifestyle.

==Theoretical foundations==

===The concept of culture===
One of the earliest articulations of the anthropological meaning of the term &quot;culture&quot; came from Sir Edward Tylor: &quot;Culture, or civilization, taken in its broad, ethnographic sense, is that complex whole which includes knowledge, belief, art, morals, law, custom, and any other capabilities and habits acquired by man as a member of society.&quot; The term &quot;civilization&quot; later gave way to definitions given by V. Gordon Childe, with culture forming an umbrella term and civilization becoming a particular kind of culture.

Kay Milton, former Director of Anthropology Research at Queen&#x27;s University Belfast, distinguishes between general and specific cultures. This means culture can be something applied to all human beings or it can be specific to a certain group of people such as African American culture or Irish American culture. Specific cultures are structured systems which means they are organized very specifically and adding or taking away any element from that system may disrupt it.

===The critique of evolutionism===
Anthropology is concerned with the lives of people in different parts of the world, particularly in relation to the discourse of beliefs and practices. In addressing this question, ethnologists in the 19th century divided into two schools of thought. Some, like Grafton Elliot Smith, argued that different groups must have learned from one another somehow, however indirectly; in other words, they argued that cultural traits spread from one place to another, or &quot;diffused&quot;.
Other ethnologists argued that different groups had the capability of creating similar beliefs and practices independently. Some of those who advocated &quot;independent invention&quot;, like Lewis Henry Morgan, additionally supposed that similarities meant that different groups had passed through the same stages of cultural evolution (See also classical social evolutionism). Morgan, in particular, acknowledged that certain forms of society and culture could not possibly have arisen before others. For example, industrial farming could not have been invented before simple farming, and metallurgy could not have developed without previous non-smelting processes involving metals (such as simple ground collection or mining). Morgan, like other 19th century social evolutionists, believed there was a more or less orderly progression from the primitive to the civilized.

20th-century anthropologists largely reject the notion that all human societies must pass through the same stages in the same order, on the grounds that such a notion does not fit the empirical facts. Some 20th-century ethnologists, like Julian Steward, have instead argued that such similarities reflected similar adaptations to similar environments. Although 19th-century ethnologists saw &quot;diffusion&quot; and &quot;independent invention&quot; as mutually exclusive and competing theories, most ethnographers quickly reached a consensus that both processes occur, and that both can plausibly account for cross-cultural similarities. But these ethnographers also pointed out the superficiality of many such similarities. They noted that even traits that spread through diffusion often were given different meanings and function from one society to another. Analyses of large human concentrations in big cities, in multidisciplinary studies by Ronald Daus, show how new methods may be applied to the understanding of man living in a global world and how it was caused by the action of extra-European nations, so highlighting the role of Ethics in modern anthropology.

Accordingly, most of these anthropologists showed less interest in comparing cultures, generalizing about human nature, or discovering universal laws of cultural development, than in understanding particular cultures in those cultures&#x27; own terms. Such ethnographers and their students promoted the idea of &quot;cultural relativism&quot;, the view that one can only understand another person&#x27;s beliefs and behaviors in the context of the culture in which they live or lived.

Others, such as Claude Lévi-Strauss (who was influenced both by American cultural anthropology and by French Durkheimian sociology), have argued that apparently similar patterns of development reflect fundamental similarities in the structure of human thought (see structuralism). By the mid-20th century, the number of examples of people skipping stages, such as going from hunter-gatherers to post-industrial service occupations in one generation, were so numerous that 19th-century evolutionism was effectively disproved.

===Cultural relativism===

Cultural relativism is a principle that was established as axiomatic in anthropological research by Franz Boas and later popularized by his students. Boas first articulated the idea in 1887: &quot;...civilization is not something absolute, but ... is relative, and ... our ideas and conceptions are true only so far as our civilization goes.&quot; Although Boas did not coin the term, it became common among anthropologists after Boas&#x27; death in 1942, to express their synthesis of a number of ideas Boas had developed. Boas believed that the sweep of cultures, to be found in connection with any sub-species, is so vast and pervasive that there cannot be a relationship between culture and race. Cultural relativism involves specific epistemological and methodological claims. Whether or not these claims require a specific ethical stance is a matter of debate. This principle should not be confused with moral relativism.

Cultural relativism was in part a response to Western ethnocentrism. Ethnocentrism may take obvious forms, in which one consciously believes that one&#x27;s people&#x27;s arts are the most beautiful, values the most virtuous, and beliefs the most truthful. Boas, originally trained in physics and geography, and heavily influenced by the thought of Kant, Herder, and von Humboldt, argued that one&#x27;s culture may mediate and thus limit one&#x27;s perceptions in less obvious ways. This understanding of culture confronts anthropologists with two problems: first, how to escape the unconscious bonds of one&#x27;s own culture, which inevitably bias our perceptions of and reactions to the world, and second, how to make sense of an unfamiliar culture. The principle of cultural relativism thus forced anthropologists to develop innovative methods and heuristic strategies.

Boas and his students realized that if they were to conduct scientific research in other cultures, they would need to employ methods that would help them escape the limits of their own ethnocentrism. One such method is that of ethnography. This method advocates living with people of another culture for an extended period of time to learn the local language and be enculturated, at least partially, into that culture. In this context, cultural relativism is of fundamental methodological importance, because it calls attention to the importance of the local context in understanding the meaning of particular human beliefs and activities. Thus, in 1948 Virginia Heyer wrote, &quot;Cultural relativity, to phrase it in starkest abstraction, states the relativity of the part to the whole. The part gains its cultural significance by its place in the whole, and cannot retain its integrity in a different situation.&quot;

===Theoretical approaches===

* Actor–network theory
* Cultural materialism
* Culture theory
* Feminist anthropology
* Functionalism
* Symbolic and interpretive anthropology
* Political economy in anthropology
* Practice theory
* Structuralism
* Post-structuralism
* Systems theory in anthropology
===Comparison with social anthropology===
The rubric &quot;cultural&quot; anthropology is generally applied to ethnographic works that are holistic in approach, are oriented to the ways in which culture affects individual experience or aim to provide a rounded view of the knowledge, customs, and institutions of a people. &quot;Social&quot; anthropology is a term applied to ethnographic works that attempt to isolate a particular system of social relations such as those that comprise domestic life, economy, law, politics, or religion, give analytical priority to the organizational bases of social life, and attend to cultural phenomena as somewhat secondary to the main issues of social scientific inquiry.

Parallel with the rise of cultural anthropology in the United States, social anthropology developed as an academic discipline in Britain and in France.

==Foundational thinkers==

===Lewis Henry Morgan===
Lewis Henry Morgan (1818–1881), a lawyer from Rochester, New York, became an advocate for and ethnological scholar of the Iroquois. His comparative analyses of religion, government, material culture, and especially kinship patterns proved to be influential contributions to the field of anthropology. Like other scholars of his day (such as Edward Tylor), Morgan argued that human societies could be classified into categories of cultural evolution on a scale of progression that ranged from &quot;savagery&quot;, to &quot;barbarism&quot;, to &quot;civilization&quot;. Generally, Morgan used technology (such as bowmaking or pottery) as an indicator of position on this scale.

=== Franz Boas, founder of the modern discipline ===

Franz Boas (1858–1942) established academic anthropology in the United States in opposition to Morgan&#x27;s evolutionary perspective. His approach was empirical, skeptical of overgeneralizations, and eschewed attempts to establish universal laws. For example, Boas studied immigrant children to demonstrate that biological race was not immutable, and that human conduct and behavior resulted from nurture, rather than nature.

Influenced by the German tradition, Boas argued that the world was full of distinct &quot;cultures,&quot; rather than societies whose evolution could be measured by the extent of &quot;civilization&quot; they had. He believed that each culture has to be studied in its particularity, and argued that cross-cultural generalizations, like those made in the natural sciences, were not possible.

In doing so, he fought discrimination against immigrants, blacks, and indigenous peoples of the Americas. Many American anthropologists adopted his agenda for social reform, and theories of race continue to be popular subjects for anthropologists today. The so-called &quot;Four Field Approach&quot; has its origins in Boasian Anthropology, dividing the discipline in the four crucial and interrelated fields of sociocultural, biological, linguistic, and archaic anthropology (e.g. archaeology). Anthropology in the United States continues to be deeply influenced by the Boasian tradition, especially its emphasis on culture.


===Kroeber, Mead, and Benedict===
Boas used his positions at Columbia University and the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) to train and develop multiple generations of students. His first generation of students included Alfred Kroeber, Robert Lowie, Edward Sapir, and Ruth Benedict, who each produced richly detailed studies of indigenous North American cultures. They provided a wealth of details used to attack the theory of a single evolutionary process. Kroeber and Sapir&#x27;s focus on Native American languages helped establish linguistics as a truly general science and free it from its historical focus on Indo-European languages.

The publication of Alfred Kroeber&#x27;s textbook &quot;Anthropology&quot; (1923) marked a turning point in American anthropology. After three decades of amassing material, Boasians felt a growing urge to generalize. This was most obvious in the &#x27;Culture and Personality&#x27; studies carried out by younger Boasians such as Margaret Mead and Ruth Benedict. Influenced by psychoanalytic psychologists including Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung, these authors sought to understand the way that individual personalities were shaped by the wider cultural and social forces in which they grew up.

Though such works as Mead&#x27;s &quot;Coming of Age in Samoa&quot; (1928) and Benedict&#x27;s &quot;The Chrysanthemum and the Sword&quot; (1946) remain popular with the American public, Mead and Benedict never had the impact on the discipline of anthropology that some expected. Boas had planned for Ruth Benedict to succeed him as chair of Columbia&#x27;s anthropology department, but she was sidelined in favor of Ralph Linton, and Mead was limited to her offices at the AMNH.

===Wolf, Sahlins, Mintz, and political economy===

In the 1950s and mid-1960s anthropology tended increasingly to model itself after the natural sciences. Some anthropologists, such as Lloyd Fallers and Clifford Geertz, focused on processes of modernization by which newly independent states could develop. Others, such as Julian Steward and Leslie White, focused on how societies evolve and fit their ecological niche—an approach popularized by Marvin Harris.

Economic anthropology as influenced by Karl Polanyi and practiced by Marshall Sahlins and George Dalton challenged standard neoclassical economics to take account of cultural and social factors and employed Marxian analysis into anthropological study. In England, British Social Anthropology&#x27;s paradigm began to fragment as Max Gluckman and Peter Worsley experimented with Marxism and authors such as Rodney Needham and Edmund Leach incorporated Lévi-Strauss&#x27;s structuralism into their work. Structuralism also influenced a number of developments in the 1960s and 1970s, including cognitive anthropology and componential analysis.

In keeping with the times, much of anthropology became politicized through the Algerian War of Independence and opposition to the Vietnam War; Marxism became an increasingly popular theoretical approach in the discipline. By the 1970s the authors of volumes such as &quot;Reinventing Anthropology&quot; worried about anthropology&#x27;s relevance.

Since the 1980s issues of power, such as those examined in Eric Wolf&#x27;s &quot;Europe and the People Without History&quot;, have been central to the discipline. In the 1980s books like &quot;Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter&quot; pondered anthropology&#x27;s ties to colonial inequality, while the immense popularity of theorists such as Antonio Gramsci and Michel Foucault moved issues of power and hegemony into the spotlight. Gender and sexuality became popular topics, as did the relationship between history and anthropology, influenced by Marshall Sahlins, who drew on Lévi-Strauss and Fernand Braudel to examine the relationship between symbolic meaning, sociocultural structure, and individual agency in the processes of historical transformation. Jean and John Comaroff produced a whole generation of anthropologists at the University of Chicago that focused on these themes. Also influential in these issues were Nietzsche, Heidegger, the critical theory of the Frankfurt School, Derrida and Lacan.

===Geertz, Schneider, and interpretive anthropology===

Many anthropologists reacted against the renewed emphasis on materialism and scientific modelling derived from Marx by emphasizing the importance of the concept of culture. Authors such as David Schneider, Clifford Geertz, and Marshall Sahlins developed a more fleshed-out concept of culture as a web of meaning or signification, which proved very popular within and beyond the discipline. Geertz was to state:

Geertz&#x27;s interpretive method involved what he called &quot;thick description&quot;. The cultural symbols of rituals, political and economic action, and of kinship, are &quot;read&quot; by the anthropologist as if they are a document in a foreign language. The interpretation of those symbols must be re-framed for their anthropological audience, i.e. transformed from the &quot;experience-near&quot; but foreign concepts of the other culture, into the &quot;experience-distant&quot; theoretical concepts of the anthropologist. These interpretations must then be reflected back to its originators, and its adequacy as a translation fine-tuned in a repeated way, a process called the hermeneutic circle. Geertz applied his method in a number of areas, creating programs of study that were very productive. His analysis of &quot;religion as a cultural system&quot; was particularly influential outside of anthropology. David Schnieder&#x27;s cultural analysis of American kinship has proven equally influential. Schneider demonstrated that the American folk-cultural emphasis on &quot;blood connections&quot; had an undue influence on anthropological kinship theories, and that kinship is not a biological characteristic, but a cultural relationship established on very different terms in different societies.

Prominent British symbolic anthropologists include Victor Turner and Mary Douglas.

===The post-modern turn===
In the late 1980s and 1990s authors such as James Clifford pondered ethnographic authority, in particular how and why anthropological knowledge was possible and authoritative. They were reflecting trends in research and discourse initiated by feminists in the academy, although they excused themselves from commenting specifically on those pioneering critics. Nevertheless, key aspects of feminist theory and methods became &quot;de rigueur&quot; as part of the &#x27;post-modern moment&#x27; in anthropology: Ethnographies became more interpretative and reflexive, explicitly addressing the author&#x27;s methodology; cultural, gendered, and racial positioning; and their influence on the ethnographic analysis. This was part of a more general trend of postmodernism that was popular contemporaneously. Currently anthropologists pay attention to a wide variety of issues pertaining to the contemporary world, including globalization, medicine and biotechnology, indigenous rights, virtual communities, and the anthropology of industrialized societies.

===Socio-cultural anthropology subfields===

* Anthropology of art
* Cognitive anthropology
* Anthropology of development
* Disability anthropology
* Ecological anthropology
* Economic anthropology
* Feminist anthropology and anthropology of gender and sexuality
* Ethnohistory and historical anthropology
* Kinship and family
* Legal anthropology
* Multimodal anthropology
* Media anthropology
* Medical anthropology
* Political anthropology
* Political economy in anthropology
* Psychological anthropology
* Public anthropology
* Anthropology of religion
* Cyborg anthropology
* Transpersonal anthropology
* Urban anthropology
* Visual anthropology
==Methods==
Modern cultural anthropology has its origins in, and developed in reaction to, 19th century ethnology, which involves the organized comparison of human societies. Scholars like E.B. Tylor and J.G. Frazer in England worked mostly with materials collected by others—usually missionaries, traders, explorers, or colonial officials—earning them the moniker of &quot;arm-chair anthropologists&quot;.

===Participant observation===

Participant observation is one of the principal research methods of cultural anthropology. It relies on the assumption that the best way to understand a group of people is to interact with them closely over a long period of time. The method originated in the field research of social anthropologists, especially Bronislaw Malinowski in Britain, the students of Franz Boas in the United States, and in the later urban research of the Chicago School of Sociology. Historically, the group of people being studied was a small, non-Western society. However, today it may be a specific corporation, a church group, a sports team, or a small town. There are no restrictions as to what the subject of participant observation can be, as long as the group of people is studied intimately by the observing anthropologist over a long period of time. This allows the anthropologist to develop trusting relationships with the subjects of study and receive an inside perspective on the culture, which helps him or her to give a richer description when writing about the culture later. Observable details (like daily time allotment) and more hidden details (like taboo behavior) are more easily observed and interpreted over a longer period of time, and researchers can discover discrepancies between what participants say—and often believe—should happen (the formal system) and what actually does happen, or between different aspects of the formal system; in contrast, a one-time survey of people&#x27;s answers to a set of questions might be quite consistent, but is less likely to show conflicts between different aspects of the social system or between conscious representations and behavior.

Interactions between an ethnographer and a cultural informant must go both ways. Just as an ethnographer may be naive or curious about a culture, the members of that culture may be curious about the ethnographer. To establish connections that will eventually lead to a better understanding of the cultural context of a situation, an anthropologist must be open to becoming part of the group, and willing to develop meaningful relationships with its members. One way to do this is to find a small area of common experience between an anthropologist and their subjects, and then to expand from this common ground into the larger area of difference. Once a single connection has been established, it becomes easier to integrate into the community, and it is more likely that accurate and complete information is being shared with the anthropologist.

Before participant observation can begin, an anthropologist must choose both a location and a focus of study. This focus may change once the anthropologist is actively observing the chosen group of people, but having an idea of what one wants to study before beginning fieldwork allows an anthropologist to spend time researching background information on their topic. It can also be helpful to know what previous research has been conducted in one&#x27;s chosen location or on similar topics, and if the participant observation takes place in a location where the spoken language is not one the anthropologist is familiar with, they will usually also learn that language. This allows the anthropologist to become better established in the community. The lack of need for a translator makes communication more direct, and allows the anthropologist to give a richer, more contextualized representation of what they witness. In addition, participant observation often requires permits from governments and research institutions in the area of study, and always needs some form of funding.

The majority of participant observation is based on conversation. This can take the form of casual, friendly dialogue, or can also be a series of more structured interviews. A combination of the two is often used, sometimes along with photography, mapping, artifact collection, and various other methods. In some cases, ethnographers also turn to structured observation, in which an anthropologist&#x27;s observations are directed by a specific set of questions they are trying to answer. In the case of structured observation, an observer might be required to record the order of a series of events, or describe a certain part of the surrounding environment. While the anthropologist still makes an effort to become integrated into the group they are studying, and still participates in the events as they observe, structured observation is more directed and specific than participant observation in general. This helps to standardize the method of study when ethnographic data is being compared across several groups or is needed to fulfill a specific purpose, such as research for a governmental policy decision.

One common criticism of participant observation is its lack of objectivity. Because each anthropologist has their own background and set of experiences, each individual is likely to interpret the same culture in a different way. Who the ethnographer is has a lot to do with what they will eventually write about a culture, because each researcher is influenced by their own perspective. This is considered a problem especially when anthropologists write in the ethnographic present, a present tense which makes a culture seem stuck in time, and ignores the fact that it may have interacted with other cultures or gradually evolved since the anthropologist made observations. To avoid this, past ethnographers have advocated for strict training, or for anthropologists working in teams. However, these approaches have not generally been successful, and modern ethnographers often choose to include their personal experiences and possible biases in their writing instead.

Participant observation has also raised ethical questions, since an anthropologist is in control of what they report about a culture. In terms of representation, an anthropologist has greater power than their subjects of study, and this has drawn criticism of participant observation in general. Additionally, anthropologists have struggled with the effect their presence has on a culture. Simply by being present, a researcher causes changes in a culture, and anthropologists continue to question whether or not it is appropriate to influence the cultures they study, or possible to avoid having influence.

===Ethnography===

In the 20th century, most cultural and social anthropologists turned to the crafting of ethnographies. An ethnography is a piece of writing about a people, at a particular place and time. Typically, the anthropologist lives among people in another society for a period of time, simultaneously participating in and observing the social and cultural life of the group.

Numerous other ethnographic techniques have resulted in ethnographic writing or details being preserved, as cultural anthropologists also curate materials, spend long hours in libraries, churches and schools poring over records, investigate graveyards, and decipher ancient scripts. A typical ethnography will also include information about physical geography, climate and habitat. It is meant to be a holistic piece of writing about the people in question, and today often includes the longest possible timeline of past events that the ethnographer can obtain through primary and secondary research.

Bronisław Malinowski developed the ethnographic method, and Franz Boas taught it in the United States. Boas&#x27; students such as Alfred L. Kroeber, Ruth Benedict and Margaret Mead drew on his conception of culture and cultural relativism to develop cultural anthropology in the United States. Simultaneously, Malinowski and A.R. Radcliffe Brown&#x27;s students were developing social anthropology in the United Kingdom. Whereas cultural anthropology focused on symbols and values, social anthropology focused on social groups and institutions. Today socio-cultural anthropologists attend to all these elements.

In the early 20th century, socio-cultural anthropology developed in different forms in Europe and in the United States. European &quot;social anthropologists&quot; focused on observed social behaviors and on &quot;social structure&quot;, that is, on relationships among social roles (for example, husband and wife, or parent and child) and social institutions (for example, religion, economy, and politics).

American &quot;cultural anthropologists&quot; focused on the ways people expressed their view of themselves and their world, especially in symbolic forms, such as art and myths. These two approaches frequently converged and generally complemented one another. For example, kinship and leadership function both as symbolic systems and as social institutions. Today almost all socio-cultural anthropologists refer to the work of both sets of predecessors and have an equal interest in what people do and in what people say.

===Cross-cultural comparison===
One means by which anthropologists combat ethnocentrism is to engage in the process of cross-cultural comparison. It is important to test so-called &quot;human universals&quot; against the ethnographic record. Monogamy, for example, is frequently touted as a universal human trait, yet comparative study shows that it is not. The Human Relations Area Files, Inc. (HRAF) is a research agency based at Yale University. Since 1949, its mission has been to encourage and facilitate worldwide comparative studies of human culture, society, and behavior in the past and present. The name came from the Institute of Human Relations, an interdisciplinary program/building at Yale at the time. The Institute of Human Relations had sponsored HRAF&#x27;s precursor, the &quot;Cross-Cultural Survey&quot; (see George Peter Murdock), as part of an effort to develop an integrated science of human behavior and culture. The two eHRAF databases on the Web are expanded and updated annually. &quot;eHRAF World Cultures&quot; includes materials on cultures, past and present, and covers nearly 400 cultures. The second database, &quot;eHRAF Archaeology&quot;, covers major archaeological traditions and many more sub-traditions and sites around the world.

Comparison across cultures includes the industrialized (or de-industrialized) West. Cultures in the more traditional standard cross-cultural sample of small-scale societies are:
===Multi-sited ethnography===
Ethnography dominates socio-cultural anthropology. Nevertheless, many contemporary socio-cultural anthropologists have rejected earlier models of ethnography as treating local cultures as bounded and isolated. These anthropologists continue to concern themselves with the distinct ways people in different locales experience and understand their lives, but they often argue that one cannot understand these particular ways of life solely from a local perspective; they instead combine a focus on the local with an effort to grasp larger political, economic, and cultural frameworks that impact local lived realities. Notable proponents of this approach include Arjun Appadurai, James Clifford, George Marcus, Sidney Mintz, Michael Taussig, Eric Wolf and Ronald Daus.

A growing trend in anthropological research and analysis is the use of multi-sited ethnography, discussed in George Marcus&#x27; article, &quot;Ethnography In/Of the World System: the Emergence of Multi-Sited Ethnography&quot;. Looking at culture as embedded in macro-constructions of a global social order, multi-sited ethnography uses traditional methodology in various locations both spatially and temporally. Through this methodology, greater insight can be gained when examining the impact of world-systems on local and global communities.

Also emerging in multi-sited ethnography are greater interdisciplinary approaches to fieldwork, bringing in methods from cultural studies, media studies, science and technology studies, and others. In multi-sited ethnography, research tracks a subject across spatial and temporal boundaries. For example, a multi-sited ethnography may follow a &quot;thing&quot;, such as a particular commodity, as it is transported through the networks of global capitalism.

Multi-sited ethnography may also follow ethnic groups in diaspora, stories or rumours that appear in multiple locations and in multiple time periods, metaphors that appear in multiple ethnographic locations, or the biographies of individual people or groups as they move through space and time. It may also follow conflicts that transcend boundaries. An example of multi-sited ethnography is Nancy Scheper-Hughes&#x27; work on the international black market for the trade of human organs. In this research, she follows organs as they are transferred through various legal and illegal networks of capitalism, as well as the rumours and urban legends that circulate in impoverished communities about child kidnapping and organ theft.

Sociocultural anthropologists have increasingly turned their investigative eye on to &quot;Western&quot; culture. For example, Philippe Bourgois won the Margaret Mead Award in 1997 for &quot;In Search of Respect&quot;, a study of the entrepreneurs in a Harlem crack-den. Also growing more popular are ethnographies of professional communities, such as laboratory researchers, Wall Street investors, law firms, or information technology (IT) computer employees.

==Topics==
===Kinship and family===

Kinship refers to the anthropological study of the ways in which humans form and maintain relationships with one another and how those relationships operate within and define social organization.

Research in kinship studies often crosses over into different anthropological subfields including medical, feminist, and public anthropology. This is likely due to its fundamental concepts, as articulated by linguistic anthropologist Patrick McConvell: Throughout history, kinship studies have primarily focused on the topics of marriage, descent, and procreation. Anthropologists have written extensively on the variations within marriage across cultures and its legitimacy as a human institution. There are stark differences between communities in terms of marital practice and value, leaving much room for anthropological fieldwork. For instance, the Nuer of Sudan and the Brahmans of Nepal practice polygyny, where one man has several marriages to two or more women. The Nyar of India and Nyimba of Tibet and Nepal practice polyandry, where one woman is often married to two or more men. The marital practice found in most cultures, however, is monogamy, where one woman is married to one man. Anthropologists also study different marital taboos across cultures, most commonly the incest taboo of marriage within sibling and parent-child relationships. It has been found that all cultures have an incest taboo to some degree, but the taboo shifts between cultures when the marriage extends beyond the nuclear family unit.

There are similar foundational differences where the act of procreation is concerned. Although anthropologists have found that biology is acknowledged in every cultural relationship to procreation, there are differences in the ways in which cultures assess the constructs of parenthood. For example, in the Nuyoo municipality of Oaxaca, Mexico, it is believed that a child can have partible maternity and partible paternity. In this case, a child would have multiple biological mothers in the case that it is born of one woman and then breastfed by another. A child would have multiple biological fathers in the case that the mother had sex with multiple men, following the commonplace belief in Nuyoo culture that pregnancy must be preceded by sex with multiple men in order have the necessary accumulation of semen.

====Late twentieth-century shifts in interest====
In the twenty-first century, Western ideas of kinship have evolved beyond the traditional assumptions of the nuclear family, raising anthropological questions of consanguinity, lineage, and normative marital expectation. The shift can be traced back to the 1960s, with the reassessment of kinship&#x27;s basic principles offered by Edmund Leach, Rodney Neeham, David Schneider, and others. Instead of relying on narrow ideas of Western normalcy, kinship studies increasingly catered to &quot;more ethnographic voices, human agency, intersecting power structures, and historical context&quot;. The study of kinship evolved to accommodate for the fact that it cannot be separated from its institutional roots and must pay respect to the society in which it lives, including that society&#x27;s contradictions, hierarchies, and individual experiences of those within it. This shift was progressed further by the emergence of second-wave feminism in the early 1970s, which introduced ideas of marital oppression, sexual autonomy, and domestic subordination. Other themes that emerged during this time included the frequent comparisons between Eastern and Western kinship systems and the increasing amount of attention paid to anthropologists&#x27; own societies, a swift turn from the focus that had traditionally been paid to largely &quot;foreign&quot;, non-Western communities.

Kinship studies began to gain mainstream recognition in the late 1990s with the surging popularity of feminist anthropology, particularly with its work related to biological anthropology and the intersectional critique of gender relations. At this time, there was the arrival of &quot;Third World feminism&quot;, a movement that argued kinship studies could not examine the gender relations of developing countries in isolation and must pay respect to racial and economic nuance as well. This critique became relevant, for instance, in the anthropological study of Jamaica: race and class were seen as the primary obstacles to Jamaican liberation from economic imperialism, and gender as an identity was largely ignored. Third World feminism aimed to combat this in the early twenty-first century by promoting these categories as coexisting factors. In Jamaica, marriage as an institution is often substituted for a series of partners, as poor women cannot rely on regular financial contributions in a climate of economic instability. In addition, there is a common practice of Jamaican women artificially lightening their skin tones in order to secure economic survival. These anthropological findings, according to Third World feminism, cannot see gender, racial, or class differences as separate entities, and instead must acknowledge that they interact together to produce unique individual experiences.

====Rise of reproductive anthropology====
Kinship studies have also experienced a rise in the interest of reproductive anthropology with the advancement of assisted reproductive technologies (ARTs), including in vitro fertilization (IVF). These advancements have led to new dimensions of anthropological research, as they challenge the Western standard of biogenetically based kinship, relatedness, and parenthood. According to anthropologists Maria C. Inhorn and Daphna Birenbaum-Carmeli, &quot;ARTs have pluralized notions of relatedness and led to a more dynamic notion of &quot;kinning&quot; namely, kinship as a process, as something under construction, rather than a natural given&quot;. With this technology, questions of kinship have emerged over the difference between biological and genetic relatedness, as gestational surrogates can provide a biological environment for the embryo while the genetic ties remain with a third party. If genetic, surrogate, and adoptive maternities are involved, anthropologists have acknowledged that there can be the possibility for three &quot;biological&quot; mothers to a single child. With ARTs, there are also anthropological questions concerning the intersections between wealth and fertility: ARTs are generally only available to those in the highest income bracket, meaning the infertile poor are inherently devalued in the system. There have also been issues of reproductive tourism and bodily commodification, as individuals seek economic security through hormonal stimulation and egg harvesting, which are potentially harmful procedures. With IVF, specifically, there have been many questions of embryotic value and the status of life, particularly as it relates to the manufacturing of stem cells, testing, and research.

Current issues in kinship studies, such as adoption, have revealed and challenged the Western cultural disposition towards the genetic, &quot;blood&quot; tie. Western biases against single parent homes have also been explored through similar anthropological research, uncovering that a household with a single parent experiences &quot;greater levels of scrutiny and [is] routinely seen as the &#x27;other&#x27; of the nuclear, patriarchal family&quot;. The power dynamics in reproduction, when explored through a comparative analysis of &quot;conventional&quot; and &quot;unconventional&quot; families, have been used to dissect the Western assumptions of child bearing and child rearing in contemporary kinship studies.

==== Critiques of kinship studies ====
Kinship, as an anthropological field of inquiry, has been heavily criticized across the discipline. One critique is that, as its inception, the framework of kinship studies was far too structured and formulaic, relying on dense language and stringent rules. Another critique, explored at length by American anthropologist David Schneider, argues that kinship has been limited by its inherent Western ethnocentrism. Schneider proposes that kinship is not a field that can be applied cross-culturally, as the theory itself relies on European assumptions of normalcy. He states in the widely circulated 1984 book &quot;A critique of the study of kinship&quot; that &quot;[K]inship has been defined by European social scientists, and European social scientists use their own folk culture as the source of many, if not all of their ways of formulating and understanding the world about them&quot;. However, this critique has been challenged by the argument that it is linguistics, not cultural divergence, that has allowed for a European bias, and that the bias can be lifted by centering the methodology on fundamental human concepts. Polish anthropologist Anna Wierzbicka argues that &quot;mother&quot; and &quot;father&quot; are examples of such fundamental human concepts and can only be Westernized when conflated with English concepts such as &quot;parent&quot; and &quot;sibling&quot;.

A more recent critique of kinship studies is its solipsistic focus on privileged, Western human relations and its promotion of normative ideals of human exceptionalism. In &quot;Critical Kinship Studies&quot;, social psychologists Elizabeth Peel and Damien Riggs argue for a move beyond this human-centered framework, opting instead to explore kinship through a &quot;posthumanist&quot; vantage point where anthropologists focus on the intersecting relationships of human animals, non-human animals, technologies and practices.

===Institutional anthropology===
The role of anthropology in institutions has expanded significantly since the end of the 20th century. Much of this development can be attributed to the rise in anthropologists working outside of academia and the increasing importance of globalization in both institutions and the field of anthropology. Anthropologists can be employed by institutions such as for-profit business, nonprofit organizations, and governments. For instance, cultural anthropologists are commonly employed by the United States federal government.

The two types of institutions defined in the field of anthropology are total institutions and social institutions. Total institutions are places that comprehensively coordinate the actions of people within them, and examples of total institutions include prisons, convents, and hospitals. Social institutions, on the other hand, are constructs that regulate individuals&#x27; day-to-day lives, such as kinship, religion, and economics. Anthropology of institutions may analyze labor unions, businesses ranging from small enterprises to corporations, government, medical organizations, education, prisons, and financial institutions. Nongovernmental organizations have garnered particular interest in the field of institutional anthropology because they are capable of fulfilling roles previously ignored by governments, or previously realized by families or local groups, in an attempt to mitigate social problems.

The types and methods of scholarship performed in the anthropology of institutions can take a number of forms. Institutional anthropologists may study the relationship between organizations or between an organization and other parts of society. Institutional anthropology may also focus on the inner workings of an institution, such as the relationships, hierarchies and cultures formed, and the ways that these elements are transmitted and maintained, transformed, or abandoned over time. Additionally, some anthropology of institutions examines the specific design of institutions and their corresponding strength. More specifically, anthropologists may analyze specific events within an institution, perform semiotic investigations, or analyze the mechanisms by which knowledge and culture are organized and dispersed.

In all manifestations of institutional anthropology, participant observation is critical to understanding the intricacies of the way an institution works and the consequences of actions taken by individuals within it. Simultaneously, anthropology of institutions extends beyond examination of the commonplace involvement of individuals in institutions to discover how and why the organizational principles evolved in the manner that they did.

Common considerations taken by anthropologists in studying institutions include the physical location at which a researcher places themselves, as important interactions often take place in private, and the fact that the members of an institution are often being examined in their workplace and may not have much idle time to discuss the details of their everyday endeavors. The ability of individuals to present the workings of an institution in a particular light or frame must additionally be taken into account when using interviews and document analysis to understand an institution, as the involvement of an anthropologist may be met with distrust when information being released to the public is not directly controlled by the institution and could potentially be damaging.

==See also==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==
* Official website of Human Relations Area Files (HRAF) based at Yale University
** A Basic Guide to Cross-Cultural Research from HRAF
** eHRAF World Cultures 
** eHRAF Archaeology </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28598" start="0" end="21" title="Cultural anthropology" label="Cultural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="37" end="49" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134448" start="74" end="92" title="cultural variation" label="cultural variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051" start="128" end="147" title="social anthropology" label="social anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552777" start="244" end="270" title="sociocultural anthropology" label="sociocultural anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="812" end="823" title="methodology" label="methodology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129049" start="835" end="858" title="participant observation" label="participant observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402508" start="873" end="882" title="fieldwork" label="fieldwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q178651" start="985" end="995" title="interviews" label="interviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q814232" start="1001" end="1008" title="Statistical survey" label="surveys"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="1582" end="1587" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="1621" end="1632" title="Colonialism" label="Colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="2157" end="2164" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q141037" start="2185" end="2197" title="Edward Burnett Tylor" label="Edward Tylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q154655" start="2510" end="2526" title="V. Gordon Childe" label="V. Gordon Childe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="3266" end="3272" title="belief" label="belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="3318" end="3330" title="Ethnology" label="ethnologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q733942" start="3399" end="3419" title="Grafton Elliot Smith" label="Grafton Elliot Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213532" start="3606" end="3614" title="Diffusion (anthropology)" label="diffused"/>
<link wikidata="Q313458" start="3814" end="3832" title="Lewis Henry Morgan" label="Lewis Henry Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12031891" start="3940" end="3958" title="cultural evolution" label="cultural evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382550" start="3969" end="3998" title="classical social evolutionism" label="classical social evolutionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343537" start="4736" end="4750" title="Julian Steward" label="Julian Steward"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="5000" end="5013" title="Ethnography" label="ethnographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q86630" start="5447" end="5458" title="Ronald Daus" label="Ronald Daus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="5640" end="5646" title="Ethics" label="Ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q741550" start="5989" end="6008" title="cultural relativism" label="cultural relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="6174" end="6193" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Claude Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="6267" end="6278" title="Émile Durkheim" label="Durkheimian"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="6279" end="6288" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179168" start="6423" end="6436" title="structuralism" label="structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="6533" end="6549" title="hunter-gatherers" label="hunter-gatherers"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="6770" end="6775" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="6783" end="6798" title="anthropology" label="anthropological"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="6811" end="6821" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="7406" end="7410" title="Race (classification of humans)" label="race"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="7450" end="7465" title="epistemology" label="epistemological"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="7540" end="7547" title="ethics" label="ethical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778848" start="7621" end="7637" title="moral relativism" label="moral relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189049" start="7694" end="7707" title="ethnocentrism" label="ethnocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="7925" end="7932" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="7937" end="7946" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="7989" end="7993" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q155547" start="7995" end="8001" title="Johann Gottfried Herder" label="Herder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="8007" end="8019" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="8743" end="8754" title="ethnography" label="ethnography"/>
<link wikidata="Q421953" start="9470" end="9490" title="Actor–network theory" label="Actor–network theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791800" start="9493" end="9513" title="Cultural materialism (anthropology)" label="Cultural materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791882" start="9516" end="9530" title="Culture theory" label="Culture theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442878" start="9533" end="9554" title="Feminist anthropology" label="Feminist anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q831725" start="9557" end="9570" title="Structural functionalism" label="Functionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668142" start="9573" end="9611" title="Symbolic anthropology" label="Symbolic and interpretive anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210200" start="9614" end="9647" title="Political economy in anthropology" label="Political economy in anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237364" start="9650" end="9665" title="Practice theory" label="Practice theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111399" start="9668" end="9681" title="Structural anthropology" label="Structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q267932" start="9684" end="9702" title="Post-structuralism" label="Post-structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663880" start="9705" end="9735" title="Systems theory in anthropology" label="Systems theory in anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="9847" end="9859" title="ethnographic" label="ethnographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="9931" end="9938" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q313458" start="10654" end="10672" title="Lewis Henry Morgan" label="Lewis Henry Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="10700" end="10709" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="10711" end="10719" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="10776" end="10784" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q141037" start="10995" end="11007" title="Edward Tylor" label="Edward Tylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="11386" end="11396" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="12169" end="12184" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="12896" end="12915" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="12924" end="12958" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q311538" start="13063" end="13077" title="Alfred Kroeber" label="Alfred Kroeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q44968" start="13079" end="13091" title="Robert Lowie" label="Robert Lowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q191095" start="13093" end="13105" title="Edward Sapir" label="Edward Sapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q228822" start="13111" end="13124" title="Ruth Benedict" label="Ruth Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="13378" end="13389" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="13458" end="13481" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q311538" start="13503" end="13517" title="Alfred Kroeber" label="Alfred Kroeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q180099" start="13814" end="13827" title="Margaret Mead" label="Margaret Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q228822" start="13832" end="13845" title="Ruth Benedict" label="Ruth Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="13900" end="13913" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="13918" end="13927" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151979" start="14117" end="14139" title="Coming of Age in Samoa" label="Coming of Age in Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038174" start="14179" end="14210" title="The Chrysanthemum and the Sword" label="The Chrysanthemum and the Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q720118" start="14495" end="14507" title="Ralph Linton" label="Ralph Linton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="14696" end="14711" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q20675520" start="14744" end="14757" title="Lloyd Fallers" label="Lloyd Fallers"/>
<link wikidata="Q310956" start="14762" end="14777" title="Clifford Geertz" label="Clifford Geertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343537" start="14882" end="14896" title="Julian Steward" label="Julian Steward"/>
<link wikidata="Q382021" start="14901" end="14913" title="Leslie White" label="Leslie White"/>
<link wikidata="Q334842" start="15005" end="15018" title="Marvin Harris" label="Marvin Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q27841" start="15021" end="15042" title="Economic anthropology" label="Economic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q318029" start="15060" end="15072" title="Karl Polanyi" label="Karl Polanyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q345300" start="15090" end="15106" title="Marshall Sahlins" label="Marshall Sahlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q60571" start="15145" end="15167" title="neoclassical economics" label="neoclassical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q924714" start="15350" end="15362" title="Max Gluckman" label="Max Gluckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727458" start="15367" end="15380" title="Peter Worsley" label="Peter Worsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438232" start="15427" end="15441" title="Rodney Needham" label="Rodney Needham"/>
<link wikidata="Q550729" start="15446" end="15458" title="Edmund Leach" label="Edmund Leach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15612" end="15634" title="Psychological anthropology#Cognitive Anthropology" label="cognitive anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q200790" start="15742" end="15770" title="Algerian War of Independence" label="Algerian War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="15793" end="15804" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="15806" end="15813" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q89562" start="16071" end="16080" title="Eric Wolf" label="Eric Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412183" start="16094" end="16131" title="Europe and the People Without History" label="Europe and the People Without History"/>
<link wikidata="Q83003" start="16360" end="16375" title="Antonio Gramsci" label="Antonio Gramsci"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="16380" end="16395" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="16422" end="16430" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q345300" start="16567" end="16583" title="Marshall Sahlins" label="Marshall Sahlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q128126" start="16597" end="16609" title="Claude Lévi-Strauss" label="Lévi-Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q185105" start="16614" end="16629" title="Fernand Braudel" label="Fernand Braudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170456" start="16778" end="16782" title="Jean Comaroff" label="Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226804" start="16787" end="16800" title="John Comaroff" label="John Comaroff"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="16945" end="16954" title="Nietzsche" label="Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="16956" end="16965" title="Heidegger" label="Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q151843" start="16994" end="17010" title="Frankfurt School" label="Frankfurt School"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="17012" end="17019" title="Derrida" label="Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q169906" start="17024" end="17029" title="Jacques Lacan" label="Lacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176536" start="17277" end="17292" title="David Schneider (anthropologist)" label="David Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q310956" start="17294" end="17309" title="Clifford Geertz" label="Clifford Geertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q345300" start="17315" end="17331" title="Marshall Sahlins" label="Marshall Sahlins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186544" start="17564" end="17581" title="thick description" label="thick description"/>
<link wikidata="Q102686" start="18187" end="18205" title="Hermeneutics" label="hermeneutic circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q357480" start="18864" end="18877" title="Victor Turner" label="Victor Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q231349" start="18882" end="18894" title="Mary Douglas" label="Mary Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q984620" start="18968" end="18982" title="James Clifford (historian)" label="James Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="19678" end="19691" title="postmodernism" label="postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="19844" end="19857" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="19859" end="19867" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="19872" end="19885" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q920486" start="19887" end="19904" title="indigenous rights" label="indigenous rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q210980" start="19906" end="19925" title="virtual communities" label="virtual communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q917614" start="19951" end="19975" title="industrial society" label="industrialized societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835914" start="20025" end="20044" title="Anthropology of art" label="Anthropology of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853045" start="20047" end="20069" title="Cognitive anthropology" label="Cognitive anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773911" start="20072" end="20099" title="Anthropology of development" label="Anthropology of development"/>
<link wikidata="Q104869363" start="20102" end="20125" title="Disability anthropology" label="Disability anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984315" start="20128" end="20151" title="Ecological anthropology" label="Ecological anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q27841" start="20154" end="20175" title="Economic anthropology" label="Economic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442878" start="20178" end="20199" title="Feminist anthropology" label="Feminist anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181985" start="20243" end="20255" title="Ethnohistory" label="Ethnohistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q358120" start="20260" end="20283" title="historical anthropology" label="historical anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q171318" start="20286" end="20293" title="Kinship" label="Kinship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195662" start="20307" end="20325" title="Legal anthropology" label="Legal anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775932" start="20328" end="20351" title="Multimodal anthropology" label="Multimodal anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q368325" start="20354" end="20372" title="Media anthropology" label="Media anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779521" start="20375" end="20395" title="Medical anthropology" label="Medical anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q27778" start="20398" end="20420" title="Political anthropology" label="Political anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210200" start="20423" end="20456" title="Political economy in anthropology" label="Political economy in anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116028" start="20459" end="20485" title="Psychological anthropology" label="Psychological anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q302211" start="20488" end="20507" title="Public anthropology" label="Public anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q27890" start="20510" end="20534" title="Anthropology of religion" label="Anthropology of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197896" start="20537" end="20556" title="Cyborg anthropology" label="Cyborg anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q27977" start="20588" end="20606" title="Urban anthropology" label="Urban anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746658" start="20609" end="20628" title="Visual anthropology" label="Visual anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q43455" start="20733" end="20742" title="ethnology" label="ethnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q141037" start="20818" end="20828" title="Edward Burnett Tylor" label="E.B. Tylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q151936" start="20833" end="20844" title="James Frazer" label="J.G. Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="20848" end="20855" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402508" start="21327" end="21341" title="field work" label="field research"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="21429" end="21439" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072063" start="21501" end="21528" title="Chicago school (sociology)" label="Chicago School of Sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="22215" end="22220" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q649732" start="22412" end="22425" title="formal system" label="formal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="22774" end="22786" title="Ethnography" label="ethnographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="27490" end="27503" title="ethnography" label="ethnographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129049" start="27695" end="27725" title="participant observation" label="participating in and observing"/>
<link wikidata="Q184992" start="28372" end="28392" title="Bronisław Malinowski" label="Bronisław Malinowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q76857" start="28432" end="28442" title="Franz Boas" label="Franz Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="28460" end="28473" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q311538" start="28503" end="28520" title="Alfred L. Kroeber" label="Alfred L. Kroeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q228822" start="28522" end="28535" title="Ruth Benedict" label="Ruth Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q180099" start="28540" end="28553" title="Margaret Mead" label="Margaret Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q741550" start="28592" end="28611" title="cultural relativism" label="cultural relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q135576" start="28698" end="28718" title="Alfred Radcliffe-Brown" label="A.R. Radcliffe Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051" start="28751" end="28770" title="social anthropology" label="social anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="29073" end="29079" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q223642" start="29236" end="29249" title="interpersonal relationship" label="relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q214339" start="29263" end="29267" title="role" label="role"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="29333" end="29344" title="institution" label="institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q27890" start="29360" end="29368" title="anthropology of religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q27841" start="29370" end="29377" title="economic anthropology" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27778" start="29383" end="29391" title="political anthropology" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="29534" end="29540" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="29558" end="29561" title="art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="29566" end="29571" title="Mythology" label="myths"/>
<link wikidata="Q171318" start="29668" end="29675" title="kinship" label="kinship"/>
<link wikidata="Q484275" start="29680" end="29690" title="leadership" label="leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487142" start="30280" end="30306" title="Human Relations Area Files" label="Human Relations Area Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="30350" end="30365" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q621368" start="30438" end="30457" title="Cross-cultural studies" label="comparative studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361073" start="30748" end="30768" title="George Peter Murdock" label="George Peter Murdock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488583" start="31307" end="31337" title="standard cross-cultural sample" label="standard cross-cultural sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124515" start="31744" end="31749" title="Human condition" label="lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q560986" start="32059" end="32074" title="Arjun Appadurai" label="Arjun Appadurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q984620" start="32076" end="32090" title="James Clifford (historian)" label="James Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q472339" start="32092" end="32105" title="George E. Marcus" label="George Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q327017" start="32107" end="32119" title="Sidney Mintz" label="Sidney Mintz"/>
<link wikidata="Q980193" start="32121" end="32136" title="Michael Taussig" label="Michael Taussig"/>
<link wikidata="Q89562" start="32138" end="32147" title="Eric Wolf" label="Eric Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q86630" start="32152" end="32163" title="Ronald Daus" label="Ronald Daus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="33229" end="33237" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962966" start="33564" end="33584" title="Nancy Scheper-Hughes" label="Nancy Scheper-Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="33990" end="34017" title="western culture" label="&amp;quot;Western&amp;quot; culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371416" start="34032" end="34049" title="Philippe Bourgois" label="Philippe Bourgois"/>
<link wikidata="Q14898061" start="34058" end="34077" title="Margaret Mead Award" label="Margaret Mead Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="34281" end="34292" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="34318" end="34340" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779521" start="34699" end="34706" title="Medical anthropology" label="medical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442878" start="34708" end="34716" title="Feminist anthropology" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q302211" start="34722" end="34741" title="public anthropology" label="public anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q822279" start="35255" end="35259" title="Nuer people" label="Nuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q243688" start="35304" end="35312" title="polygyny" label="polygyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102979" start="35429" end="35438" title="polyandry" label="polyandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q184211" start="35550" end="35558" title="monogamy" label="monogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070686" start="36235" end="36240" title="Nuyoo Mixtec" label="Nuyoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="36257" end="36263" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="36265" end="36271" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q550729" start="37129" end="37141" title="Edmund Leach" label="Edmund Leach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438232" start="37143" end="37156" title="Rodney Needham" label="Rodney Neeham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176536" start="37158" end="37173" title="David M. Schneider" label="David Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234128" start="38460" end="38480" title="Postcolonial feminism" label="Third World feminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25862" start="39740" end="39774" title="Assisted reproductive technology" label="assisted reproductive technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="39793" end="39815" title="In vitro fertilisation" label="in vitro fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757090" start="40028" end="40043" title="Marcia C. Inhorn" label="Maria C. Inhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q189049" start="42522" end="42535" title="ethnocentrism" label="ethnocentrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q262474" start="43275" end="43290" title="Anna Wierzbicka" label="Anna Wierzbicka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487142" start="47667" end="47693" title="Human Relations Area Files" label="Human Relations Area Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="47710" end="47725" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5390" wikidata="Q618655" url="?curid=5390" title="Conversion of units">
<text>Conversion of units is the conversion of the unit of measurement in which a quantity is expressed, typically through a multiplicative conversion factor that changes the unit without changing the quantity. This is also often loosely taken to include replacement of a quantity with a corresponding quantity that describes the same physical property.

Unit conversion is often easier within a metric system such as the SI than in others, due to the system&#x27;s coherence and its metric prefixes that act as power-of-10 multipliers. 

== Overview ==
The definition and choice of units in which to express a quantity may depend on the specific situation and the intended purpose. This may be governed by regulation, contract, technical specifications or other published standards. Engineering judgment may include such factors as:
* the precision and accuracy of measurement and the associated uncertainty of measurement
* the statistical confidence interval or tolerance interval of the initial measurement
* the number of significant figures of the measurement
* the intended use of the measurement, including the engineering tolerances
* historical definitions of the units and their derivatives used in old measurements; e.g., international foot vs. US survey foot.

For some purposes, conversions from one system of units to another are needed to be exact, without increasing or decreasing the precision of the expressed quantity. An &quot;adaptive conversion&quot; may not produce an exactly equivalent expression. Nominal values are sometimes allowed and used.

== Factor–label method ==
The factor–label method, also known as the unit–factor method or the unity bracket method, is a widely used technique for unit conversions that uses the rules of algebra.

The factor–label method is the sequential application of conversion factors expressed as fractions and arranged so that any dimensional unit appearing in both the numerator and denominator of any of the fractions can be cancelled out until only the desired set of dimensional units is obtained. For example, 10 miles per hour can be converted to metres per second by using a sequence of conversion factors as shown below:
formula_1

Each conversion factor is chosen based on the relationship between one of the original units and one of the desired units (or some intermediary unit), before being rearranged to create a factor that cancels out the original unit. For example, as &quot;mile&quot; is the numerator in the original fraction and , &quot;mile&quot; will need to be the denominator in the conversion factor. Dividing both sides of the equation by 1 mile yields , which when simplified results in the dimensionless . Because of the identity property of multiplication, multiplying any quantity (physical or not) by the dimensionless 1 does not change that quantity. Once this and the conversion factor for seconds per hour have been multiplied by the original fraction to cancel out the units &quot;mile&quot; and &quot;hour&quot;, 10 miles per hour converts to 4.4704 metres per second.

As a more complex example, the concentration of nitrogen oxides (NO&quot;x&quot;) in the flue gas from an industrial furnace can be converted to a mass flow rate expressed in grams per hour (g/h) of NO&quot;x&quot; by using the following information as shown below:
; NO&quot;x&quot; concentration := 10 parts per million by volume = 10 ppmv = 10 volumes/106 volumes
; NO&quot;x&quot; molar mass := 46 kg/kmol = 46 g/mol
; Flow rate of flue gas := 20 cubic metres per minute = 20 m3/min
: The flue gas exits the furnace at 0 °C temperature and 101.325 kPa absolute pressure.
: The molar volume of a gas at 0 °C temperature and 101.325 kPa is 22.414 m3/kmol.

: formula_2

After cancelling any dimensional units that appear both in the numerators and the denominators of the fractions in the above equation, the NO&quot;x&quot; concentration of 10 ppmv converts to mass flow rate of 24.63 grams per hour.

=== Checking equations that involve dimensions ===
The factor–label method can also be used on any mathematical equation to check whether or not the dimensional units on the left hand side of the equation are the same as the dimensional units on the right hand side of the equation. Having the same units on both sides of an equation does not ensure that the equation is correct, but having different units on the two sides (when expressed in terms of base units) of an equation implies that the equation is wrong.

For example, check the universal gas law equation of , when:
* the pressure &quot;P&quot; is in pascals (Pa)
* the volume &quot;V&quot; is in cubic metres (m3)
* the amount of substance &quot;n&quot; is in moles (mol)
* the universal gas constant &quot;R&quot; is 8.3145 Pa⋅m3/(mol⋅K)
* the temperature &quot;T&quot; is in kelvins (K)

formula_3

As can be seen, when the dimensional units appearing in the numerator and denominator of the equation&#x27;s right hand side are cancelled out, both sides of the equation have the same dimensional units. Dimensional analysis can be used as a tool to construct equations that relate non-associated physico-chemical properties. The equations may reveal undiscovered or overlooked properties of matter, in the form of left-over dimensions – dimensional adjusters – that can then be assigned physical significance. It is important to point out that such &#x27;mathematical manipulation&#x27; is neither without prior precedent, nor without considerable scientific significance. Indeed, the Planck constant, a fundamental physical constant, was &#x27;discovered&#x27; as a purely mathematical abstraction or representation that built on the Rayleigh–Jeans law for preventing the ultraviolet catastrophe. It was assigned and ascended to its quantum physical significance either in tandem or post mathematical dimensional adjustment – not earlier.

=== Limitations ===
The factor–label method can convert only unit quantities for which the units are in a linear relationship intersecting at 0 (ratio scale in Stevens&#x27;s typology). Most conversions fit this paradigm. An example for which it cannot be used is the conversion between the Celsius scale and the Kelvin scale (or the Fahrenheit scale). Between degrees Celsius and kelvins, there is a constant difference rather than a constant ratio, while between degrees Celsius and degrees Fahrenheit there is neither a constant difference nor a constant ratio. There is, however, an affine transform (, rather than a linear transform ) between them.

For example, the freezing point of water is 0 °C and 32 °F, and a 5 °C change is the same as a 9 °F change. Thus, to convert from units of Fahrenheit to units of Celsius, one subtracts 32 °F (the offset from the point of reference), divides by 9 °F and multiplies by 5 °C (scales by the ratio of units), and adds 0 °C (the offset from the point of reference). Reversing this yields the formula for obtaining a quantity in units of Celsius from units of Fahrenheit; one could have started with the equivalence between 100 °C and 212 °F, which yields the same formula.

Hence, to convert the numerical quantity value of a temperature &quot;T&quot;[F] in degrees Fahrenheit to a numerical quantity value &quot;T&quot;[C] in degrees Celsius, this formula may be used:
: &quot;T&quot;[C] = (&quot;T&quot;[F] − 32) × 5/9.

To convert &quot;T&quot;[C] in degrees Celsius to &quot;T&quot;[F] in degrees Fahrenheit, this formula may be used:
: &quot;T&quot;[F] = (&quot;T&quot;[C] × 9/5) + 32.

=== Example ===
Starting with:
: formula_4
replace the original unit with its meaning in terms of the desired unit , e.g. if , then:
: formula_5

Now and are both numerical values, so just calculate their product.

Or, which is just mathematically the same thing, multiply &quot;Z&quot; by unity, the product is still &quot;Z&quot;:
: formula_6

For example, you have an expression for a physical value &quot;Z&quot; involving the unit &quot;feet per second&quot; () and you want it in terms of the unit &quot;miles per hour&quot; ():

{5280\,\mathrm{ft}}\quad \mathrm{and}\quad 1 = \frac{3600\,\mathrm{s}}{1\,\mathrm{h}}&lt;/math&gt;

|3= Last, multiply the original expression of the physical value by the fraction, called a &quot;conversion factor&quot;, to obtain the same physical value expressed in terms of a different unit. Note: since valid conversion factors are dimensionless and have a numerical value of one, multiplying any physical quantity by such a conversion factor (which is 1) does not change that physical quantity.
: formula_7

Or as an example using the metric system, you have a value of fuel economy in the unit &quot;litres per 100 kilometres&quot; and you want it in terms of the unit &quot;microlitres per metre&quot;:
: formula_8

== Calculation involving non-SI Units ==
In the cases where non-SI units are used, the numerical calculation of a formula can be done by first working out the factor, and then plug in the numerical values of the given/known quantities.

For example, in the study of Bose–Einstein condensate, atomic mass is usually given in daltons, instead of kilograms, and chemical potential is often given in the Boltzmann constant times nanokelvin. The condensate&#x27;s healing length is given by:
formula_9

For a 23Na condensate with chemical potential of (the Boltzmann constant times) 128 nK, the calculation of healing length (in micrometres) can be done in two steps:

=== Calculate the factor ===
Assume that , this gives
formula_10
which is our factor.

=== Calculate the numbers ===
Now, make use of the fact that . With , .

This method is especially useful for programming and/or making a worksheet, where input quantities are taking multiple different values; For example, with the factor calculated above, it is very easy to see that the healing length of 174Yb with chemical potential 20.3 nK is 

== Software tools ==
There are many conversion tools. They are found in the function libraries of applications such as spreadsheets databases, in calculators, and in macro packages and plugins for many other applications such as the mathematical, scientific and technical applications.

There are many standalone applications that offer the thousands of the various units with conversions. For example, the free software movement offers a command line utility GNU units for GNU and Windows. The Unified Code for Units of Measure is also a popular option.

== See also ==

* Conversion of units of temperature
* Dimensional analysis
* English units
* Imperial units
* International System of Units
* List of conversion factors
* List of metric units
* Mesures usuelles
* Metric prefix
* Metric system
* Metrication
* Natural units
* United States customary units
* Unit of length
* Units of measurement
== Notes and references ==

; Notes
== External links ==

* 
* NIST Guide to SI Units Many conversion factors listed.
* The Unified Code for Units of Measure
* Units, Symbols, and Conversions XML Dictionary 
* &quot;Instruction sur les poids et mesures républicaines – déduites de la grandeur de la terre, uniformes pour toute la République, et sur les calculs relatifs à leur division décimale&quot; 
* Math Skills Review
* Chapter 11: Behavior of Gases &quot;Chemistry: Concepts and Applications&quot;, Denton independent school District</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q618655" start="0" end="19" title="Conversion of units" label="Conversion of units"/>
<link wikidata="Q47574" start="45" end="64" title="unit of measurement" label="unit of measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q309314" start="76" end="84" title="quantity" label="quantity"/>
<link wikidata="Q618655" start="134" end="151" title="Conversion of units" label="conversion factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="390" end="403" title="metric system" label="metric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="416" end="418" title="International System of Units" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q99734889" start="460" end="469" title="Coherence (units of measurement)" label="coherence"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="478" end="491" title="metric prefix" label="metric prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="713" end="721" title="contract" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101564" start="723" end="747" title="technical specifications" label="technical specifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q317623" start="767" end="775" title="technical standard" label="standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q272035" start="834" end="856" title="precision and accuracy" label="precision and accuracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403517" start="891" end="917" title="uncertainty of measurement" label="uncertainty of measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q208498" start="936" end="955" title="confidence interval" label="confidence interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814221" start="959" end="977" title="tolerance interval" label="tolerance interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056761" start="1021" end="1040" title="significant figures" label="significant figures"/>
<link wikidata="Q950292" start="1113" end="1134" title="engineering tolerance" label="engineering tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710" start="1228" end="1246" title="international foot" label="international foot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1254" end="1265" title="Foot (unit)#Survey foot" label="survey foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q12216016" start="1518" end="1532" title="Real versus nominal value" label="Nominal values"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="1754" end="1761" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q211256" start="2075" end="2089" title="miles per hour" label="miles per hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q182429" start="2110" end="2127" title="metres per second" label="metres per second"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686031" start="3094" end="3107" title="concentration" label="concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="3111" end="3126" title="nitrogen oxides" label="nitrogen oxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="3128" end="3143" title="NOx" label="NO&amp;quot;x&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556360" start="3152" end="3160" title="flue gas" label="flue gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136626" start="3180" end="3187" title="Industrial furnace" label="furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366187" start="3210" end="3224" title="mass flow rate" label="mass flow rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="3367" end="3384" title="parts per notation" label="parts per million"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3644" end="3656" title="standard conditions of temperature and pressure#Molar volume of a gas" label="molar volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q41509" start="3715" end="3719" title="kmol" label="kmol"/>
<link wikidata="Q191785" start="4507" end="4524" title="Ideal gas law" label="universal gas law"/>
<link wikidata="Q182333" start="4708" end="4730" title="universal gas constant" label="universal gas constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="5517" end="5532" title="Planck constant" label="Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q849484" start="5667" end="5685" title="Rayleigh–Jeans law" label="Rayleigh–Jeans law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399710" start="5705" end="5728" title="ultraviolet catastrophe" label="ultraviolet catastrophe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6018" end="6029" title="Level of measurement#Ratio scale" label="ratio scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q25267" start="6164" end="6177" title="Celsius scale" label="Celsius scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="6186" end="6198" title="Kelvin scale" label="Kelvin scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q42289" start="6207" end="6223" title="Fahrenheit scale" label="Fahrenheit scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q382497" start="6460" end="6476" title="affine transform" label="affine transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="6494" end="6510" title="linear transform" label="linear transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q126818" start="8387" end="8400" title="dimensionless" label="dimensionless"/>
<link wikidata="Q199" start="8431" end="8434" title="one" label="one"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="8838" end="8846" title="SI Units" label="SI units"/>
<link wikidata="Q46202" start="9040" end="9064" title="Bose–Einstein condensate" label="Bose–Einstein condensate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840065" start="9066" end="9077" title="atomic mass" label="atomic mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q483261" start="9098" end="9105" title="Dalton (unit)" label="daltons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="9118" end="9126" title="kilogram" label="kilogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q737004" start="9133" end="9151" title="chemical potential" label="chemical potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962" start="9174" end="9192" title="Boltzmann constant" label="Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q182460" start="9199" end="9209" title="nanokelvin" label="nanokelvin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9233" end="9247" title="Gross–Pitaevskii equation#Healing length" label="healing length"/>
<link wikidata="Q259432" start="9663" end="9672" title="worksheet" label="worksheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076638" start="10282" end="10304" title="free software movement" label="free software movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093305" start="10335" end="10344" title="GNU units" label="GNU units"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494286" start="10370" end="10403" title="Unified Code for Units of Measure" label="Unified Code for Units of Measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405835" start="10449" end="10483" title="Conversion of units of temperature" label="Conversion of units of temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q217113" start="10486" end="10506" title="Dimensional analysis" label="Dimensional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16782623" start="10509" end="10522" title="English units" label="English units"/>
<link wikidata="Q641227" start="10525" end="10539" title="Imperial units" label="Imperial units"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="10542" end="10571" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q113947419" start="10574" end="10600" title="List of conversion factors" label="List of conversion factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840803" start="10603" end="10623" title="List of metric units" label="List of metric units"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009928" start="10626" end="10642" title="Mesures usuelles" label="Mesures usuelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="10645" end="10658" title="Metric prefix" label="Metric prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="10661" end="10674" title="Metric system" label="Metric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738925" start="10677" end="10688" title="Metrication" label="Metrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962243" start="10691" end="10704" title="Natural units" label="Natural units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116609" start="10707" end="10736" title="United States customary units" label="United States customary units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978718" start="10739" end="10753" title="Unit of length" label="Unit of length"/>
<link wikidata="Q47574" start="10756" end="10776" title="Units of measurement" label="Units of measurement"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5391" wikidata="Q515" url="?curid=5391" title="City">
<text>A city is a human settlement of a substantial size. The term &quot;city&quot; has different meanings around the world and in some places the settlement can be very small. Even where the term is limited to larger settlements, there is no universally agreed definition of the lower boundary for their size. In a narrower sense, a city can be defined as a permanent and densely populated place with administratively defined boundaries whose members work primarily on non-agricultural tasks. Cities generally have extensive systems for housing, transportation, sanitation, utilities, land use, production of goods, and communication. Their density facilitates interaction between people, government organizations, and businesses, sometimes benefiting different parties in the process, such as improving the efficiency of goods and service distribution.

Historically, city dwellers have been a small proportion of humanity overall, but following two centuries of unprecedented and rapid urbanization, more than half of the world population now lives in cities, which has had profound consequences for global sustainability. Present-day cities usually form the core of larger metropolitan areas and urban areas—creating numerous commuters traveling toward city centres for employment, entertainment, and education. However, in a world of intensifying globalization, all cities are to varying degrees also connected globally beyond these regions. This increased influence means that cities also have significant influences on global issues, such as sustainable development, climate change, and global health. Because of these major influences on global issues, the international community has prioritized investment in sustainable cities through Sustainable Development Goal 11. Due to the efficiency of transportation and the smaller land consumption, dense cities hold the potential to have a smaller ecological footprint per inhabitant than more sparsely populated areas. Therefore, compact cities are often referred to as a crucial element in fighting climate change. However, this concentration can also have some significant negative consequences, such as forming urban heat islands, concentrating pollution, and stressing water supplies and other resources.

== Meaning ==

A city can be distinguished from other human settlements by its relatively great size, but also by its functions and its special symbolic status, which may be conferred by a central authority. The term can also refer either to the physical streets and buildings of the city or to the collection of people who dwell there and can be used in a general sense to mean urban rather than rural territory.

National censuses use a variety of definitions – invoking factors such as population, population density, number of dwellings, economic function, and infrastructure – to classify populations as urban. Typical working definitions for small-city populations start at around 100,000 people. Common population definitions for an urban area (city or town) range between 1,500 and 50,000 people, with most U.S. states using a minimum between 1,500 and 5,000 inhabitants. Some jurisdictions set no such minima. In the United Kingdom, city status is awarded by the Crown and then remains permanent. (Historically, the qualifying factor was the presence of a cathedral, resulting in some very small cities such as Wells, with a population of 12,000 , and St Davids, with a population of 1,841 .) According to the &quot;functional definition&quot;, a city is not distinguished by size alone, but also by the role it plays within a larger political context. Cities serve as administrative, commercial, religious, and cultural hubs for their larger surrounding areas.

The presence of a literate elite is often associated with cities because of the cultural diversities present in a city. A typical city has professional administrators, regulations, and some form of taxation (food and other necessities or means to trade for them) to support the government workers. (This arrangement contrasts with the more typically horizontal relationships in a tribe or village accomplishing common goals through informal agreements between neighbors, or the leadership of a chief.) The governments may be based on heredity, religion, military power, work systems such as canal-building, food distribution, land-ownership, agriculture, commerce, manufacturing, finance, or a combination of these. Societies that live in cities are often called civilizations.

The &quot;degree of urbanization&quot; is a modern metric to help define what comprises a city: &quot;a population of at least 50,000 inhabitants in contiguous dense grid cells (&gt;1,500 inhabitants per square kilometer)&quot;. This metric was &quot;devised over years by the European Commission, OECD, World Bank and others, and endorsed in March [2021] by the United Nations ... largely for the purpose of international statistical comparison&quot;.

== Etymology ==
The word &quot;city&quot; and the related &quot;civilization&quot; come from the Latin root , originally meaning &#x27;citizenship&#x27; or &#x27;community member&#x27; and eventually coming to correspond with , meaning &#x27;city&#x27; in a more physical sense. The Roman &quot;civitas&quot; was closely linked with the Greek —another common root appearing in English words such as &quot;metropolis&quot;.

In toponymic terminology, names of individual cities and towns are called &quot;astionyms&quot; (from Ancient Greek &#x27;city or town&#x27; and &#x27;name&#x27;).

==Geography==
Urban geography deals both with cities in their larger context and with their internal structure. Cities are estimated to cover about 3% of the land surface of the Earth.

=== Site ===

Town siting has varied through history according to natural, technological, economic, and military contexts. Access to water has long been a major factor in city placement and growth, and despite exceptions enabled by the advent of rail transport in the nineteenth century, through the present most of the world&#x27;s urban population lives near the coast or on a river.

Urban areas as a rule cannot produce their own food and therefore must develop some relationship with a hinterland that sustains them. Only in special cases such as mining towns which play a vital role in long-distance trade, are cities disconnected from the countryside which feeds them. Thus, centrality within a productive region influences siting, as economic forces would, in theory, favor the creation of marketplaces in optimal mutually reachable locations.

=== Center ===
The vast majority of cities have a central area containing buildings with special economic, political, and religious significance. Archaeologists refer to this area by the Greek term temenos or if fortified as a citadel. These spaces historically reflect and amplify the city&#x27;s centrality and importance to its wider sphere of influence. Today cities have a city center or downtown, sometimes coincident with a central business district.

=== Public space ===

Cities typically have public spaces where anyone can go. These include privately owned spaces open to the public as well as forms of public land such as public domain and the commons. Western philosophy since the time of the Greek agora has considered physical public space as the substrate of the symbolic public sphere. Public art adorns (or disfigures) public spaces. Parks and other natural sites within cities provide residents with relief from the hardness and regularity of typical built environments. Urban green spaces are another component of public space that provides the benefit of mitigating the urban heat island effect, especially in cities that are in warmer climates. These spaces prevent carbon imbalances, extreme habitat losses, electricity and water consumption, and human health risks.

=== Internal structure ===
The urban structure generally follows one or more basic patterns: geomorphic, radial, concentric, rectilinear, and curvilinear. The physical environment generally constrains the form in which a city is built. If located on a mountainside, urban structures may rely on terraces and winding roads. It may be adapted to its means of subsistence (e.g. agriculture or fishing). And it may be set up for optimal defense given the surrounding landscape. Beyond these &quot;geomorphic&quot; features, cities can develop internal patterns, due to natural growth or to city planning.

In a radial structure, main roads converge on a central point. This form could evolve from successive growth over a long time, with concentric traces of town walls and citadels marking older city boundaries. In more recent history, such forms were supplemented by ring roads moving traffic around the outskirts of a town. Dutch cities such as Amsterdam and Haarlem are structured as a central square surrounded by concentric canals marking every expansion. In cities such as Moscow, this pattern is still clearly visible.

A system of rectilinear city streets and land plots, known as the grid plan, has been used for millennia in Asia, Europe, and the Americas. The Indus Valley Civilization built Mohenjo-Daro, Harappa, and other cities on a grid pattern, using ancient principles described by Kautilya, and aligned with the compass points. The ancient Greek city of Priene exemplifies a grid plan with specialized districts used across the Hellenistic Mediterranean.

=== Urban areas ===
The urban-type settlement extends far beyond the traditional boundaries of the city proper in a form of development sometimes described critically as urban sprawl. Decentralization and dispersal of city functions (commercial, industrial, residential, cultural, political) has transformed the very meaning of the term and has challenged geographers seeking to classify territories according to an urban-rural binary.

Metropolitan areas include suburbs and exurbs organized around the needs of commuters, and sometimes edge cities characterized by a degree of economic and political independence. (In the US these are grouped into metropolitan statistical areas for purposes of demography and marketing.) Some cities are now part of a continuous urban landscape called urban agglomeration, conurbation, or megalopolis (exemplified by the BosWash corridor of the Northeastern United States.)

==History==

The emergence of cities from proto-urban settlements, such as Çatalhöyük, is a non-linear development that demonstrates the varied experiences of early urbanization.

The cities of Jericho, Aleppo, Byblos, Faiyum, Yerevan, Athens, Matera, Damascus, and Argos are among those laying claim to the longest continual inhabitation.

Cities, characterized by population density, symbolic function, and urban planning, have existed for thousands of years. In the conventional view, civilization and the city were both followed by the development of agriculture, which enabled the production of surplus food and thus a social division of labor (with concomitant social stratification) and trade. Early cities often featured granaries, sometimes within a temple. A minority viewpoint considers that cities may have arisen without agriculture, due to alternative means of subsistence (fishing), to use as communal seasonal shelters, to their value as bases for defensive and offensive military organization, or to their inherent economic function. Cities played a crucial role in the establishment of political power over an area, and ancient leaders such as Alexander the Great founded and created them with zeal.

=== Ancient times ===

Jericho and Çatalhöyük, dated to the eighth millennium BC, are among the earliest proto-cities known to archaeologists. However, the Mesopotamian city of Uruk from the mid-fourth millennium BC (ancient Iraq) is considered by most archaeologists to be the first true city, innovating many characteristics for cities to follow, with its name attributed to the Uruk period.

In the fourth and third millennium BC, complex civilizations flourished in the river valleys of Mesopotamia, India, China, and Egypt. Excavations in these areas have found the ruins of cities geared variously towards trade, politics, or religion. Some had large, dense populations, but others carried out urban activities in the realms of politics or religion without having large associated populations.

Among the early Old World cities, Mohenjo-daro of the Indus Valley civilization in present-day Pakistan, existing from about 2600 BC, was one of the largest, with a population of 50,000 or more and a sophisticated sanitation system. China&#x27;s planned cities were constructed according to sacred principles to act as celestial microcosms.

The Ancient Egyptian cities known physically by archaeologists are not extensive. They include (known by their Arab names) El Lahun, a workers&#x27; town associated with the pyramid of Senusret II, and the religious city Amarna built by Akhenaten and abandoned. These sites appear planned in a highly regimented and stratified fashion, with a minimalistic grid of rooms for the workers and increasingly more elaborate housing available for higher classes.

In Mesopotamia, the civilization of Sumer, followed by Assyria and Babylon, gave rise to numerous cities, governed by kings and fostered multiple languages written in cuneiform. The Phoenician trading empire, flourishing around the turn of the first millennium BC, encompassed numerous cities extending from Tyre, Cydon, and Byblos to Carthage and Cádiz.

In the following centuries, independent city-states of Greece, especially Athens, developed the &quot;polis&quot;, an association of male landowning citizens who collectively constituted the city. The agora, meaning &quot;gathering place&quot; or &quot;assembly&quot;, was the center of the athletic, artistic, spiritual, and political life of the polis. Rome was the first city that surpassed one million inhabitants. Under the authority of its empire, Rome transformed and founded many cities (), and with them brought its principles of urban architecture, design, and society.

In the ancient Americas, early urban traditions developed in the Andes and Mesoamerica. In the Andes, the first urban centers developed in the Norte Chico civilization, Chavin and Moche cultures, followed by major cities in the Huari, Chimu, and Inca cultures. The Norte Chico civilization included as many as 30 major population centers in what is now the Norte Chico region of north-central coastal Peru. It is the oldest known civilization in the Americas, flourishing between the 30th and 18th centuries BC. Mesoamerica saw the rise of early urbanism in several cultural regions, beginning with the Olmec and spreading to the Preclassic Maya, the Zapotec of Oaxaca, and Teotihuacan in central Mexico. Later cultures such as the Aztec, Andean civilizations, Mayan, Mississippians, and Pueblo peoples drew on these earlier urban traditions. Many of their ancient cities continue to be inhabited, including major metropolitan cities such as Mexico City, in the same location as Tenochtitlan; while ancient continuously inhabited Pueblos are near modern urban areas in New Mexico, such as Acoma Pueblo near the Albuquerque metropolitan area and Taos Pueblo near Taos; while others like Lima are located nearby ancient Peruvian sites such as Pachacamac.

From 1600 BC, Dhar Tichitt, in the south of present-day Mauritania, presented characteristics suggestive of an incipient form of urbanism. The second place to show urban characteristics in West Africa was Dia, in present-day Mali, from 800 BC. Both Dhar Tichitt and Dia were founded by the same people: the Soninke, who would later also found the Ghana Empire.

Another ancient site, Jenné-Jeno, in what is today Mali, has been dated to the third century BCE. According to Roderick and Susan McIntosh, Jenné-Jeno did not fit into traditional Western conceptions of urbanity as it lacked monumental architecture and a distinctive elite social class, but it should indeed be considered a city based on a functional redefinition of urban development. In particular, Jenné-Jeno featured settlement mounds arranged according to a horizontal, rather than vertical, power hierarchy, and served as a center of specialized production and exhibited functional interdependence with the surrounding hinterland.

More recently, scholars have concluded that the civilization of Djenne-Djenno was likely established by the Mande progenitors of the Bozo people. Their habitation of the site spanned the period from 3rd century BCE to 13th century CE. Archaeological evidence from Jenné-Jeno, specifically the presence of non-West African glass beads dated from the third century BCE to the fourth century CE, indicates that pre-Arabic trade contacts probably existed between Jenné-Jeno and North Africa.

Additionally, other early urban centers in West Africa, dated to around 500 CE, include Awdaghust, Kumbi Saleh, the ancient capital of Ghana, and Maranda, a center located on a trade route between Egypt and Gao.

===Middle Ages===


The dissolution of the Roman Empire in the West was connected with profound changes in urban fabric of western Europe. In places where Roman administration quickly weakened urbanism went through a profound crisis, even if it continued to remain an important symbolic factor. In regions like Italy or Spain cities diminished in size but nevertheless continued to play a key role in both the economy and government. Late antique cities in the East were also undergoing intense transformations, with increased political participation of the crowds and demographical fluctuations. Christian communities and their doctrinal differences increasingly shaped the urban fabric. The locus of power shifted to Constantinople and to the ascendant Islamic civilization with its major cities Baghdad, Cairo, and Córdoba. From the 9th through the end of the 12th century, Constantinople, the capital of the Eastern Roman Empire, was the largest and wealthiest city in Europe, with a population approaching 1 million. The Ottoman Empire gradually gained control over many cities in the Mediterranean area, including Constantinople in 1453.

In the Holy Roman Empire, beginning in the 12th century, free imperial cities such as Nuremberg, Strasbourg, Frankfurt, Basel, Zürich, and Nijmegen became a privileged elite among towns having won self-governance from their local lord or having been granted self-governance by the emperor and being placed under his immediate protection. By 1480, these cities, as far as still part of the empire, became part of the Imperial Estates governing the empire with the emperor through the Imperial Diet.

By the 13th and 14th centuries, some cities had become powerful states, taking surrounding areas under their control or establishing extensive maritime empires. In Italy, medieval communes developed into city-states including the Republic of Venice and the Republic of Genoa. In Northern Europe, cities including Lübeck and Bruges formed the Hanseatic League for collective defense and commerce. Their power was later challenged and eclipsed by the Dutch commercial cities of Ghent, Ypres, and Amsterdam. Similar phenomena existed elsewhere, as in the case of Sakai, which enjoyed considerable autonomy in late medieval Japan.

In the first millennium AD, the Khmer capital of Angkor in Cambodia grew into the most extensive preindustrial settlement in the world by area, covering over and possibly supporting up to one million people.

West Africa already had cities before the Common Era, but the consolidation of Trans-Saharan trade in the Middle Ages multiplied the number of cities in the region, as well as making some of them very populous, notably Gao (72,000 inhabitants in 800 AD), Oyo-Ile (50,000 inhabitants in 1400 AD, and may have reached up to 140,000 inhabitants in the 18th century), Ile-Ifẹ̀ (70,000 to 105,000 inhabitants in the 14th and 15th centuries), Niani (50,000 inhabitants in 1400 AD) and Timbuktu (100,000 inhabitants in 1450 AD).

===Early modern===
In the West, nation-states became the dominant unit of political organization following the Peace of Westphalia in the seventeenth century. Western Europe&#x27;s larger capitals (London and Paris) benefited from the growth of commerce following the emergence of an Atlantic trade. However, most towns remained small.

During the Spanish colonization of the Americas, the old Roman city concept was extensively used. Cities were founded in the middle of the newly conquered territories and were bound to several laws regarding administration, finances, and urbanism.

===Industrial age===

The growth of the modern industry from the late 18th century onward led to massive urbanization and the rise of new great cities, first in Europe and then in other regions, as new opportunities brought huge numbers of migrants from rural communities into urban areas. England led the way as London became the capital of a world empire and cities across the country grew in locations strategic for manufacturing. In the United States from 1860 to 1910, the introduction of railroads reduced transportation costs, and large manufacturing centers began to emerge, fueling migration from rural to city areas.

Some industrialized cities were confronted with health challenges associated with overcrowding, occupational hazards of industry, contaminated water and air, poor sanitation, and communicable diseases such as typhoid and cholera. Factories and slums emerged as regular features of the urban landscape.

===Post-industrial age===
In the second half of the 20th century, deindustrialization (or &quot;economic restructuring&quot;) in the West led to poverty, homelessness, and urban decay in formerly prosperous cities. America&#x27;s &quot;Steel Belt&quot; became a &quot;Rust Belt&quot; and cities such as Detroit, Michigan, and Gary, Indiana began to shrink, contrary to the global trend of massive urban expansion. Such cities have shifted with varying success into the service economy and public-private partnerships, with concomitant gentrification, uneven revitalization efforts, and selective cultural development. Under the Great Leap Forward and subsequent five-year plans continuing today, China has undergone concomitant urbanization and industrialization and become the world&#x27;s leading manufacturer.

Amidst these economic changes, high technology and instantaneous telecommunication enable select cities to become centers of the knowledge economy. A new smart city paradigm, supported by institutions such as the RAND Corporation and IBM, is bringing computerized surveillance, data analysis, and governance to bear on cities and city dwellers. Some companies are building brand-new master-planned cities from scratch on greenfield sites.

== Urbanization ==

Urbanization is the process of migration from rural to urban areas, driven by various political, economic, and cultural factors. Until the 18th century, an equilibrium existed between the rural agricultural population and towns featuring markets and small-scale manufacturing. With the agricultural and industrial revolutions, urban population began its unprecedented growth, both through migration and demographic expansion. In England, the proportion of the population living in cities jumped from 17% in 1801 to 72% in 1891. In 1900, 15% of the world&#x27;s population lived in cities. The cultural appeal of cities also plays a role in attracting residents.

Urbanization rapidly spread across Europe and the Americas and since the 1950s has taken hold in Asia and Africa as well. The Population Division of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs reported in 2014 that for the first time, more than half of the world population lives in cities.

Latin America is the most urban continent, with four-fifths of its population living in cities, including one-fifth of the population said to live in shantytowns (favelas, poblaciones callampas, etc.). Batam, Indonesia, Mogadishu, Somalia, Xiamen, China, and Niamey, Niger, are considered among the world&#x27;s fastest-growing cities, with annual growth rates of 5–8%. In general, the more developed countries of the &quot;Global North&quot; remain more urbanized than the less developed countries of the &quot;Global South&quot;—but the difference continues to shrink because urbanization is happening faster in the latter group. Asia is home to by far the greatest absolute number of city-dwellers: over two billion and counting. The UN predicts an additional 2.5 billion city dwellers (and 300 million fewer country dwellers) worldwide by 2050, with 90% of urban population expansion occurring in Asia and Africa.

Megacities, cities with populations in the multi-millions, have proliferated into the dozens, arising especially in Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Economic globalization fuels the growth of these cities, as new torrents of foreign capital arrange for rapid industrialization, as well as the relocation of major businesses from Europe and North America, attracting immigrants from near and far. A deep gulf divides the rich and poor in these cities, which usually contain a super-wealthy elite living in gated communities and large masses of people living in substandard housing with inadequate infrastructure and otherwise poor conditions.

Cities around the world have expanded physically as they grow in population, with increases in their surface extent, with the creation of high-rise buildings for residential and commercial use, and with development underground.

Urbanization can create rapid demand for water resources management, as formerly good sources of freshwater become overused and polluted, and the volume of sewage begins to exceed manageable levels.

== Government ==
The local government of cities takes different forms including prominently the municipality (especially in England, in the United States, India, and former British colonies; legally, the municipal corporation; &quot;municipio&quot; in Spain and Portugal, and, along with &quot;municipalidad&quot;, in most former parts of the Spanish and Portuguese empires) and the &quot;commune&quot; (in France and Chile; or &quot;comune&quot; in Italy).

The chief official of the city is very often called the &quot;mayor&quot;. Whatever their true degree of political authority, the mayor typically acts as the figurehead or personification of their city.

Legal conflicts and issues arise more frequently in cities than elsewhere due to the bare fact of their greater density. Modern city governments thoroughly regulate everyday life in many dimensions, including public and personal health, transport, burial, resource use and extraction, recreation, and the nature and use of buildings. Technologies, techniques, and laws governing these areas—developed in cities—have become ubiquitous in many areas.
Municipal officials may be appointed from a higher level of government or elected locally.

=== Municipal services ===

Cities typically provide municipal services such as education, through school systems; policing, through police departments; and firefighting, through fire departments; as well as the city&#x27;s basic infrastructure. These are provided more or less routinely, in a more or less equal fashion. Responsibility for administration usually falls on the city government, but some services may be operated by a higher level of government, while others may be privately run. Armies may assume responsibility for policing cities in states of domestic turmoil such as America&#x27;s King assassination riots of 1968.

=== Finance ===
The traditional basis for municipal finance is local property tax levied on real estate within the city. Local government can also collect revenue for services, or by leasing land that it owns. However, financing municipal services, as well as urban renewal and other development projects, is a perennial problem, which cities address through appeals to higher governments, arrangements with the private sector, and techniques such as privatization (selling services into the private sector), corporatization (formation of quasi-private municipally-owned corporations), and financialization (packaging city assets into tradeable financial public contracts and other related rights). This situation has become acute in deindustrialized cities and in cases where businesses and wealthier citizens have moved outside of city limits and therefore beyond the reach of taxation. Cities in search of ready cash increasingly resort to the municipal bond, essentially a loan with interest and a repayment date. City governments have also begun to use tax increment financing, in which a development project is financed by loans based on future tax revenues which it is expected to yield. Under these circumstances, creditors and consequently city governments place a high importance on city credit ratings.

=== Governance ===

Governance includes government but refers to a wider domain of social control functions implemented by many actors including non-governmental organizations. The impact of globalization and the role of multinational corporations in local governments worldwide have led to a shift in perspective on urban governance, away from the &quot;urban regime theory&quot; in which a coalition of local interests functionally govern, toward a theory of outside economic control, widely associated in academics with the philosophy of neoliberalism. In the neoliberal model of governance, public utilities are privatized, the industry is deregulated, and corporations gain the status of governing actors—as indicated by the power they wield in public-private partnerships and over business improvement districts, and in the expectation of self-regulation through corporate social responsibility. The biggest investors and real estate developers act as the city&#x27;s de facto urban planners.

The related concept of good governance places more emphasis on the state, with the purpose of assessing urban governments for their suitability for development assistance. The concepts of governance and good governance are especially invoked in emergent megacities, where international organizations consider existing governments inadequate for their large populations.

=== Urban planning ===
Urban planning, the application of forethought to city design, involves optimizing land use, transportation, utilities, and other basic systems in order to achieve certain objectives. Urban planners and scholars have proposed overlapping theories as ideals of how plans should be formed. Planning tools, beyond the original design of the city itself, include public capital investment in infrastructure and land-use controls such as zoning. The continuous process of comprehensive planning involves identifying general objectives as well as collecting data to evaluate progress and inform future decisions.

Government is legally the final authority on planning but in practice, the process involves both public and private elements. The legal principle of eminent domain is used by the government to divest citizens of their property in cases where its use is required for a project. Planning often involves tradeoffs—decisions in which some stand to gain and some to lose—and thus is closely connected to the prevailing political situation.

The history of urban planning dates back to some of the earliest known cities, especially in the Indus Valley and Mesoamerican civilizations, which built their cities on grids and apparently zoned different areas for different purposes. The effects of planning, ubiquitous in today&#x27;s world, can be seen most clearly in the layout of planned communities, fully designed prior to construction, often with consideration for interlocking physical, economic, and cultural systems.

== Society ==
=== Social structure ===
Urban society is typically stratified. Spatially, cities are formally or informally segregated along ethnic, economic, and racial lines. People living relatively close together may live, work, and play in separate areas, and associate with different people, forming ethnic or lifestyle enclaves or, in areas of concentrated poverty, ghettoes. While in the US and elsewhere poverty became associated with the inner city, in France it has become associated with the &quot;banlieues&quot;, areas of urban development that surround the city proper. Meanwhile, across Europe and North America, the racially white majority is empirically the most segregated group. Suburbs in the West, and, increasingly, gated communities and other forms of &quot;privatopia&quot; around the world, allow local elites to self-segregate into secure and exclusive neighborhoods.

Landless urban workers, contrasted with peasants and known as the proletariat, form a growing stratum of society in the age of urbanization. In Marxist doctrine, the proletariat will inevitably revolt against the bourgeoisie as their ranks swell with disenfranchised and disaffected people lacking all stake in the status quo. The global urban proletariat of today, however, generally lacks the status of factory workers which in the nineteenth century provided access to the means of production.

=== Economics ===

Historically, cities rely on rural areas for intensive farming to yield surplus crops, in exchange for which they provide money, political administration, manufactured goods, and culture. Urban economics tends to analyze larger agglomerations, stretching beyond city limits, in order to reach a more complete understanding of the local labor market.

As hubs of trade, cities have long been home to retail commerce and consumption through the interface of shopping. In the 20th century, department stores using new techniques of advertising, public relations, decoration, and design, transformed urban shopping areas into fantasy worlds encouraging self-expression and escape through consumerism.

In general, the density of cities expedites commerce and facilitates knowledge spillovers, helping people and firms exchange information and generate new ideas. A thicker labor market allows for better skill matching between firms and individuals. Population density also enables sharing of common infrastructure and production facilities; however, in very dense cities, increased crowding and waiting times may lead to some negative effects.

Although manufacturing fueled the growth of cities, many now rely on a tertiary or service economy. The services in question range from tourism, hospitality, entertainment, and housekeeping to grey-collar work in law, financial consulting, and administration.

According to a scientific model of cities by Professor Geoffrey West, with the doubling of a city&#x27;s size, salaries per capita will generally increase by 15%.

=== Culture and communications ===
Cities are typically hubs for education and the arts, supporting universities, museums, temples, and other cultural institutions. They feature impressive displays of architecture ranging from small to enormous and ornate to brutal; skyscrapers, providing thousands of offices or homes within a small footprint, and visible from miles away, have become iconic urban features. Cultural elites tend to live in cities, bound together by shared cultural capital, and themselves play some role in governance. By virtue of their status as centers of culture and literacy, cities can be described as the locus of civilization, human history, and social change.

Density makes for effective mass communication and transmission of news, through heralds, printed proclamations, newspapers, and digital media. These communication networks, though still using cities as hubs, penetrate extensively into all populated areas. In the age of rapid communication and transportation, commentators have described urban culture as nearly ubiquitous or as no longer meaningful.

Today, a city&#x27;s promotion of its cultural activities dovetails with place branding and city marketing, public diplomacy techniques used to inform development strategy; attract businesses, investors, residents, and tourists; and create shared identity and sense of place within the metropolitan area. Physical inscriptions, plaques, and monuments on display physically transmit a historical context for urban places. Some cities, such as Jerusalem, Mecca, and Rome have indelible religious status and for hundreds of years have attracted pilgrims. Patriotic tourists visit Agra to see the Taj Mahal, or New York City to visit the World Trade Center. Elvis lovers visit Memphis to pay their respects at Graceland. Place brands (which include place satisfaction and place loyalty) have great economic value (comparable to the value of commodity brands) because of their influence on the decision-making process of people thinking about doing business in—&quot;purchasing&quot; (the brand of)—a city.

Bread and circuses among other forms of cultural appeal, attract and entertain the masses. Sports also play a major role in city branding and local identity formation. Cities go to considerable lengths in competing to host the Olympic Games, which bring global attention and tourism. Paris, a city known for its cultural history, was the site of the most recent Olympics in the summer of 2024.

=== Warfare ===

Cities play a crucial strategic role in warfare due to their economic, demographic, symbolic, and political centrality. For the same reasons, they are targets in asymmetric warfare. Many cities throughout history were founded under military auspices, a great many have incorporated fortifications, and military principles continue to influence urban design. Indeed, war may have served as the social rationale and economic basis for the very earliest cities.

Powers engaged in geopolitical conflict have established fortified settlements as part of military strategies, as in the case of garrison towns, America&#x27;s Strategic Hamlet Program during the Vietnam War, and Israeli settlements in Palestine. While occupying the Philippines, the US Army ordered local people to concentrate in cities and towns, in order to isolate committed insurgents and battle freely against them in the countryside.

During World War II, national governments on occasion declared certain cities open, effectively surrendering them to an advancing enemy in order to avoid damage and bloodshed. Urban warfare proved decisive, however, in the Battle of Stalingrad, where Soviet forces repulsed German occupiers, with extreme casualties and destruction. In an era of low-intensity conflict and rapid urbanization, cities have become sites of long-term conflict waged both by foreign occupiers and by local governments against insurgency. Such warfare, known as counterinsurgency, involves techniques of surveillance and psychological warfare as well as close combat, and functionally extends modern urban crime prevention, which already uses concepts such as defensible space.

Although capture is the more common objective, warfare has in some cases spelled complete destruction for a city. Mesopotamian tablets and ruins attest to such destruction, as does the Latin motto &quot;Carthago delenda est&quot;. Since the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and throughout the Cold War, nuclear strategists continued to contemplate the use of &quot;counter-value&quot; targeting: crippling an enemy by annihilating its valuable cities, rather than aiming primarily at its military forces.

=== Climate change ===

== Infrastructure ==

Urban infrastructure involves various physical networks and spaces necessary for transportation, water use, energy, recreation, and public functions. Infrastructure carries a high initial cost in fixed capital but lower marginal costs and thus positive economies of scale. Because of the higher barriers to entry, these networks have been classified as natural monopolies, meaning that economic logic favors control of each network by a single organization, public or private.

Infrastructure in general plays a vital role in a city&#x27;s capacity for economic activity and expansion, underpinning the very survival of the city&#x27;s inhabitants, as well as technological, commercial, industrial, and social activities. Structurally, many infrastructure systems take the form of networks with redundant links and multiple pathways, so that the system as a whole continues to operate even if parts of it fail. The particulars of a city&#x27;s infrastructure systems have historical path dependence because new development must build from what exists already.

Megaprojects such as the construction of airports, power plants, and railways require large upfront investments and thus tend to require funding from the national government or the private sector. Privatization may also extend to all levels of infrastructure construction and maintenance.

Urban infrastructure ideally serves all residents equally but in practice may prove uneven—with, in some cities, clear first-class and second-class alternatives.

=== Utilities ===

Public utilities (literally, useful things with general availability) include basic and essential infrastructure networks, chiefly concerned with the supply of water, electricity, and telecommunications capability to the populace.

Sanitation, necessary for good health in crowded conditions, requires water supply and waste management as well as individual hygiene. Urban water systems include principally a water supply network and a network (sewerage system) for sewage and stormwater. Historically, either local governments or private companies have administered urban water supply, with a tendency toward government water supply in the 20th century and a tendency toward private operation at the turn of the twenty-first. The market for private water services is dominated by two French companies, Veolia Water (formerly Vivendi) and Engie (formerly Suez), said to hold 70% of all water contracts worldwide.

Modern urban life relies heavily on the energy transmitted through electricity for the operation of electric machines (from household appliances to industrial machines to now-ubiquitous electronic systems used in communications, business, and government) and for traffic lights, street lights, and indoor lighting. Cities rely to a lesser extent on hydrocarbon fuels such as gasoline and natural gas for transportation, heating, and cooking. Telecommunications infrastructure such as telephone lines and coaxial cables also traverse cities, forming dense networks for mass and point-to-point communications.

=== Transportation ===


Because cities rely on specialization and an economic system based on wage labor, their inhabitants must have the ability to regularly travel between home, work, commerce, and entertainment. City dwellers travel by foot or by wheel on roads and walkways, or use special rapid transit systems based on underground, overground, and elevated rail. Cities also rely on long-distance transportation (truck, rail, and airplane) for economic connections with other cities and rural areas.

City streets historically were the domain of horses and their riders and pedestrians, who only sometimes had sidewalks and special walking areas reserved for them. In the West, bicycles or (velocipedes), efficient human-powered machines for short- and medium-distance travel, enjoyed a period of popularity at the beginning of the twentieth century before the rise of automobiles. Soon after, they gained a more lasting foothold in Asian and African cities under European influence. In Western cities, industrializing, electrifying, and expanding public transit systems, especially streetcars, enabled urban expansion as new residential neighborhoods sprang up along transit lines and workers rode to and from work downtown.

Since the mid-20th century, cities have relied heavily on motor vehicle transportation, with major implications for their layout, environment, and aesthetics. (This transformation occurred most dramatically in the US—where corporate and governmental policies favored automobile transport systems—and to a lesser extent in Europe.) The rise of personal cars accompanied the expansion of urban economic areas into much larger metropolises, subsequently creating ubiquitous traffic issues with the accompanying construction of new highways, wider streets, and alternative walkways for pedestrians. However, severe traffic jams still occur regularly in cities around the world, as private car ownership and urbanization continue to increase, overwhelming existing urban street networks.

The urban bus system, the world&#x27;s most common form of public transport, uses a network of scheduled routes to move people through the city, alongside cars, on the roads. The economic function itself also became more decentralized as concentration became impractical and employers relocated to more car-friendly locations (including edge cities). Some cities have introduced bus rapid transit systems which include exclusive bus lanes and other methods for prioritizing bus traffic over private cars. Many big American cities still operate conventional public transit by rail, as exemplified by the ever-popular New York City Subway system. Rapid transit is widely used in Europe and has increased in Latin America and Asia.

Walking and cycling (&quot;non-motorized transport&quot;) enjoy increasing favor (more pedestrian zones and bike lanes) in American and Asian urban transportation planning, under the influence of such trends as the Healthy Cities movement, the drive for sustainable development, and the idea of a carfree city. Techniques such as road space rationing and road use charges have been introduced to limit urban car traffic.

== Housing ==

The housing of residents presents one of the major challenges every city must face. Adequate housing entails not only physical shelters but also the physical systems necessary to sustain life and economic activity.

Homeownership represents status and a modicum of economic security, compared to renting which may consume much of the income of low-wage urban workers. Homelessness, or lack of housing, is a challenge currently faced by millions of people in countries rich and poor. Because cities generally have higher population densities than rural areas, city dwellers are more likely to reside in apartments and less likely to live in a single-family home.

==Ecology==


Urban ecosystems, influenced as they are by the density of human buildings and activities, differ considerably from those of their rural surroundings. Anthropogenic buildings and waste, as well as cultivation in gardens, create physical and chemical environments which have no equivalents in the wilderness, in some cases enabling exceptional biodiversity. They provide homes not only for immigrant humans but also for immigrant plants, bringing about interactions between species that never previously encountered each other. They introduce frequent disturbances (construction, walking) to plant and animal habitats, creating opportunities for recolonization and thus favoring young ecosystems with r-selected species dominant. On the whole, urban ecosystems are less complex and productive than others, due to the diminished absolute amount of biological interactions.

Typical urban fauna includes insects (especially ants), rodents (mice, rats), and birds, as well as cats and dogs (domesticated and feral). Large predators are scarce. However, in North America, large predators such as coyotes and other large animals like white-tailed deer persist.

Cities generate considerable ecological footprints, locally and at longer distances, due to concentrated populations and technological activities. From one perspective, cities are not ecologically sustainable due to their resource needs. From another, proper management may be able to ameliorate a city&#x27;s ill effects. Air pollution arises from various forms of combustion, including fireplaces, wood or coal-burning stoves, other heating systems, and internal combustion engines. Industrialized cities, and today third-world megacities, are notorious for veils of smog (industrial haze) that envelop them, posing a chronic threat to the health of their millions of inhabitants. Urban soil contains higher concentrations of heavy metals (especially lead, copper, and nickel) and has lower pH than soil in the comparable wilderness.

Modern cities are known for creating their own microclimates, due to concrete, asphalt, and other artificial surfaces, which heat up in sunlight and channel rainwater into underground ducts. The temperature in New York City exceeds nearby rural temperatures by an average of 2–3 °C and at times 5–10 °C differences have been recorded. This effect varies nonlinearly with population changes (independently of the city&#x27;s physical size). Aerial particulates increase rainfall by 5–10%. Thus, urban areas experience unique climates, with earlier flowering and later leaf dropping than in nearby countries.

Poor and working-class people face disproportionate exposure to environmental risks (known as environmental racism when intersecting also with racial segregation). For example, within the urban microclimate, less-vegetated poor neighborhoods bear more of the heat (but have fewer means of coping with it).

One of the main methods of improving the urban ecology is including in the cities more urban green spaces: parks, gardens, lawns, and trees. These areas improve the health and well-being of the human, animal, and plant populations of the cities. Well-maintained urban trees can provide many social, ecological, and physical benefits to the residents of the city.

A study published in &quot;Scientific Reports&quot; in 2019 found that people who spent at least two hours per week in nature were 23 percent more likely to be satisfied with their life and were 59 percent more likely to be in good health than those who had zero exposure. The study used data from almost 20,000 people in the UK. Benefits increased for up to 300 minutes of exposure. The benefits are applied to men and women of all ages, as well as across different ethnicities, socioeconomic statuses, and even those with long-term illnesses and disabilities. People who did not get at least two hours – even if they surpassed an hour per week – did not get the benefits. The study is the latest addition to a compelling body of evidence for the health benefits of nature. Many doctors already give nature prescriptions to their patients. The study did not count time spent in a person&#x27;s own yard or garden as time in nature, but the majority of nature visits in the study took place within two miles of home. &quot;Even visiting local urban green spaces seems to be a good thing,&quot; Dr. White said in a press release. &quot;Two hours a week is hopefully a realistic target for many people, especially given that it can be spread over an entire week to get the benefit.&quot;

== World city system ==
As the world becomes more closely linked through economics, politics, technology, and culture (a process called globalization), cities have come to play a leading role in transnational affairs, exceeding the limitations of international relations conducted by national governments. This phenomenon, resurgent today, can be traced back to the Silk Road, Phoenicia, and the Greek city-states, through the Hanseatic League and other alliances of cities. Today the information economy based on high-speed internet infrastructure enables instantaneous telecommunication around the world, effectively eliminating the distance between cities for the purposes of the international markets and other high-level elements of the world economy, as well as personal communications and mass media.

=== Global city ===

A global city, also known as a world city, is a prominent centre of trade, banking, finance, innovation, and markets. Saskia Sassen used the term &quot;global city&quot; in her 1991 work, &quot;The Global City: New York, London, Tokyo&quot; to refer to a city&#x27;s power, status, and cosmopolitanism, rather than to its size. Following this view of cities, it is possible to rank the world&#x27;s cities hierarchically. Global cities form the capstone of the global hierarchy, exerting command and control through their economic and political influence. Global cities may have reached their status due to early transition to post-industrialism or through inertia which has enabled them to maintain their dominance from the industrial era. This type of ranking exemplifies an emerging discourse in which cities, considered variations on the same ideal type, &quot;must&quot; compete with each other globally to achieve prosperity.

Critics of the notion point to the different realms of power and interchange. The term &quot;global city&quot; is heavily influenced by economic factors and, thus, may not account for places that are otherwise significant. Paul James, for example argues that the term is &quot;reductive and skewed&quot; in its focus on financial systems.

Multinational corporations and banks make their headquarters in global cities and conduct much of their business within this context. American firms dominate the international markets for law and engineering and maintain branches in the biggest foreign global cities.

Large cities have a great divide between populations of both ends of the financial spectrum. Regulations on immigration promote the exploitation of low- and high-skilled immigrant workers from poor areas. During employment, migrant workers may be subject to unfair working conditions, including working overtime, low wages, and lack of safety in workplaces.

=== Transnational activity ===
Cities increasingly participate in world political activities independently of their enclosing nation-states. Early examples of this phenomenon are the sister city relationship and the promotion of multi-level governance within the European Union as a technique for European integration. Cities including Hamburg, Prague, Amsterdam, The Hague, and City of London maintain their own embassies to the European Union at Brussels.

New urban dwellers are increasingly transmigrants, keeping one foot each (through telecommunications if not travel) in their old and their new homes.

=== Global governance ===
Cities participate in global governance by various means including membership in global networks which transmit norms and regulations. At the general, global level, United Cities and Local Governments (UCLG) is a significant umbrella organization for cities; regionally and nationally, Eurocities, Asian Network of Major Cities 21, the Federation of Canadian Municipalities the National League of Cities, and the United States Conference of Mayors play similar roles. UCLG took responsibility for creating Agenda 21 for culture, a program for cultural policies promoting sustainable development, and has organized various conferences and reports for its furtherance.

Networks have become especially prevalent in the arena of environmentalism and specifically climate change following the adoption of Agenda 21. Environmental city networks include the C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group, the United Nations Global Compact Cities Programme, the Carbon Neutral Cities Alliance (CNCA), the Covenant of Mayors and the Compact of Mayors, ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability, and the Transition Towns network.

Cities with world political status as meeting places for advocacy groups, non-governmental organizations, lobbyists, educational institutions, intelligence agencies, military contractors, information technology firms, and other groups with a stake in world policymaking. They are consequently also sites for symbolic protest.

South Africa has one of the highest rates of protests in the world. Pretoria, a city in South Africa, had a rally where five thousand people took part in order to advocate for increasing wages to afford living costs.

=== United Nations System ===
The United Nations System has been involved in a series of events and declarations dealing with the development of cities during this period of rapid urbanization.
* The Habitat I conference in 1976 adopted the &quot;Vancouver Declaration on Human Settlements&quot; which identifies urban management as a fundamental aspect of development and establishes various principles for maintaining urban habitats.
* Citing the Vancouver Declaration, the UN General Assembly in December 1977 authorized the United Nations Commission Human Settlements and the HABITAT Centre for Human Settlements, intended to coordinate UN activities related to housing and settlements.
* The 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro resulted in a set of international agreements including Agenda 21 which establishes principles and plans for sustainable development.
* The Habitat II conference in 1996 called for cities to play a leading role in this program, which subsequently advanced the Millennium Development Goals and Sustainable Development Goals.
* In January 2002 the UN Commission on Human Settlements became an umbrella agency called the United Nations Human Settlements Programme or UN-Habitat, a member of the United Nations Development Group.
* The Habitat III conference of 2016 focused on implementing these goals under the banner of a &quot;New Urban Agenda&quot;. The four mechanisms envisioned for effecting the New Urban Agenda are (1) national policies promoting integrated sustainable development, (2) stronger urban governance, (3) long-term integrated urban and territorial planning, and (4) effective financing frameworks. Just before this conference, the European Union concurrently approved an &quot;Urban Agenda for the European Union&quot; known as the Pact of Amsterdam.

UN-Habitat coordinates the U.N. urban agenda, working with the UN Environmental Programme, the UN Development Programme, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, the World Health Organization, and the World Bank.

The World Bank, a U.N. specialized agency, has been a primary force in promoting the Habitat conferences, and since the first Habitat conference has used their declarations as a framework for issuing loans for urban infrastructure. The bank&#x27;s structural adjustment programs contributed to urbanization in the Third World by creating incentives to move to cities. The World Bank and UN-Habitat in 1999 jointly established the Cities Alliance (based at the World Bank headquarters in Washington, D.C.) to guide policymaking, knowledge sharing, and grant distribution around the issue of urban poverty. (UN-Habitat plays an advisory role in evaluating the quality of a locality&#x27;s governance.) The Bank&#x27;s policies have tended to focus on bolstering real estate markets through credit and technical assistance.

The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has increasingly focused on cities as key sites for influencing cultural governance. It has developed various city networks including the International Coalition of Cities against Racism and the Creative Cities Network. UNESCO&#x27;s capacity to select World Heritage Sites gives the organization significant influence over cultural capital, tourism, and historic preservation funding.

== Representation in culture ==
Cities figure prominently in traditional Western culture, appearing in the Bible in both evil and holy forms, symbolized by Babylon and Jerusalem. Cain and Nimrod are the first city builders in the Book of Genesis. In Sumerian mythology Gilgamesh built the walls of Uruk.

Cities can be perceived in terms of extremes or opposites: at once liberating and oppressive, wealthy and poor, organized and chaotic. The name anti-urbanism refers to various types of ideological opposition to cities, whether because of their culture or their political relationship with the country. Such opposition may result from identification of cities with oppression and the ruling elite. This and other political ideologies strongly influence narratives and themes in discourse about cities. In turn, cities symbolize their home societies.

Writers, painters, and filmmakers have produced innumerable works of art concerning the urban experience. Classical and medieval literature includes a genre of &quot;descriptiones&quot; which treat of city features and history. Modern authors such as Charles Dickens and James Joyce are famous for evocative descriptions of their home cities. Fritz Lang conceived the idea for his influential 1927 film &quot;Metropolis&quot; while visiting Times Square and marveling at the nighttime neon lighting. Other early cinematic representations of cities in the twentieth century generally depicted them as technologically efficient spaces with smoothly functioning systems of automobile transport. By the 1960s, however, traffic congestion began to appear in such films as &quot;The Fast Lady&quot; (1962) and &quot;Playtime&quot; (1967).

Literature, film, and other forms of popular culture have supplied visions of future cities both utopian and dystopian. The prospect of expanding, communicating, and increasingly interdependent world cities has given rise to images such as Nylonkong (New York, London, Hong Kong) and visions of a single world-encompassing ecumenopolis.

==Gallery==
==See also==

* Lists of cities
* List of adjectivals and demonyms for cities
* Compact city
* Eco-cities
* Lost city
* Megacity
* Metropolis
* Settlement hierarchy
* Urbanization
* Walking city

== Notes ==

==References==
===Bibliography===

* Abrahamson, Mark (2004). &quot;Global Cities&quot;. Oxford University Press. 
* Ashworth, G.J. &quot;War and the City&quot;. London &amp; New York: Routledge, 1991. .
* Bridge, Gary, and Sophie Watson, eds. (2000). &quot;A Companion to the City&quot;. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2000/2003. 
* Brighenti, Andrea Mubi, ed. (2013). &quot;Urban Interstices: The Aesthetics and the Politics of the In-between.&quot; Farnham: Ashgate Publishing. .
* Carter, Harold (1995). &quot;The Study of Urban Geography&quot;. 4th ed. London: Arnold. 
* Clark, Peter (ed.) (2013). &quot;The Oxford Handbook of Cities in World History&quot;. Oxford University Press. 
* Curtis, Simon (2016). &quot;Global Cities and Global Order&quot;. Oxford University Press. 
* Ellul, Jacques (1970). &quot;The Meaning of the City&quot;. Translated by Dennis Pardee. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans, 1970. ; French original (written earlier, published later as): Sans feu ni lieu : Signification biblique de la Grande Ville; Paris: Gallimard, 1975. Republished 2003 with 
* Gupta, Joyetta, Karin Pfeffer, Hebe Verrest, &amp; Mirjam Ros-Tonen, eds. (2015). &quot;Geographies of Urban Governance: Advanced Theories, Methods and Practices&quot;. Springer, 2015. .
* Hahn, Harlan, &amp; Charles Levine (1980). &quot;Urban Politics: Past, Present, &amp; Future&quot;. New York &amp; London: Longman.
* Hanson, Royce (ed.). &quot;Perspectives on Urban Infrastructure&quot;. Committee on National Urban Policy, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, National Research Council. Washington: National Academy Press, 1984.
* Herrschel, Tassilo &amp; Peter Newman (2017). &quot;Cities as International Actors: Urban and Regional Governance Beyond the Nation State&quot;. Palgrave Macmillan (Springer Nature). 
* Grava, Sigurd (2003). &quot;Urban Transportation Systems: Choices for Communities&quot;. McGraw Hill, e-book. 
* Kaplan, David H.; James O. Wheeler; Steven R. Holloway; &amp; Thomas W. Hodler, cartographer (2004). &quot;Urban Geography&quot;. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc. 
* Kavaratzis, Mihalis, Gary Warnaby, &amp; Gregory J. Ashworth, eds. (2015). &quot;Rethinking Place Branding: Comprehensive Brand Development for Cities and Regions&quot;. Springer. .
* Kraas, Frauke, Surinder Aggarwal, Martin Coy, &amp; Günter Mertins, eds. (2014). &quot;Megacities: Our Global Urban Future&quot;. United Nations &quot;International Year of Planet Earth&quot; book series. Springer. .
* Leach, William (1993). &quot;Land of Desire: Merchants, Power, and the Rise of a New American Culture&quot;. New York: Vintage Books (Random House), 1994. .
* Levy, John M. (2017). &quot;Contemporary Urban Planning&quot;. 11th ed. New York: Routledge (Taylor &amp; Francis).
* Magnusson, Warren. &quot;Politics of Urbanism: Seeing like a city&quot;. London &amp; New York: Routledge, 2011. .
* Marshall, John U. (1989). &quot;The Structure of Urban Systems&quot;. University of Toronto Press. .
* Marzluff, John M., Eric Schulenberger, Wilfried Endlicher, Marina Alberti, Gordon Bradley, Clre Ryan, Craig ZumBrunne, &amp; Ute Simon (2008). &quot;Urban Ecology: An International Perspective on the Interaction Between Humans and Nature&quot;. New York: Springer Science+Business Media. .
* McQuillan, Eugene. &quot;The Law of Municipal Corporations&quot;, 3rd ed. 1987 revised volume by Charles R.P. Keating, Esq. Wilmette, Illinois: Callaghan &amp; Company.
* Moholy-Nagy, Sibyl (1968). &quot;Matrix of Man: An Illustrated History of Urban Environment.&quot; New York: Frederick A Praeger. 
* Mumford, Lewis (1961). &quot;The City in History: Its Origins, Its Transformations, and Its Prospects&quot;. New York: Harcourt, Brace &amp; World.
* 
* Paddison, Ronan, ed. (2001). &quot;Handbook of Urban Studies&quot;. London; Thousand Oaks, California; and New Delhi: Sage Publications. .
* 
* Rybczynski, W., &quot;City Life: Urban Expectations in a New World&quot;, (1995)
* Smith, Michael E. (2002) &quot;The Earliest Cities. In Urban Life: Readings in Urban Anthropology, edited by George Gmelch and Walter Zenner&quot;, pp. 3–19. 4th ed. Waveland Press, Prospect Heights, IL.
* Southall, Aidan (1998). &quot;The City in Time and Space&quot;. Cambridge University Press. 
* Wellman, Kath &amp; Marcus Spiller, eds. (2012). &quot;Urban Infrastructure: Finance and Management&quot;. Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. .
===Further reading===
* Chandler, T. &quot;Four Thousand Years of Urban Growth: An Historical Census&quot;. Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press, 1987.
* Geddes, Patrick, &quot;City Development&quot; (1904)
* 
* 
* 
* Robson, W.A., and Regan, D.E., ed., &quot;Great Cities of the World&quot;, (3d ed., 2 vol., 1972)
* 
* Thernstrom, S., and Sennett, R., ed., &quot;Nineteenth-Century Cities&quot; (1969)
* Toynbee, Arnold J. (ed), &quot;Cities of Destiny&quot;, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967. Pan historical/geographical essays, many images. Starts with &quot;Athens&quot;, ends with &quot;The Coming World City-Ecumenopolis&quot;.
* Weber, Max, &quot;The City&quot;, 1921. (tr. 1958)
==External links==
* World Urbanization Prospects, Website of the United Nations Population Division (archived 10 July 2017)
* Urban population (% of total) – World Bank website based on UN data.
* Degree of urbanization (percentage of urban population in total population) by continent in 2016 – Statista, based on Population Reference Bureau data.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="2" end="6" title="City" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q486972" start="12" end="28" title="human settlement" label="human settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069949" start="367" end="374" title="Urban density" label="densely"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247867" start="532" end="539" title="housing" label="housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="541" end="550" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="557" end="567" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="569" end="578" title="Public utilities" label="utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165944" start="580" end="588" title="land use" label="land use"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="590" end="609" title="Manufacturing" label="production of goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="615" end="628" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="684" end="708" title="government organisations" label="government organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="714" end="722" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="983" end="995" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188" start="1019" end="1035" title="world population" label="world population"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="1097" end="1118" title="sustainability" label="global sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="1171" end="1188" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="1194" end="1204" title="urban area" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q48442" start="1224" end="1233" title="Commuting" label="commuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468524" start="1251" end="1262" title="city centre" label="city centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="1346" end="1359" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117122" start="1520" end="1533" title="global issues" label="global issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="1543" end="1566" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q102133023" start="1568" end="1582" title="Climate change and cities" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725393" start="1588" end="1601" title="global health" label="global health"/>
<link wikidata="Q652360" start="1713" end="1731" title="Sustainable city" label="sustainable cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q53581228" start="1740" end="1771" title="Sustainable Development Goal 11" label="Sustainable Development Goal 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q15809898" start="1829" end="1845" title="land consumption" label="land consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069949" start="1847" end="1852" title="Urban density" label="dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q234173" start="1897" end="1917" title="ecological footprint" label="ecological footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q225467" start="1980" end="1994" title="Compact city" label="compact cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="2164" end="2181" title="urban heat island" label="urban heat island"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="2198" end="2207" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q10929914" start="2396" end="2419" title="city status" label="special symbolic status"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="2639" end="2644" title="Urban area" label="urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q31749783" start="2657" end="2672" title="rural territory" label="rural territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2684" end="2690" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="2749" end="2759" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2761" end="2779" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q699405" start="2791" end="2799" title="dwelling" label="dwelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="2825" end="2839" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3075" end="3079" title="U.S." label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q1867820" start="3186" end="3213" title="city status in the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom, city status"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="3325" end="3334" title="cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q212283" start="3380" end="3385" title="Wells, Somerset" label="Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q648732" start="3421" end="3430" title="St Davids" label="St Davids"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="3884" end="3898" title="Public administration" label="administrators"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="3930" end="3938" title="taxation" label="taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="4010" end="4028" title="Civil service" label="government workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="4082" end="4092" title="egalitarianism" label="horizontal"/>
<link wikidata="Q133311" start="4112" end="4117" title="tribe" label="tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="4121" end="4128" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q484275" start="4210" end="4220" title="leadership" label="leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="4495" end="4507" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="4788" end="4807" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="4809" end="4813" title="OECD" label="OECD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="4815" end="4825" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="4874" end="4888" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="5029" end="5041" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="5062" end="5067" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q200250" start="5370" end="5380" title="metropolis" label="metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="5392" end="5401" title="toponymic" label="toponymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="5491" end="5504" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q690068" start="5568" end="5583" title="Urban geography" label="Urban geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="5986" end="6000" title="rail transport" label="rail transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="6156" end="6178" title="Subsistence agriculture" label="produce their own food"/>
<link wikidata="Q108369092" start="6211" end="6223" title="city region" label="relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354" start="6231" end="6241" title="hinterland" label="hinterland"/>
<link wikidata="Q820254" start="6292" end="6303" title="mining town" label="mining town"/>
<link wikidata="Q740625" start="6791" end="6798" title="temenos" label="temenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="6820" end="6827" title="citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q108369092" start="6930" end="6949" title="city region" label="sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468524" start="6971" end="6982" title="city center" label="city center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050303" start="6986" end="6994" title="downtown" label="downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q738570" start="7024" end="7049" title="central business district" label="central business district"/>
<link wikidata="Q294440" start="7096" end="7108" title="public space" label="public space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246264" start="7145" end="7186" title="privately owned public space" label="privately owned spaces open to the public"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871222" start="7227" end="7240" title="Public domain (land)" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="7249" end="7256" title="common land" label="commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="7258" end="7276" title="Western philosophy" label="Western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187909" start="7305" end="7310" title="agora" label="agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q17945" start="7381" end="7394" title="public sphere" label="public sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q557141" start="7396" end="7406" title="Public art" label="Public art"/>
<link wikidata="Q22698" start="7445" end="7449" title="Park" label="Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q22652" start="7461" end="7488" title="Incorporation of nature within a city" label="natural sites within cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986688" start="7563" end="7580" title="built environment" label="built environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q22652" start="7583" end="7601" title="Urban green spaces" label="Urban green spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q898132" start="7911" end="7930" title="Urban structure" label="The urban structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="8470" end="8483" title="urban planning" label="city planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q57346" start="8639" end="8648" title="town wall" label="town wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="8654" end="8661" title="citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q510662" start="8750" end="8759" title="ring road" label="ring road"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="8829" end="8838" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9920" start="8843" end="8850" title="Haarlem" label="Haarlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="8961" end="8967" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256511" start="9075" end="9084" title="grid plan" label="grid plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="9153" end="9178" title="Indus Valley Civilisation" label="Indus Valley Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725" start="9185" end="9197" title="Mohenjo-Daro" label="Mohenjo-Daro"/>
<link wikidata="Q185562" start="9199" end="9206" title="Harappa" label="Harappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q323133" start="9282" end="9290" title="Kautilya" label="Kautilya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11114344" start="9313" end="9327" title="compass points" label="compass points"/>
<link wikidata="Q142819" start="9355" end="9361" title="Priene" label="Priene"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="9429" end="9454" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124027" start="9556" end="9567" title="city proper" label="city proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="9627" end="9639" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="9894" end="9911" title="Metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="9921" end="9927" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q25398029" start="9933" end="9938" title="exurb" label="exurb"/>
<link wikidata="Q48442" start="9970" end="9979" title="commuting" label="commuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266029" start="9995" end="10006" title="edge city" label="edge cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="10107" end="10137" title="metropolitan statistical areas" label="metropolitan statistical areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="10154" end="10164" title="demography" label="demography"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="10169" end="10178" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="10245" end="10264" title="urban agglomeration" label="urban agglomeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q245260" start="10266" end="10277" title="conurbation" label="conurbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q471822" start="10282" end="10293" title="megalopolis" label="megalopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422082" start="10314" end="10321" title="northeast megalopolis" label="BosWash"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="10338" end="10364" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251867" start="10410" end="10433" title="proto-city" label="proto-urban settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q192522" start="10443" end="10453" title="Çatalhöyük" label="Çatalhöyük"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="10533" end="10545" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687" start="10562" end="10569" title="Jericho" label="Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q41183" start="10571" end="10577" title="Aleppo" label="Aleppo"/>
<link wikidata="Q173532" start="10579" end="10585" title="Byblos" label="Byblos"/>
<link wikidata="Q203299" start="10587" end="10593" title="Faiyum" label="Faiyum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953" start="10595" end="10602" title="Yerevan" label="Yerevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="10604" end="10610" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q13616" start="10612" end="10618" title="Matera" label="Matera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="10620" end="10628" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="10634" end="10639" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862380" start="10672" end="10706" title="List of oldest continuously inhabited cities" label="the longest continual inhabitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="10734" end="10752" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="10754" end="10760" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="10777" end="10791" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q180548" start="10908" end="10934" title="Neolithic Revolution" label="development of agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q207449" start="10999" end="11016" title="division of labour" label="division of labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="11035" end="11056" title="social stratification" label="social stratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="11062" end="11067" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q114768" start="11097" end="11106" title="granary" label="granaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="11530" end="11549" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402267" start="11610" end="11617" title="Tell es-Sultan" label="Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q192522" start="11622" end="11632" title="Çatalhöyük" label="Çatalhöyük"/>
<link wikidata="Q33652" start="11647" end="11667" title="eighth millennium BC" label="eighth millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251867" start="11692" end="11704" title="proto-cities" label="proto-cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="11743" end="11754" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="11764" end="11768" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q731494" start="11968" end="11979" title="Uruk period" label="Uruk period"/>
<link wikidata="Q115439" start="11989" end="11995" title="fourth millennium BC" label="fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q29945" start="12000" end="12019" title="third millennium BC" label="third millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="12078" end="12089" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="12091" end="12096" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="12098" end="12103" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="12109" end="12114" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q109607" start="12158" end="12163" title="ruins" label="ruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069949" start="12245" end="12262" title="Urban density" label="dense populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725" start="12422" end="12434" title="Mohenjo-daro" label="Mohenjo-daro"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="12483" end="12491" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418323" start="12588" end="12619" title="Sanitation of the Indus Valley Civilisation" label="sophisticated sanitation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q204556" start="12621" end="12648" title="Ancient Chinese urban planning" label="China&amp;#x27;s planned cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933919" start="12717" end="12727" title="Macrocosm and microcosm" label="microcosms"/>
<link wikidata="Q23640645" start="12734" end="12757" title="List of ancient Egyptian towns and cities" label="Ancient Egyptian cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q56924" start="12853" end="12861" title="El Lahun" label="El Lahun"/>
<link wikidata="Q18722" start="12915" end="12926" title="Senusret II" label="Senusret II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736" start="12951" end="12957" title="Amarna" label="Amarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q81794" start="12967" end="12976" title="Akhenaten" label="Akhenaten"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="13046" end="13056" title="social stratification" label="stratified"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="13223" end="13228" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="13242" end="13249" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="13254" end="13261" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="13354" end="13363" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="13369" end="13378" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25716" start="13431" end="13450" title="first millennium BC" label="first millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594094" start="13464" end="13479" title="List of Phoenician cities" label="numerous cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="13495" end="13499" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9304037" start="13501" end="13506" title="Cydon" label="Cydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q173532" start="13512" end="13518" title="Byblos" label="Byblos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="13522" end="13530" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="13535" end="13540" title="Cádiz" label="Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="13583" end="13593" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="13598" end="13604" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q844930" start="13617" end="13623" title="Classical Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q148837" start="13645" end="13650" title="polis" label="polis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="13692" end="13700" title="citizenship" label="citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q187909" start="13744" end="13749" title="agora" label="agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="13898" end="13902" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="13985" end="13995" title="Roman Empire" label="its empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884402" start="14018" end="14025" title="List of cities founded by the Romans" label="founded"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="14139" end="14147" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="14189" end="14194" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="14199" end="14210" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q153836" start="14267" end="14291" title="Norte Chico civilization" label="Norte Chico civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q13341477" start="14293" end="14299" title="Chavín culture" label="Chavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208188" start="14304" end="14309" title="Moche (culture)" label="Moche"/>
<link wikidata="Q605340" start="14352" end="14357" title="Huari culture" label="Huari"/>
<link wikidata="Q581741" start="14359" end="14364" title="Chimu" label="Chimu"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="14370" end="14374" title="Inca" label="Inca"/>
<link wikidata="Q153836" start="14481" end="14499" title="Norte Chico (Peruvian region)" label="Norte Chico region"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="14525" end="14529" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q135364" start="14727" end="14732" title="Olmec" label="Olmec"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796750" start="14754" end="14769" title="Maya city" label="Preclassic Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q844750" start="14775" end="14782" title="Zapotec civilization" label="Zapotec"/>
<link wikidata="Q172613" start="14798" end="14809" title="Teotihuacan" label="Teotihuacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="14856" end="14861" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122657" start="14863" end="14882" title="Andean civilization" label="Andean civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q45914" start="14885" end="14890" title="Maya peoples" label="Mayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="14892" end="14906" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippians"/>
<link wikidata="Q251749" start="14912" end="14918" title="Pueblo" label="Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="15066" end="15077" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q13695" start="15103" end="15115" title="Tenochtitlan" label="Tenochtitlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="15193" end="15203" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q342057" start="15213" end="15225" title="Acoma Pueblo" label="Acoma Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712839" start="15235" end="15264" title="Albuquerque metropolitan area" label="Albuquerque metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q252814" start="15269" end="15280" title="Taos Pueblo" label="Taos Pueblo"/>
<link wikidata="Q876315" start="15286" end="15290" title="Taos, New Mexico" label="Taos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="15310" end="15314" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="15342" end="15346" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q430563" start="15365" end="15375" title="Pachacamac" label="Pachacamac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165596" start="15392" end="15404" title="Dhar Tichitt" label="Dhar Tichitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="15434" end="15444" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="15567" end="15578" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270077" start="15583" end="15586" title="Dia, Mali" label="Dia"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="15603" end="15607" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146970" start="15685" end="15692" title="Soninke people" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q206789" start="15725" end="15737" title="Ghana Empire" label="Ghana Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q607668" start="15762" end="15772" title="Jenné-Jeno" label="Jenné-Jeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="15791" end="15795" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="16426" end="16438" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407391" start="16486" end="16491" title="Mandé peoples" label="Mande"/>
<link wikidata="Q896172" start="16511" end="16522" title="Bozo people" label="Bozo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q616309" start="16955" end="16964" title="Aoudaghost" label="Awdaghust"/>
<link wikidata="Q682728" start="16966" end="16977" title="Koumbi Saleh" label="Kumbi Saleh"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17013" end="17020" title=":de:Marandet" label="Maranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="17104" end="17135" title="Fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="dissolution of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17514" end="17533" title="Late antiquity#Cities" label="Late antique cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="17799" end="17813" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="17825" end="17855" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="ascendant Islamic civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="17878" end="17885" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="17887" end="17892" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="17898" end="17905" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="17957" end="17971" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="17992" end="18012" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="18106" end="18120" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6609648" start="18138" end="18162" title="List of cities conquered by the Ottoman Empire" label="control over many cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="18200" end="18222" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="Constantinople in 1453"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="18232" end="18249" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="18282" end="18302" title="free imperial city" label="free imperial cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="18311" end="18320" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="18322" end="18332" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="18334" end="18343" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q78" start="18345" end="18350" title="Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="18352" end="18358" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q47887" start="18364" end="18372" title="Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507115" start="18641" end="18657" title="Imperial Estates" label="Imperial Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q669970" start="18708" end="18721" title="Imperial Diet (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Imperial Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107861" start="18895" end="18911" title="medieval commune" label="medieval commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115680" start="18928" end="18939" title="Italian city-states" label="city-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="18954" end="18972" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="18981" end="18998" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="19037" end="19043" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="19048" end="19054" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="19066" end="19082" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q823916" start="19142" end="19152" title="Dutch–Hanseatic War" label="challenged"/>
<link wikidata="Q157109" start="19173" end="19178" title="Burgundian Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q15875645" start="19190" end="19196" title="History of urban centers in the Low Countries" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="19200" end="19205" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q102728" start="19207" end="19212" title="Ypres" label="Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="19218" end="19227" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q193428" start="19284" end="19289" title="Sakai, Osaka" label="Sakai"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="19384" end="19389" title="Khmer Empire" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q163607" start="19401" end="19407" title="Angkor" label="Angkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772521" start="19449" end="19473" title="Pre-industrial society" label="preindustrial settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="19561" end="19572" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="19603" end="19613" title="Common Era" label="Common Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q465279" start="19640" end="19659" title="Trans-Saharan trade" label="Trans-Saharan trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q188904" start="19780" end="19783" title="Gao" label="Gao"/>
<link wikidata="Q123746783" start="19816" end="19823" title="Old Oyo" label="Oyo-Ile"/>
<link wikidata="Q180084" start="19925" end="19933" title="Ifẹ̀" label="Ile-Ifẹ̀"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339489" start="19998" end="20003" title="Niani, Guinea" label="Niani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9427" start="20040" end="20048" title="Timbuktu" label="Timbuktu"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="20195" end="20214" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="20368" end="20376" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="20696" end="20725" title="Industrial Revolution" label="growth of the modern industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="20775" end="20787" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="20983" end="20989" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="21014" end="21026" title="British Empire" label="world empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="21089" end="21102" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q477862" start="21148" end="21173" title="History of rail transport" label="introduction of railroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113614" start="21380" end="21392" title="overcrowding" label="overcrowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433185" start="21394" end="21413" title="occupational hazard" label="occupational hazard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21456" end="21471" title="History of water supply and sanitation#Modern age" label="poor sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="21507" end="21514" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="21519" end="21526" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="21528" end="21537" title="Factories" label="Factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="21542" end="21546" title="slum" label="slum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="21667" end="21686" title="deindustrialization" label="deindustrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259783" start="21697" end="21719" title="economic restructuring" label="economic restructuring"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="21746" end="21753" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="21755" end="21767" title="homelessness" label="homelessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039238" start="21773" end="21784" title="urban decay" label="urban decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q781973" start="21869" end="21878" title="Rust Belt" label="Rust Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724015" start="21904" end="21911" title="Decline of Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q184116" start="21927" end="21940" title="Gary, Indiana" label="Gary, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13418058" start="21950" end="21956" title="Shrinking cities" label="shrink"/>
<link wikidata="Q112730899" start="22070" end="22085" title="service economy" label="service economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="22090" end="22117" title="public-private partnerships" label="public-private partnerships"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="22136" end="22150" title="gentrification" label="gentrification"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="22159" end="22181" title="urban renewal" label="revitalization efforts"/>
<link wikidata="Q58715" start="22229" end="22247" title="Great Leap Forward" label="Great Leap Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q855055" start="22263" end="22278" title="Five-year plans of China" label="five-year plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="22297" end="22302" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900233" start="22329" end="22341" title="urbanization in China" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100815" start="22346" end="22363" title="Chinese industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="22400" end="22412" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q466410" start="22446" end="22461" title="high technology" label="high technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="22480" end="22497" title="telecommunication" label="telecommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q830170" start="22544" end="22561" title="knowledge economy" label="knowledge economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231558" start="22569" end="22579" title="smart city" label="smart city"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="22628" end="22644" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="22649" end="22652" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q20065209" start="22679" end="22691" title="Surveillance issues in smart cities" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15118772" start="22712" end="22722" title="E-governance" label="governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738778" start="22798" end="22812" title="land use planning" label="master-planned"/>
<link wikidata="Q12018455" start="22836" end="22846" title="greenfield land" label="greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="22875" end="22887" title="Urbanization" label="Urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q330284" start="23113" end="23120" title="Market (place)" label="markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q18293488" start="23161" end="23173" title="British Agricultural Revolution" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="23178" end="23188" title="Industrial Revolution" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q381763" start="23278" end="23299" title="Demographic transition" label="demographic expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="23304" end="23311" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671637" start="23691" end="23747" title="United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs" label="United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="23847" end="23860" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294703" start="23997" end="24007" title="shantytown" label="shantytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q693827" start="24010" end="24016" title="favela" label="favela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767917" start="24019" end="24040" title="campamento (Chile)" label="poblaciones callampas"/>
<link wikidata="Q10103" start="24049" end="24054" title="Batam" label="Batam"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="24056" end="24065" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449" start="24067" end="24076" title="Mogadishu" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="24078" end="24085" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q68744" start="24087" end="24093" title="Xiamen" label="Xiamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="24095" end="24100" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3674" start="24106" end="24112" title="Niamey" label="Niamey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="24114" end="24119" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="24233" end="24257" title="developed country" label="more developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203182" start="24271" end="24283" title="Global North" label="Global North"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="24321" end="24345" title="less developed countries" label="less developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203182" start="24359" end="24371" title="Global South" label="Global South"/>
<link wikidata="Q174844" start="24766" end="24776" title="Megacities" label="Megacities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897397" start="24999" end="25006" title="Financial capital" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051832" start="25059" end="25089" title="offshoring" label="relocation of major businesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="25132" end="25141" title="immigrant" label="immigrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q75848" start="25271" end="25288" title="gated community" label="gated communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049799" start="25679" end="25705" title="water resources management" label="water resources management"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="25794" end="25800" title="sewage" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="25855" end="25875" title="Local government" label="The local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="25934" end="25946" title="municipality" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112653" start="25959" end="25969" title="local government in England" label="in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q516156" start="25971" end="25991" title="local government in the United States" label="in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16861604" start="25993" end="25998" title="municipal governance in India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="26011" end="26027" title="crown colonies" label="British colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="26042" end="26063" title="municipal corporation" label="municipal corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763214" start="26071" end="26080" title="municipio" label="municipio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074737" start="26090" end="26095" title="Municipalities of Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13217644" start="26100" end="26108" title="Municipalities of Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="26132" end="26145" title="municipalidad" label="municipalidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="26181" end="26188" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="26193" end="26203" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q484170" start="26242" end="26251" title="communes in France" label="in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840161" start="26256" end="26261" title="Communes of Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="26272" end="26278" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="26359" end="26364" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472275" start="26455" end="26465" title="figurehead" label="figurehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q428148" start="26657" end="26665" title="regulation" label="regulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129653" start="26666" end="26679" title="everyday life" label="everyday life"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="26710" end="26716" title="public health" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q12147" start="26730" end="26736" title="health" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="26738" end="26747" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q331055" start="26749" end="26755" title="burial" label="burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554231" start="26757" end="26765" title="resource" label="resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="26774" end="26784" title="resource extraction" label="extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q184872" start="26786" end="26796" title="recreation" label="recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41176" start="26824" end="26832" title="building" label="building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936366" start="27095" end="27113" title="municipal services" label="municipal services"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="27122" end="27131" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="27141" end="27154" title="school system" label="school system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="27157" end="27165" title="police" label="policing"/>
<link wikidata="Q897825" start="27199" end="27211" title="firefighting" label="firefighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498663" start="27221" end="27236" title="fire department" label="fire department"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412181" start="27644" end="27668" title="King assassination riots" label="King assassination riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q607695" start="27748" end="27760" title="property tax" label="property tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="27771" end="27782" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="27939" end="27952" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="28130" end="28143" title="privatization" label="privatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="28171" end="28185" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185242" start="28188" end="28203" title="corporatization" label="corporatization"/>
<link wikidata="Q607865" start="28269" end="28285" title="financialization" label="financialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308569" start="28512" end="28523" title="city limits" label="city limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q140830" start="28588" end="28598" title="cash and cash equivalents" label="ready cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347273" start="28626" end="28640" title="municipal bond" label="municipal bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q384660" start="28666" end="28674" title="Maturity (finance)" label="interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q384660" start="28681" end="28695" title="Maturity (finance)" label="repayment date"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689442" start="28737" end="28760" title="tax increment financing" label="tax increment financing"/>
<link wikidata="Q372765" start="28977" end="28990" title="credit rating" label="credit rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553864" start="29014" end="29024" title="Governance" label="Governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q623971" start="29077" end="29091" title="social control" label="social control"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="29139" end="29168" title="non-governmental organization" label="non-governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="29215" end="29240" title="multinational corporation" label="multinational corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="29535" end="29548" title="neoliberalism" label="neoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="29610" end="29620" title="privatization" label="privatized"/>
<link wikidata="Q902410" start="29638" end="29649" title="deregulation" label="deregulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="29655" end="29666" title="corporation" label="corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q221096" start="29744" end="29771" title="public-private partnerships" label="public-private partnerships"/>
<link wikidata="Q474818" start="29781" end="29811" title="business improvement districts" label="business improvement districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q218600" start="29863" end="29894" title="corporate social responsibility" label="corporate social responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q557880" start="29908" end="29916" title="investor" label="investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q695829" start="29922" end="29943" title="real estate developer" label="real estate developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="29968" end="29976" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345314" start="30017" end="30032" title="good governance" label="good governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q865909" start="30142" end="30164" title="development assistance" label="development assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="30388" end="30402" title="Urban planning" label="Urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q19720691" start="30552" end="30570" title="Technical aspects of urban planning" label="certain objectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641312" start="30626" end="30634" title="theories of urban planning" label="theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q457193" start="30747" end="30761" title="public capital" label="public capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738778" start="30795" end="30812" title="Land-use planning" label="land-use controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="30821" end="30827" title="zoning" label="zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907895" start="30855" end="30877" title="comprehensive planning" label="comprehensive planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q166332" start="31145" end="31159" title="eminent domain" label="eminent domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q19720696" start="31436" end="31461" title="history of urban planning" label="history of urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074523" start="31770" end="31789" title="planned community" label="planned communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q597680" start="31953" end="31966" title="Urban sociology" label="Urban society"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="31980" end="31990" title="social stratification" label="stratified"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315484" start="32037" end="32047" title="Geographical segregation" label="segregated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610510" start="32219" end="32225" title="ethnic enclave" label="ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545505" start="32229" end="32238" title="lifestyle enclave" label="lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="32286" end="32292" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739536" start="32361" end="32371" title="inner city" label="inner city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940624" start="32423" end="32431" title="banlieue" label="banlieue"/>
<link wikidata="Q235155" start="32555" end="32560" title="white people" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="32612" end="32618" title="Suburb" label="Suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q75848" start="32652" end="32669" title="Gated community" label="gated communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q123705" start="32793" end="32805" title="neighborhood" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="32849" end="32856" title="peasant" label="peasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="32875" end="32886" title="proletariat" label="proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="32953" end="32960" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q29502" start="33003" end="33009" title="proletarian revolution" label="revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="33022" end="33033" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q201610" start="33124" end="33134" title="status quo" label="status quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q260747" start="33285" end="33304" title="means of production" label="means of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="33355" end="33365" title="rural area" label="rural area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="33371" end="33388" title="intensive farming" label="intensive farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="33392" end="33411" title="crop yield" label="yield surplus crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q385256" start="33514" end="33529" title="Urban economics" label="Urban economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="33662" end="33674" title="labor market" label="labor market"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="33725" end="33731" title="retail" label="retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q192270" start="33745" end="33756" title="Consumption (economics)" label="consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q830036" start="33782" end="33790" title="shopping" label="shopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q216107" start="33813" end="33829" title="department store" label="department store"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="33855" end="33866" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="33868" end="33884" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q631931" start="33886" end="33896" title="decorative arts" label="decoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q82604" start="33902" end="33908" title="design" label="design"/>
<link wikidata="Q16798524" start="33948" end="33961" title="fantasy world" label="fantasy world"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="34010" end="34021" title="consumerism" label="consumerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423399" start="34093" end="34112" title="knowledge spillover" label="knowledge spillover"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="34477" end="34490" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="34539" end="34547" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="tertiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q112730899" start="34551" end="34566" title="service economy" label="service economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="34604" end="34611" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495452" start="34613" end="34624" title="hospitality industry" label="hospitality"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="34626" end="34639" title="entertainment" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q708514" start="34645" end="34657" title="housekeeping" label="housekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608073" start="34661" end="34672" title="grey-collar" label="grey-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517554" start="34681" end="34684" title="legal outsourcing" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="34712" end="34726" title="management" label="administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q964122" start="34784" end="34797" title="Geoffrey West" label="Geoffrey West"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="34958" end="34967" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="34972" end="34980" title="the arts" label="the arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="34993" end="35005" title="university" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="35007" end="35013" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="35016" end="35022" title="temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152824" start="35035" end="35056" title="cultural institutions" label="cultural institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="35094" end="35106" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q994776" start="35152" end="35158" title="Brutalist architecture" label="brutal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303" start="35160" end="35170" title="skyscraper" label="skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q918002" start="35368" end="35384" title="cultural capital" label="cultural capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="35533" end="35545" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q200325" start="35547" end="35560" title="human history" label="human history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510761" start="35566" end="35579" title="social change" label="social change"/>
<link wikidata="Q853710" start="35610" end="35628" title="mass communication" label="mass communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q38926" start="35649" end="35653" title="news" label="news"/>
<link wikidata="Q696819" start="35663" end="35669" title="herald" label="herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572600" start="35680" end="35692" title="proclamation" label="proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="35695" end="35704" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090622" start="36058" end="36072" title="place branding" label="place branding"/>
<link wikidata="Q751585" start="36077" end="36091" title="city marketing" label="city marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758100" start="36093" end="36109" title="public diplomacy" label="public diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146163" start="36225" end="36240" title="collective identity" label="shared identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450999" start="36245" end="36259" title="sense of place" label="sense of place"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="36313" end="36320" title="Historical marker" label="plaques"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989906" start="36326" end="36334" title="monument" label="monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="36427" end="36436" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="36438" end="36443" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="36449" end="36453" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="36527" end="36534" title="pilgrim" label="pilgrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q42941" start="36562" end="36566" title="Agra" label="Agra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9141" start="36578" end="36587" title="Taj Mahal" label="Taj Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="36592" end="36605" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q20861677" start="36619" end="36637" title="World Trade Center (2001–present)" label="World Trade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="36639" end="36644" title="Elvis" label="Elvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="36658" end="36665" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q545360" start="36691" end="36700" title="Graceland" label="Graceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="36832" end="36837" title="brand" label="brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="36874" end="36889" title="decision-making" label="decision-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q845658" start="36988" end="37006" title="Bread and circuses" label="Bread and circuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443060" start="37067" end="37077" title="commoner" label="the masses"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="37136" end="37144" title="Identity (social science)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="37215" end="37228" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q752673" start="37562" end="37580" title="asymmetric warfare" label="asymmetric warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="37682" end="37695" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857885" start="37734" end="37756" title="military urbanism" label="influence urban design"/>
<link wikidata="Q159385" start="37878" end="37890" title="geopolitics" label="geopolitical"/>
<link wikidata="Q88556" start="37989" end="37997" title="garrison" label="garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164077" start="38020" end="38044" title="Strategic Hamlet Program" label="Strategic Hamlet Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="38056" end="38067" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q582706" start="38073" end="38091" title="Israeli settlement" label="Israeli settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="38113" end="38122" title="Philippine–American War" label="occupying"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="38127" end="38138" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="38309" end="38321" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q862308" start="38380" end="38384" title="open city" label="open"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769366" start="38398" end="38410" title="surrender (military)" label="surrendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="38525" end="38545" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q369799" start="38648" end="38670" title="low-intensity conflict" label="low-intensity conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323212" start="38807" end="38817" title="insurgency" label="insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q760037" start="38842" end="38859" title="counterinsurgency" label="counterinsurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q163698" start="38901" end="38922" title="psychological warfare" label="psychological warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102423" start="38934" end="38946" title="close combat" label="close combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q855848" start="38986" end="39002" title="crime prevention" label="crime prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251458" start="39040" end="39056" title="defensible space theory" label="defensible space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39186" end="39193" title="Cuneiform script#List of major cuneiform tablet discoveries" label="tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q109607" start="39198" end="39203" title="ruins" label="ruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q611895" start="39262" end="39282" title="Carthago delenda est" label="Carthago delenda est"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="39300" end="39341" title="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="39361" end="39369" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291690" start="39371" end="39390" title="Nuclear strategy" label="nuclear strategists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177048" start="39433" end="39446" title="countervalue" label="counter-value"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176973" start="39532" end="39571" title="counterforce" label="aiming primarily at its military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="39626" end="39640" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113011" start="39816" end="39829" title="fixed capital" label="fixed capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q382444" start="39840" end="39853" title="marginal cost" label="marginal cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="39873" end="39891" title="economies of scale" label="economies of scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163938" start="39915" end="39932" title="barriers to entry" label="barriers to entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q648510" start="39973" end="39991" title="natural monopoly" label="natural monopolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192971" start="40401" end="40409" title="network theory" label="networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093521" start="40603" end="40618" title="path dependence" label="path dependence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475641" start="40681" end="40692" title="Megaproject" label="Megaproject"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="40722" end="40729" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="40732" end="40743" title="power plant" label="power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="40750" end="40757" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="41153" end="41169" title="Public utility" label="Public utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="41385" end="41395" title="Sanitation" label="Sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="41472" end="41488" title="waste management" label="waste management"/>
<link wikidata="Q162297" start="41511" end="41518" title="hygiene" label="hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="41526" end="41531" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q625083" start="41562" end="41582" title="water supply network" label="water supply network"/>
<link wikidata="Q156849" start="41598" end="41613" title="Sewerage" label="sewerage system"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966166" start="41619" end="41625" title="sewage" label="sewage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421263" start="41630" end="41640" title="stormwater" label="stormwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078604" start="41642" end="41654" title="History of water supply and sanitation" label="Historically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061108" start="41726" end="41738" title="water supply" label="water supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q682599" start="41956" end="41968" title="Veolia Water" label="Veolia Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127887" start="41979" end="41986" title="Vivendi" label="Vivendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416787" start="41992" end="41997" title="Engie" label="Engie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551864" start="42008" end="42012" title="Suez (company, 1997–2008)" label="Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="42107" end="42113" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="42134" end="42145" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q951504" start="42167" end="42184" title="electric machines" label="electric machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q212920" start="42201" end="42211" title="Home appliance" label="appliances"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112665" start="42215" end="42234" title="outline of industrial machinery" label="industrial machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="42253" end="42263" title="electronics" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="42330" end="42343" title="traffic light" label="traffic light"/>
<link wikidata="Q503958" start="42346" end="42358" title="street light" label="street light"/>
<link wikidata="Q210064" start="42372" end="42380" title="lighting" label="lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q111765628" start="42416" end="42432" title="hydrocarbon fuel" label="hydrocarbon fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="42442" end="42450" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="42455" end="42466" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="42487" end="42494" title="heating" label="heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="42500" end="42507" title="cooking" label="cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="42509" end="42527" title="Telecommunications" label="Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373572" start="42551" end="42565" title="telephone line" label="telephone line"/>
<link wikidata="Q183389" start="42571" end="42584" title="coaxial cable" label="coaxial cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q853710" start="42635" end="42639" title="mass communication" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q681349" start="42644" end="42658" title="point-to-point (telecommunications)" label="point-to-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q273005" start="42746" end="42761" title="economic system" label="economic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q949973" start="42771" end="42781" title="wage labour" label="wage labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="42936" end="42940" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087190" start="42946" end="42953" title="walkway" label="walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="42971" end="42984" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44377" start="43002" end="43013" title="tunnel" label="underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="43015" end="43025" title="light rail" label="overground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601555" start="43031" end="43039" title="Elevated railway" label="elevated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="43103" end="43107" title="rail transport" label="rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q197" start="43113" end="43121" title="airplane" label="airplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="43229" end="43234" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q221488" start="43257" end="43267" title="pedestrian" label="pedestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q177749" start="43293" end="43301" title="sidewalk" label="sidewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834363" start="43307" end="43328" title="transit mall" label="special walking areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11442" start="43361" end="43368" title="bicycle" label="bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q595658" start="43374" end="43384" title="velocipede" label="velocipede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076056" start="43703" end="43715" title="electrification" label="electrifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="43731" end="43745" title="public transit" label="public transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="43766" end="43775" title="streetcar" label="streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q752870" start="43968" end="43981" title="motor vehicle" label="motor vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215004" start="44009" end="44021" title="effects of the car on societies" label="implications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="44262" end="44265" title="car" label="car"/>
<link wikidata="Q200250" start="44334" end="44344" title="metropolis" label="metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4323994" start="44381" end="44388" title="traffic" label="traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="44438" end="44445" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q17087190" start="44479" end="44486" title="walkway" label="walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q358078" start="44676" end="44690" title="street network" label="street network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740966" start="44704" end="44714" title="Public transport bus service" label="bus system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="44799" end="44805" title="bus route" label="routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266029" start="45031" end="45042" title="edge city" label="edge cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="45073" end="45090" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q842314" start="45123" end="45132" title="bus lanes" label="bus lanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="45310" end="45330" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537379" start="45424" end="45431" title="Walking" label="Walking"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="45436" end="45443" title="cycling" label="cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q369730" start="45511" end="45526" title="pedestrian zone" label="pedestrian zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378400" start="45532" end="45541" title="bike lane" label="bike lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625620" start="45639" end="45653" title="healthy city" label="Healthy Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="45678" end="45701" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q581830" start="45721" end="45733" title="carfree city" label="carfree city"/>
<link wikidata="Q20747255" start="45754" end="45774" title="road space rationing" label="road space rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739432" start="45779" end="45795" title="road pricing" label="road use charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247867" start="45861" end="45872" title="Housing" label="The housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q989946" start="45988" end="45996" title="Shelter (building)" label="shelters"/>
<link wikidata="Q98108964" start="46077" end="46090" title="Owner-occupancy" label="Homeownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q157171" start="46157" end="46164" title="renting" label="renting"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="46229" end="46241" title="Homelessness" label="Homelessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="46463" end="46472" title="apartment" label="apartment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307276" start="46503" end="46521" title="Single-family detached home" label="single-family home"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="46544" end="46553" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41176" start="46703" end="46711" title="building" label="building"/>
<link wikidata="Q45701" start="46717" end="46722" title="waste" label="waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="46735" end="46746" title="Agriculture" label="cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107656" start="46750" end="46756" title="garden" label="garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q911871" start="46834" end="46844" title="wilderness" label="wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="46881" end="46893" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="46957" end="46973" title="introduced species" label="immigrant plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q966490" start="47089" end="47101" title="disturbance (ecology)" label="disturbances"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="47146" end="47153" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710494" start="47183" end="47197" title="Secondary succession" label="recolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q188230" start="47216" end="47232" title="ecological succession" label="young ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139299" start="47238" end="47256" title="r/K selection theory" label="r-selected species"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="47424" end="47429" title="fauna" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="47439" end="47445" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="47459" end="47462" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="47466" end="47472" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="47475" end="47479" title="mouse" label="mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="47481" end="47484" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="47492" end="47496" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="47510" end="47513" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="47519" end="47522" title="dog" label="dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="47525" end="47537" title="domestication" label="domesticated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739176" start="47542" end="47547" title="feral" label="feral"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="47556" end="47564" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q234173" start="47723" end="47743" title="ecological footprint" label="ecological footprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="47891" end="47902" title="sustainable" label="sustainable"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="48017" end="48030" title="Air pollution" label="Air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="48150" end="48176" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="48263" end="48267" title="smog" label="smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q643546" start="48280" end="48284" title="haze" label="haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q105789" start="48422" end="48434" title="heavy metals" label="heavy metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="48447" end="48451" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="48453" end="48459" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="48465" end="48471" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="48487" end="48489" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q215108" start="48578" end="48590" title="microclimate" label="microclimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="48600" end="48608" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q189259" start="48610" end="48617" title="Asphalt concrete" label="asphalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="48667" end="48675" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="48688" end="48692" title="rain" label="rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="48703" end="48720" title="Storm drain" label="underground ducts"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48726" end="48754" title="Geography of New York City#Climate" label="temperature in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979133" start="48763" end="48788" title="Climate of New York (state)" label="nearby rural temperatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="48978" end="48990" title="particulates" label="particulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491965" start="49233" end="49253" title="environmental racism" label="environmental racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430301" start="49487" end="49500" title="urban ecology" label="urban ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q22652" start="49533" end="49550" title="urban green space" label="urban green space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261792" start="49837" end="49855" title="Scientific Reports" label="Scientific Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="51233" end="51246" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="51344" end="51367" title="international relations" label="international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="51463" end="51472" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="51474" end="51483" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="51524" end="51540" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q871337" start="51582" end="51601" title="information economy" label="information economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="51622" end="51630" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="51668" end="51685" title="telecommunication" label="telecommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="51893" end="51903" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="51929" end="51940" title="global city" label="global city"/>
<link wikidata="Q239419" start="52045" end="52058" title="Saskia Sassen" label="Saskia Sassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="52194" end="52199" title="Power (social and political)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52304" end="52347" title="Global city#GaWC study" label="rank the world&amp;#x27;s cities hierarchically"/>
<link wikidata="Q21662260" start="52415" end="52434" title="command and control" label="command and control"/>
<link wikidata="Q824362" start="52554" end="52572" title="post-industrial society" label="post-industrialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190539" start="52713" end="52722" title="discourse" label="discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151541" start="53083" end="53093" title="Paul James (academic)" label="Paul James"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="53200" end="53225" title="Multinational corporation" label="Multinational corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="53231" end="53235" title="bank" label="bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q613142" start="53388" end="53391" title="law firm" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="53396" end="53407" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="54011" end="54022" title="sister city" label="sister city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459305" start="54057" end="54079" title="multi-level governance" label="multi-level governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048268" start="54125" end="54145" title="European integration" label="European integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="54164" end="54171" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="54173" end="54179" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="54181" end="54190" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="54192" end="54201" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="54207" end="54221" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927117" start="54254" end="54284" title="Brussels and the European Union" label="the European Union at Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684572" start="54323" end="54336" title="transmigrants" label="transmigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524235" start="54486" end="54503" title="global governance" label="global governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974854" start="54629" end="54664" title="United Cities and Local Governments" label="United Cities and Local Governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156831" start="54689" end="54710" title="umbrella organization" label="umbrella organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374874" start="54750" end="54760" title="Eurocities" label="Eurocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q844487" start="54762" end="54794" title="Asian Network of Major Cities 21" label="Asian Network of Major Cities 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091483" start="54800" end="54837" title="Federation of Canadian Municipalities" label="Federation of Canadian Municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974065" start="54842" end="54867" title="National League of Cities" label="National League of Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709691" start="54877" end="54911" title="United States Conference of Mayors" label="United States Conference of Mayors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826731" start="54970" end="54991" title="Agenda 21 for culture" label="Agenda 21 for culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711347" start="55007" end="55024" title="cultural policy" label="cultural policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="55190" end="55206" title="environmentalism" label="environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="55224" end="55238" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q208571" start="55265" end="55274" title="Agenda 21" label="Agenda 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q485087" start="55316" end="55351" title="C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group" label="C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55357" end="55403" title="United Nations Global Compact#UN Global Compact – Cities Programme" label="United Nations Global Compact Cities Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579460" start="55409" end="55439" title="Carbon Neutral Cities Alliance" label="Carbon Neutral Cities Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q487647" start="55452" end="55470" title="Covenant of Mayors" label="Covenant of Mayors"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579719" start="55479" end="55496" title="Compact of Mayors" label="Compact of Mayors"/>
<link wikidata="Q677691" start="55498" end="55542" title="ICLEI" label="ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q370451" start="55552" end="55576" title="Transition town" label="Transition Towns network"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="55906" end="55918" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3926" start="55974" end="55982" title="Pretoria" label="Pretoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q854218" start="56158" end="56179" title="United Nations System" label="United Nations System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7865428" start="56324" end="56333" title="Habitat I" label="Habitat I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4530482" start="56481" end="56492" title="economic development" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="56550" end="56557" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q751149" start="56826" end="56838" title="Earth Summit" label="Earth Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="56842" end="56856" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q208571" start="56913" end="56922" title="Agenda 21" label="Agenda 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="56966" end="56989" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393120" start="56997" end="57007" title="Habitat II" label="Habitat II"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737" start="57117" end="57145" title="Millennium Development Goals" label="Millennium Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="57150" end="57179" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q487883" start="57275" end="57317" title="United Nations Human Settlements Programme" label="United Nations Human Settlements Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187686" start="57349" end="57381" title="United Nations Development Group" label="United Nations Development Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022362" start="57389" end="57400" title="Habitat III" label="Habitat III"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="57807" end="57821" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q22283237" start="57908" end="57925" title="Pact of Amsterdam" label="Pact of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q182016" start="57991" end="58017" title="UN Environmental Programme" label="UN Environmental Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="58023" end="58047" title="UN Development Programme" label="UN Development Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q656812" start="58053" end="58101" title="Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights" label="Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="58107" end="58132" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="58142" end="58152" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="58159" end="58169" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q14638071" start="58178" end="58196" title="List of specialized agencies of the United Nations" label="specialized agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141807" start="58403" end="58424" title="structural adjustment" label="structural adjustment"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="58469" end="58480" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015655" start="58585" end="58600" title="Cities Alliance" label="Cities Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q230788" start="58706" end="58711" title="Grant (money)" label="grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="58915" end="58926" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="59047" end="59053" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417206" start="59119" end="59138" title="cultural governance" label="cultural governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="59308" end="59327" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q918002" start="59379" end="59395" title="cultural capital" label="cultural capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="59397" end="59404" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q914856" start="59410" end="59431" title="historic preservation" label="historic preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="59549" end="59554" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="59598" end="59605" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="59610" end="59619" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q205365" start="59621" end="59625" title="Cain" label="Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q201861" start="59630" end="59636" title="Nimrod" label="Nimrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="59672" end="59687" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q159709" start="59711" end="59720" title="Gilgamesh" label="Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="59740" end="59744" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853409" start="59891" end="59904" title="anti-urbanism" label="anti-urbanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="60036" end="60047" title="Rural area" label="the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q192797" start="60137" end="60142" title="elite" label="elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q190539" start="60224" end="60233" title="discourse" label="discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q27664152" start="60463" end="60476" title="List of literary descriptions of cities (before 1550)" label="descriptiones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="60548" end="60563" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="60568" end="60579" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q19504" start="60640" end="60650" title="Fritz Lang" label="Fritz Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q151599" start="60706" end="60716" title="Metropolis (1927 film)" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="60738" end="60750" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q12177156" start="60782" end="60795" title="neon lighting" label="neon lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q244156" start="61012" end="61030" title="traffic congestion" label="traffic congestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733497" start="61070" end="61083" title="The Fast Lady" label="The Fast Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454574" start="61107" end="61115" title="Playtime" label="Playtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="61228" end="61234" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="61240" end="61248" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110677558" start="61371" end="61380" title="Nylonkong" label="Nylonkong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035733" start="61454" end="61466" title="ecumenopolis" label="ecumenopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646947" start="61497" end="61512" title="Lists of cities" label="Lists of cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683155" start="61515" end="61558" title="List of adjectivals and demonyms for cities" label="List of adjectivals and demonyms for cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q225467" start="61561" end="61573" title="Compact city" label="Compact city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333087" start="61576" end="61586" title="Eco-cities" label="Eco-cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974842" start="61589" end="61598" title="Lost city" label="Lost city"/>
<link wikidata="Q174844" start="61601" end="61609" title="Megacity" label="Megacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q200250" start="61612" end="61622" title="Metropolis" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10295476" start="61625" end="61645" title="Settlement hierarchy" label="Settlement hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="61648" end="61660" title="Urbanization" label="Urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542471" start="61663" end="61675" title="Walking city" label="Walking city"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805028" start="62143" end="62161" title="Ashgate Publishing" label="Ashgate Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q322922" start="62468" end="62482" title="Jacques Ellul" label="Ellul, Jacques"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472426" start="62497" end="62520" title="The Meaning of the City" label="The Meaning of the City"/>
<link wikidata="" start="62654" end="62714" title=":fr:Sans feu ni lieu : Signification biblique de la Grande Ville" label="Sans feu ni lieu : Signification biblique de la Grande Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q21096327" start="63491" end="63506" title="Springer Nature" label="Springer Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q122123" start="65149" end="65167" title="Sibyl Moholy-Nagy" label="Moholy-Nagy, Sibyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q469888" start="65282" end="65296" title="Lewis Mumford" label="Mumford, Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723203" start="65311" end="65383" title="The City in History" label="The City in History: Its Origins, Its Transformations, and Its Prospects"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028450" start="65579" end="65593" title="Witold Rybczynski" label="Rybczynski, W."/>
<link wikidata="Q4696737" start="65868" end="65883" title="Aidan Southall" label="Southall, Aidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558777" start="66227" end="66245" title="Edwin Mellen Press" label="Edwin Mellen Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q381848" start="66255" end="66270" title="Patrick Geddes" label="Geddes, Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q185381" start="66507" end="66525" title="Arnold J. Toynbee" label="Toynbee, Arnold J."/>
<link wikidata="Q17153156" start="66573" end="66584" title="McGraw-Hill" label="McGraw-Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="66733" end="66743" title="Max Weber" label="Weber, Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911782" start="66751" end="66759" title="The City (Weber book)" label="The City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333891" start="67081" end="67089" title="Statista" label="Statista"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229786" start="67100" end="67127" title="Population Reference Bureau" label="Population Reference Bureau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5394" wikidata="Q218462" url="?curid=5394" title="Chervil">
<text>Chervil (; Anthriscus cerefolium), sometimes called French parsley or garden chervil (to distinguish it from similar plants also called chervil), is a delicate annual herb related to parsley. It was formerly called myrhis due to its volatile oil with an aroma similar to the resinous substance myrrh. It is commonly used to season mild-flavoured dishes and is a constituent of the French herb mixture .

==Name==

The name &quot;chervil&quot; is from Anglo-Norman, from Latin or , meaning &quot;leaves of joy&quot;; the Latin is formed, as from an Ancient Greek word ().

==Description==
The plants grow to , with tripinnate leaves that may be curly. The small white flowers form small umbels, across. The fruit is about 1 cm long, oblong-ovoid with a slender, ridged beak.

==Distribution and habitat==

A member of the Apiaceae, chervil is native to the Caucasus but was spread by the Romans through most of Europe, where it is now naturalised. It is also grown frequently in the United States, where it sometimes escapes cultivation. Such escape can be recognized, however, as garden chervil is distinguished from all other Anthriscus species growing in North America (i.e., &quot;A. caucalis&quot; and &quot;A. sylvestris&quot;) by its having lanceolate-linear bracteoles and a fruit with a relatively long beak.

== Cultivation ==
Transplanting chervil can be difficult, due to the long taproot. It prefers a cool and moist location; otherwise, it rapidly goes to seed (also known as bolting). It is usually grown as a cool-season crop, like lettuce, and should be planted in early spring and late fall or in a winter greenhouse. Regular harvesting of leaves also helps to prevent bolting. If plants bolt despite precautions, the plant can be periodically re-sown throughout the growing season, thus producing fresh plants as older plants bolt and go out of production.

Chervil grows to a height of , and a width of .

== Uses ==

===Culinary===

Chervil is used, particularly in France, to season poultry, seafood, young spring vegetables (such as carrots), soups, and sauces. More delicate than parsley, it has a faint taste of liquorice or aniseed.

Chervil is one of the four traditional French , along with tarragon, chives, and parsley, which are essential to French cooking. Unlike the more pungent, robust herbs such as thyme and rosemary, which can take prolonged cooking, the are added at the last minute, to salads, omelettes, and soups.

===Chemical constituents===
Essential oil obtained via water distillation of wild Turkish Anthriscus cerefolium was analyzed by gas chromatography - mass spectrometry identifying 4 compounds: methyl chavicol (83.10%), 1-allyl-2,4-dimethoxybenzene (15.15%), undecane (1.75%) and β-pinene (&lt;0.01%).

===Horticulture===
According to some, slugs are attracted to chervil and the plant is sometimes used to bait them.

===Health===

Chervil has had various uses in folk medicine. It was claimed to be useful as a digestive aid, for lowering high blood pressure, and, infused with vinegar, for curing hiccups. Besides its digestive properties, it is used as a mild stimulant.

Chervil has also been implicated in &quot;strimmer dermatitis&quot;, another name for phytophotodermatitis, due to spray from weed trimmers and similar forms of contact. Other plants in the family Apiaceae can have similar effects.

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q218462" start="0" end="7" title="Chervil" label="Chervil"/>
<link wikidata="Q218462" start="52" end="66" title="Chervil" label="French parsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q218462" start="70" end="84" title="Chervil" label="garden chervil"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="160" end="166" title="annual plant" label="annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="167" end="171" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q25284" start="183" end="190" title="parsley" label="parsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q203635" start="294" end="299" title="myrrh" label="myrrh"/>
<link wikidata="Q35214" start="451" end="463" title="Anglo-Norman language" label="Anglo-Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="470" end="475" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="548" end="561" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q145794" start="821" end="829" title="Apiaceae" label="Apiaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="856" end="864" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494641" start="1016" end="1035" title="escaped plant" label="escapes cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q848142" start="1184" end="1195" title="Anthriscus caucalis" label="A. caucalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q683490" start="1212" end="1225" title="Anthriscus sylvestris" label="A. sylvestris"/>
<link wikidata="Q609336" start="1392" end="1399" title="taproot" label="taproot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007802" start="1489" end="1496" title="bolting (horticulture)" label="bolting"/>
<link wikidata="Q83193" start="1547" end="1554" title="lettuce" label="lettuce"/>
<link wikidata="Q178559" start="2004" end="2011" title="poultry" label="poultry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192935" start="2013" end="2020" title="seafood" label="seafood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="2035" end="2044" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q257106" start="2136" end="2145" title="liquorice" label="liquorice"/>
<link wikidata="Q28692" start="2149" end="2156" title="aniseed" label="aniseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q155814" start="2218" end="2226" title="tarragon" label="tarragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q51148" start="2228" end="2233" title="chive" label="chive"/>
<link wikidata="Q25284" start="2240" end="2247" title="parsley" label="parsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215980" start="2334" end="2339" title="thyme" label="thyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q102240169" start="2344" end="2352" title="rosemary" label="rosemary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953597" start="2795" end="2799" title="slug" label="slug"/>
<link wikidata="Q11978" start="2967" end="2976" title="digestion" label="digestive"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="2995" end="3014" title="high blood pressure" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="3034" end="3041" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q58952" start="3054" end="3061" title="hiccups" label="hiccups"/>
<link wikidata="Q229256" start="3181" end="3191" title="dermatitis" label="dermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660485" start="3216" end="3236" title="phytophotodermatitis" label="phytophotodermatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q145794" start="3327" end="3335" title="Apiaceae" label="Apiaceae"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5395" wikidata="Q51148" url="?curid=5395" title="Chives">
<text>Chives, scientific name Allium schoenoprasum, is a species of flowering plant in the family Amaryllidaceae.

A perennial plant, &quot;A. schoenoprasum&quot; is widespread in nature across much of Eurasia and North America. It is the only species of &quot;Allium&quot; native to both the New and the Old Worlds.

The leaves and flowers are edible. Chives are a commonly used herb and vegetable with a variety of culinary uses. They are also used to repel insects.

== Description ==
Chives are a bulb-forming herbaceous perennial plant, growing to tall. The bulbs are slender, conical, long and broad, and grow in dense clusters from the roots. The scapes (or stems) are hollow and tubular, up to long and across, with a soft texture, although, prior to the emergence of a flower, they may appear stiffer than usual. The grass-like leaves, which are shorter than the scapes, are also hollow and tubular, or terete (round in cross-section).

The flowers are pale purple, and star-shaped with six petals, wide, and produced in a dense inflorescence of 10–30 together; before opening, the inflorescence is surrounded by a papery bract. The seeds are produced in a small, three-valved capsule, maturing in summer. The herb flowers from April to May in the southern parts of its habitat zones and in June in the northern parts.

Chives are the only species of &quot;Allium&quot; native to both the New and the Old Worlds. Sometimes, the plants found in North America are classified as &quot;A. schoenoprasum&quot; var. &quot;sibiricum&quot;, although this is disputed. Differences between specimens are significant. One example was found in northern Maine growing solitary, instead of in clumps, also exhibiting dingy grey flowers.

=== Similar species ===
Close relatives of chives include common onions, garlic, shallot, leek, scallion, and Chinese onion.

The terete hollow leaves distinguish the plant from &quot;Allium tuberosum&quot; (garlic chives).

==Taxonomy==
It was formally described by the Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus in his seminal publication &quot;Species Plantarum&quot; in 1753.

The name of the species derives from the Greek σχοίνος, &quot;skhoínos&quot; (sedge or rush) and πράσον, &quot;práson&quot; (leek). Its English name, chives, derives from the French word &quot;cive&quot;, from &quot;cepa&quot;, the Latin word for onion. In the Middle Ages, it was known as &#x27;rush leek&#x27;.

Several subspecies have been proposed, but are not accepted by Plants of the World Online, , which sinks them into two subspecies:
*&quot;Allium schoenoprasum&quot; subsp. &quot;gredense&quot; 
*&quot;Allium schoenoprasum&quot; subsp. &quot;latiorifolium&quot; 
Varieties have also been proposed, including &quot;A. schoenoprasum&quot; var. &quot;sibiricum&quot;. The Flora of North America notes that the species is very variable, and considers recognition of varieties as &quot;unsound&quot;.

==Distribution and habitat==
Chives are native to temperate areas of Europe, Asia and North America. 

===Range===
Chives have a wide natural range across much of the Northern Hemisphere.

In Asia it is native from the Ural Mountains in Russia to Kamchatka in the far east. It grows natively in the Korean peninsula, but only the islands of Hokkaido and Honshu in Japan. Likewise its natural range in China only extends to Xinjiang and Inner Mongolia, though it is also found in adjacent Mongolia. It is native to all the nations of the Caucasus. However, in Central Asia it is only found in Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan. To the south its range also extends to Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Pakistan, and the Western Himalayas in India.

It is native to all parts of Europe with the exception of Sicily, Sardinia, the island of Cyprus, Iceland, Crimea, and Hungary and other offshore islands. It also is not native to Belgium and Ireland, but it grows there as an introduced plant.

In North America it is native to Alaska and almost every province of Canada, but has been introduced to the island of Newfoundland. In the United States the certain native range in the lower 48 is in two separated areas. In the west its range is in Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, and Colorado. In the east it extends from Minnesota, eastward through Wisconsin, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey. Then northward into New York and all of New England. The Plants of the World Online database lists it as introduced to Illinois and Maryland and the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service PLANTS database additionally lists it as growing in Nevada, Utah, Missouri, and Virginia without information on if it is native or introduced to those states.

In other areas of the Americas chives grow as an introduced plant in Mexico, Honduras, Costa Rica, Cuba, Jamaica, Hispaniola, Trinidad, Colombia, Bolivia, and the southern part of Argentina in Tierra del Fuego.

== Ecology ==
Chives are repulsive to most insects due to their sulfur compounds, but their flowers attract bees, and they are at times kept to increase desired insect life.

The plant provides a great deal of nectar for pollinators. It was rated in the top 10 for most nectar production (nectar per unit cover per year) in a United Kingdom plants survey conducted by the AgriLand project which is supported by the UK Insect Pollinators Initiative.

== Cultivation ==

Chives have been cultivated in Europe since the Middle Ages (from the fifth until the 15th centuries), although their usage dates back 5,000 years.

Chives are cultivated both for their culinary uses and for their ornamental value; the violet flowers are often used in ornamental dry bouquets.

Chives thrive in well-drained soil, rich in organic matter, with a pH of 6–7 and full sun. They can be grown from seed and mature in summer, or early the following spring. Typically, chives need to be germinated at a temperature of and kept moist. They can also be planted under a cloche or germinated indoors in cooler climates, then planted out later. After at least four weeks, the young shoots should be ready to be planted out. They are also easily propagated by division.

In cold regions, chives die back to the underground bulbs in winter, with the new leaves appearing in early spring. Chives starting to look old can be cut back to about 2–5 cm. When harvesting, the needed number of stalks should be cut to the base. During the growing season, the plant continually regrows leaves, allowing for a continuous harvest.

Chives are susceptible to damage by leek moth larvae, which bore into the leaves or bulbs of the plant.
== Uses ==

=== Culinary arts ===

Chives are grown for their scapes and leaves, which are used for culinary purposes as a flavoring herb, and provide a somewhat milder onion-like flavor than those of other &quot;Allium&quot; species. The edible flowers are used in salads, or used to make blossom vinegars. Both the scapes and the unopened, immature flower buds are diced and used as an ingredient for omelettes, fish, potatoes, soups, and many other dishes. 

Chives have a wide variety of culinary uses, such as in traditional dishes in France, Sweden, and elsewhere. In his 1806 book &quot;Attempt at a Flora&quot; (&quot;Försök til en flora&quot;), Anders Jahan Retzius describes how chives are used with pancakes, soups, fish, and sandwiches. They are also an ingredient of the &quot;gräddfil&quot; sauce with the traditional herring dish served at Swedish midsummer celebrations. The flowers may also be used to garnish dishes.

In Poland and Germany, chives are served with quark. Chives are one of the &quot;fines herbes&quot; of French cuisine, the others being tarragon, chervil and parsley. Chives can be found fresh at most markets year-round, making them readily available; they can also be dry-frozen without much impairment to the taste, giving home growers the opportunity to store large quantities harvested from their own gardens.
=== Uses in plant cultivation ===
Retzius also describes how farmers would plant chives between the rocks making up the borders of their flowerbeds, to keep the plants free from pests (such as Japanese beetles). The growing plant repels unwanted insect life, and the juice of the leaves can be used for the same purpose, as well as fighting fungal infections, mildew, and scab.

== In culture ==
In Europe, chives were sometimes referred to as &quot;rush leeks&quot;.

It was mentioned in 80 A.D. by Marcus Valerius Martialis in his &quot;Epigrams&quot;.
The Romans believed chives could relieve the pain from sunburn or a sore throat. They believed eating chives could increase blood pressure and act as a diuretic.

Romani have used chives in fortune telling. Bunches of dried chives hung around a house were believed to ward off disease and evil.

In the 19th century, Dutch farmers fed cattle on the herb to give a different taste to their milk.

== References ==
== External links ==
* Nutritional Information
* Mrs. Grieve&#x27;s &quot;A Modern Herbal&quot; @ Botanical.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q51148" start="0" end="6" title="Chives" label="Chives"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="62" end="77" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q155848" start="92" end="106" title="Amaryllidaceae" label="Amaryllidaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="111" end="120" title="perennial" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="287" end="290" title="New world" label="New"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="299" end="308" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="374" end="378" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q188748" start="495" end="499" title="bulb" label="bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="508" end="518" title="herbaceous" label="herbaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="637" end="641" title="root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q887261" start="648" end="654" title="Scape (botany)" label="scapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="944" end="950" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="994" end="999" title="petal" label="petal"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="1032" end="1045" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q729496" start="1125" end="1130" title="bract" label="bract"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="1136" end="1140" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="1392" end="1395" title="New world" label="New"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="1404" end="1413" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q767728" start="1508" end="1512" title="variety (botany)" label="var."/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="1644" end="1649" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="1785" end="1798" title="onion" label="common onions"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="1800" end="1806" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193498" start="1808" end="1815" title="shallot" label="shallot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="1817" end="1821" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q774278" start="1823" end="1831" title="scallion" label="scallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q422240" start="1837" end="1850" title="Allium chinense" label="Chinese onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42285" start="1911" end="1927" title="Allium tuberosum" label="Allium tuberosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="2015" end="2028" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849308" start="2062" end="2079" title="Species Plantarum" label="Species Plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="2137" end="2142" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q155843" start="2174" end="2179" title="Cyperaceae" label="sedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="2221" end="2225" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2232" end="2239" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2271" end="2277" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2328" end="2333" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2357" end="2368" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542613" start="2473" end="2499" title="Plants of the World Online" label="Plants of the World Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="2946" end="2952" title="Native species" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="2956" end="2965" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="3125" end="3139" title="Ural Mountains" label="Ural Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="3153" end="3162" title="Kamchatka" label="Kamchatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="3247" end="3255" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="3260" end="3266" title="Honshu" label="Honshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="3329" end="3337" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="3342" end="3356" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="3394" end="3402" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="3443" end="3451" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="3465" end="3477" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="3498" end="3508" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813" start="3513" end="3523" title="Kyrgyzstan" label="Kyrgyzstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="3564" end="3575" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="3577" end="3581" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="3583" end="3587" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="3589" end="3597" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378930" start="3607" end="3624" title="Western Himalayas" label="Western Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="3694" end="3700" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="3702" end="3710" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773917" start="3726" end="3732" title="Cyprus (island)" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="3734" end="3741" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="3743" end="3749" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="3755" end="3762" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="3999" end="4011" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="4342" end="4353" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542613" start="4359" end="4385" title="Plants of the World Online" label="Plants of the World Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980595" start="4456" end="4494" title="Natural Resources Conservation Service" label="Natural Resources Conservation Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="4732" end="4740" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="4742" end="4752" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="4754" end="4758" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="4760" end="4767" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="4769" end="4779" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="4781" end="4789" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="4791" end="4799" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="4801" end="4808" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82601" start="4848" end="4864" title="Tierra del Fuego" label="Tierra del Fuego"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="4931" end="4937" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="4975" end="4978" title="bee" label="bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="5077" end="5083" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141466" start="5088" end="5099" title="pollinators" label="pollinators"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="5384" end="5395" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="5698" end="5700" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q193838" start="5832" end="5842" title="germination" label="germinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371761" start="5912" end="5918" title="Row cover" label="cloche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032508" start="6496" end="6505" title="leek moth" label="leek moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49391" start="6777" end="6783" title="Allium" label="Allium"/>
<link wikidata="Q20129" start="6967" end="6975" title="omelette" label="omelette"/>
<link wikidata="Q600396" start="6978" end="6982" title="Fish (food)" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="6984" end="6990" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q41415" start="6994" end="6998" title="soup" label="soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q491077" start="7218" end="7238" title="Anders Jahan Retzius" label="Anders Jahan Retzius"/>
<link wikidata="Q840171" start="7354" end="7362" title="sour cream" label="gräddfil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="7396" end="7403" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q154502" start="7427" end="7436" title="midsummer" label="midsummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q259642" start="7546" end="7551" title="Quark (dairy product)" label="quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412533" start="7581" end="7593" title="fines herbes" label="fines herbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q155814" start="7636" end="7644" title="tarragon" label="tarragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q218462" start="7646" end="7653" title="chervil" label="chervil"/>
<link wikidata="Q25284" start="7658" end="7665" title="parsley" label="parsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683382" start="8107" end="8122" title="Japanese beetle" label="Japanese beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662845" start="8255" end="8272" title="Fungal phytopathogen" label="fungal infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220207" start="8274" end="8280" title="mildew" label="mildew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771039" start="8286" end="8290" title="Fusarium ear blight" label="scab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098" start="8414" end="8439" title="Marcus Valerius Martialis" label="Marcus Valerius Martialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q649717" start="8524" end="8531" title="sunburn" label="sunburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="8593" end="8607" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q200656" start="8621" end="8629" title="diuretic" label="diuretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="8632" end="8638" title="Romani people" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="8786" end="8791" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="8858" end="8862" title="milk" label="milk"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5397" wikidata="Q552780" url="?curid=5397" title="Chris Morris (satirist)">
<text>Christopher J. Morris (born 15 June 1962) is an English comedian, radio presenter, actor and filmmaker. Known for his deadpan, dark humour, surrealism and controversial subject matter, he has been praised by the British Film Institute for his &quot;uncompromising, moralistic drive&quot;.

Morris teamed up with his radio producer Armando Iannucci in the early 1990s to create &quot;On the Hour&quot;, a satire of news programmes. A television spin off, &quot;The Day Today&quot;, launched the career of comedian Steve Coogan and was hailed as one of the most important satirical shows of the 1990s. Morris further developed the satirical news format with &quot;Brass Eye&quot;, which lampooned celebrities whilst focusing on themes such as crime and drugs. For some, the apotheosis of Morris&#x27;s career was a &quot;Brass Eye&quot; special dealing with the moral panic surrounding paedophilia. It became one of the most complained-about programmes in British television history, leading the &quot;Daily Mail&quot; to describe him as &quot;the most loathed man on TV&quot;.

Morris&#x27;s similarly controversial postmodern sketch comedy and ambient music radio show &quot;Blue Jam&quot; gained a cult following. It was adapted into the TV series &quot;Jam&quot;, hailed as &quot;the most radical and original television programme broadcast in years&quot;, and Morris won the BAFTA Award for Best Short Film after expanding a &quot;Blue Jam&quot; sketch into &quot;My Wrongs 8245–8249 &amp; 117&quot; starring Paddy Considine. &quot;Nathan Barley&quot;, a sitcom written in collaboration with then little-known Charlie Brooker that satirised hipsters, had low ratings but success with its DVD release. Morris joined the cast of sitcom &quot;The IT Crowd&quot;, his first project in which he did not have writing or producing input.

In 2010, Morris directed his feature-length film, &quot;Four Lions&quot;, which satirised Islamic terrorism through its portrayal of a group of inept British Muslims. Reception was largely positive, earning Morris his second BAFTA Film Award, this time for Outstanding Debut. He has directed four episodes of Iannucci&#x27;s political comedy &quot;Veep&quot; and appeared onscreen in &quot;The Double&quot; and &quot;Stewart Lee&#x27;s Comedy Vehicle&quot; also serving as script-editor for the latter. His second feature-length film, &quot;The Day Shall Come&quot;, was released in 2019. 

==Early life==
Christopher J. Morris was born on 15 June 1962 in Colchester, Essex, the son of Rosemary Parrington and Paul Michael Morris. His father was a GP. Morris has a large red birthmark almost completely covering the left side of his face and neck, which he disguises with makeup when acting. He grew up in a Victorian farmhouse in the village of Buckden, Cambridgeshire, which he described as &quot;very dull&quot;. He has two younger brothers, including theatre director Tom Morris. From an early age, he was a prankster and had a passion for radio. From the age of 10, he was educated at the independent Jesuit boarding school Stonyhurst College in Stonyhurst, Lancashire. He went to study zoology at the University of Bristol, where he gained a 2:1.

==Career==
===Radio===
On graduating, Morris pursued a career as a musician in various bands, for which he played the bass guitar. He then went to work for Radio West, a local radio station in Bristol. He then took up a news traineeship with BBC Radio Cambridgeshire, where he took advantage of access to editing and recording equipment to create elaborate spoofs and parodies. He also spent time in early 1987 hosting a 2–4pm afternoon show and finally ended up presenting Saturday morning show &quot;I.T.&quot;

In July 1987, he moved on to BBC Radio Bristol to present his own show, &quot;No Known Cure&quot;, broadcast on Saturday and Sunday mornings. The show was surreal and satirical, with odd interviews conducted with unsuspecting members of the public. He was fired from Bristol in 1990 after &quot;talking over the news bulletins and making silly noises&quot;. In 1988 he also joined, from its launch, Greater London Radio (GLR). He presented &quot;The Chris Morris Show&quot; on GLR until 1993, when one show got suspended after a sketch was broadcast involving a child &quot;outing&quot; celebrities.

In 1991, Morris joined Armando Iannucci&#x27;s spoof news project &quot;On the Hour&quot;. Broadcast on BBC Radio 4, it saw him work alongside Iannucci, Steve Coogan, Stewart Lee, Richard Herring and Rebecca Front. In 1992, Morris hosted Danny Baker&#x27;s Radio 5 Morning Edition show for a week whilst Baker was on holiday. In 1994, Morris began a weekly evening show, the &quot;Chris Morris Music Show&quot;, on BBC Radio 1 alongside Peter Baynham and &#x27;man with a mobile phone&#x27; Paul Garner. In the shows, Morris perfected the spoof interview style that would become a central component of his &quot;Brass Eye&quot; programme. In the same year, Morris teamed up with Peter Cook (as Sir Arthur Streeb-Greebling) in a series of improvised conversations for BBC Radio 3 entitled &quot;Why Bother?&quot;.

===Move into television and film===
In 1994, a BBC Two television series based on &quot;On the Hour&quot; was broadcast under the name &quot;The Day Today&quot;. &quot;The Day Today&quot; made a star of Morris, and marked the television debut of Steve Coogan&#x27;s Alan Partridge character. The programme ended on a high after just one series, with Morris winning the 1994 British Comedy Award for Best Newcomer for his lead role as the Paxmanesque news anchor.

In 1996, Morris appeared on the daytime programme &quot;The Time, The Place&quot;, posing as an academic, Thurston Lowe, in a discussion entitled &quot;Are British Men Lousy Lovers?&quot;, but was found out when a producer alerted the show&#x27;s host, John Stapleton.

In 1997, the black humour which had featured in &quot;On the Hour&quot; and &quot;The Day Today&quot; became more prominent in &quot;Brass Eye&quot;, another spoof of current affairs television documentary, shown on Channel 4. All three series satirised and exaggerated issues expected of news shows. The second episode of &quot;Brass Eye,&quot; for example, satirised drugs and the political rhetoric surrounding them. To help convey the satire, Morris invented a fictional drug by the name of &quot;cake&quot;. In the episode, British celebrities and politicians describe the supposed symptoms in detail; David Amess mentioned the fictional drug at Parliament. In 2001, Morris satirised the moral panic regarding paedophilia in the most controversial episode of &quot;Brass Eye&quot;, &quot;Paedogeddon&quot;. Channel 4 apologised for the episode after receiving criticism from tabloids and around 3,000 complaints from viewers, which, at the time, was the most for an episode of British television. 

From 1997 to 1999, Morris created &quot;Blue Jam&quot; for BBC Radio 1, a surreal, taboo-breaking radio show set to an ambient soundtrack. In 2000, this was followed by &quot;Jam&quot;, a television reworking. Morris released a &#x27;remix&#x27; version of this, entitled &quot;Jaaaaam&quot;.

In 2002, Morris ventured into film, directing the short &quot;My Wrongs #8245–8249 &amp; 117&quot;, adapted from a &quot;Blue Jam&quot; monologue about a man led astray by a sinister talking dog. It was the first film project of Warp Films, a branch of Warp Records. In 2002 it won the BAFTA for best short film. In 2005 Morris worked on a sitcom entitled &quot;Nathan Barley&quot;, based on the character created by Charlie Brooker for his website TVGoHome (Morris had contributed to TVGoHome on occasion, under the pseudonym &#x27;Sid Peach&#x27;). Co-written by Brooker and Morris, the series was broadcast on Channel 4 in early 2005.

===&quot;The IT Crowd&quot; and &quot;Comedy Vehicle&quot;===
Morris appeared in &quot;The IT Crowd&quot;, a Channel 4 sitcom which focuses on the information technology department of the fictional company Reynholm Industries. The series was written and directed by Graham Linehan (with whom Morris collaborated on &quot;The Day Today&quot;, &quot;Brass Eye&quot; and &quot;Jam&quot;) and produced by Ash Atalla. Morris played Denholm Reynholm, the eccentric managing director of the company. This marked the first time Morris had acted in a substantial role in a project which he has not developed himself. Morris&#x27;s character was killed off during episode two of the second series. His character made a brief return in the first episode of the third series.

In November 2007, Morris wrote an article for &quot;The Observer&quot; in response to Ronan Bennett&#x27;s article published six days earlier in &quot;The Guardian&quot;. Bennett&#x27;s article, &quot;Shame on us&quot;, accused the novelist Martin Amis of racism. Morris&#x27;s response, &quot;The absurd world of Martin Amis&quot;, was also highly critical of Amis; although he did not accede to Bennett&#x27;s accusation of racism, Morris likened Amis to the Muslim cleric Abu Hamza (who was jailed for inciting racial hatred in 2006), suggesting that both men employ &quot;mock erudition, vitriol and decontextualised quotes from the Qu&#x27;ran&quot; to incite hatred.

Morris served as script editor for the 2009 series &quot;Stewart Lee&#x27;s Comedy Vehicle&quot;, working with former colleagues Stewart Lee, Kevin Eldon and Armando Iannucci. He maintained this role for the second (2011) and third series (2014), also appearing as a mock interviewer dubbed the &quot;hostile interrogator&quot; in the third and fourth series.

===&quot;Four Lions&quot;, &quot;Veep&quot;, and other appearances===
Morris completed his debut feature film &quot;Four Lions&quot; in late 2009, a satire based on a group of Islamist terrorists in Sheffield.
It premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2010 and was short-listed for the festival&#x27;s World Cinema Narrative prize. The film (working title &quot;Boilerhouse&quot;) was picked up by Film Four. Morris told &quot;The Sunday Times&quot; that the film sought to do for Islamic terrorism what &quot;Dad&#x27;s Army&quot;, the classic BBC comedy, did for the Nazis by showing them as &quot;scary but also ridiculous&quot;.

In 2012, Morris directed the seventh and penultimate episode of the first season of &quot;Veep&quot;, an Armando Iannucci-devised American version of &quot;The Thick of It&quot;. In 2013, he returned to direct two episodes for the second season of &quot;Veep&quot;, and a further episode for season three in 2014.

In 2013, Morris appeared briefly in Richard Ayoade&#x27;s &quot;The Double&quot;, a black comedy film based on the Fyodor Dostoyevsky novella of the same name. Morris had previously worked with Ayoade on &quot;Nathan Barley&quot; and &quot;The IT Crowd&quot;.

In February 2014, Morris made a surprise appearance at the beginning of a Stewart Lee live show, introducing the comedian with fictional anecdotes about their work together. The following month, Morris appeared in the third series of &quot;Stewart Lee&#x27;s Comedy Vehicle&quot; as a &quot;hostile interrogator&quot;, a role previously occupied by Armando Iannucci.

In December 2014, it was announced that a short radio collaboration with Noel Fielding and Richard Ayoade would be broadcast on BBC Radio 6. According to Fielding, the work had been in progress since around 2006. However, in January 2015 it was decided, &#x27;in consultation with [Morris]&#x27;, that the project was not yet complete, and so the intended broadcast did not go ahead.

===&quot;The Day Shall Come&quot;===
A statement released by Film4 in February 2016 made reference to funding what would be Morris&#x27;s second feature film. In November 2017 it was reported that Morris had shot the movie, starring Anna Kendrick, in the Dominican Republic but the title was not made public. It was later reported in January 2018 that Jim Gaffigan and Rupert Friend had joined the cast of the still-untitled film, and that the plot would revolve around an FBI hostage situation gone wrong. The completed film, titled &quot;The Day Shall Come&quot;, had its world premiere at South by Southwest on 11 March 2019.

===Music===
Morris often co-writes and performs incidental music for his television shows, notably with &quot;Jam&quot; and the &#x27;extended remix&#x27; version, &quot;Jaaaaam&quot;. In the early 1990s Morris contributed a Pixies parody track entitled &quot;Motherbanger&quot; to a flexi-disc given away with an edition of Select music magazine. Morris supplied sketches for British band Saint Etienne&#x27;s 1993 single &quot;You&#x27;re in a Bad Way&quot; (the sketch &#x27;Spongbake&#x27; appears at the end of the 4th track on the CD single).

In 2000, Morris collaborated by mail with Amon Tobin to create the track &quot;Bad Sex&quot;, which was released as a B-side on the Tobin single &quot;Slowly&quot;.
Anglo-French band Stereolab&#x27;s song &quot;Nothing to Do with Me&quot; from their 2001 album &quot;Sound-Dust&quot; featured various lines from Chris Morris sketches as lyrics.

== Style ==
Ramsey Ess of &quot;Vulture&quot; described Morris&#x27;s comedy style as &quot;crass&quot; and &quot;shocking&quot;, but noted an &quot;underlying morality&quot; and integrity, as well as the humour being Morris&#x27;s priority.

==Recognition==
In 2003, Morris was listed in &quot;The Observer&quot; as one of the 50 funniest acts in British comedy. In 2005, Channel 4 aired a show called &quot;The Comedian&#x27;s Comedian&quot; in which foremost writers and performers of comedy ranked their 50 favourite acts. Morris was at number eleven. Morris won the BAFTA for outstanding debut with his film &quot;Four Lions&quot;. Adeel Akhtar and Nigel Lindsay collected the award in his absence. Lindsay stated that Morris had sent him a text message before they collected the award reading, &#x27;Doused in petrol, Zippo at the ready&#x27;. In June 2012 Morris was placed at number 16 in the Top 100 People in UK Comedy.

In 2010, a biography, &quot;Disgusting Bliss: The Brass Eye of Chris Morris&quot;, was published. Written by Lucian Randall, the book depicted Morris as &quot;brilliant but uncompromising&quot;, and a &quot;frantic-minded perfectionist&quot;.

In November 2014, BBC Radio 4 Extra broadcast a three-hour retrospective of Morris&#x27;s radio career called &#x27;Raw Meat Radio&#x27;, which was presented by Mary Anne Hobbs and featured interviews with Armando Iannucci, Peter Baynham, Paul Garner, and others.

===Awards===
Morris won the Best TV Comedy Newcomer award from the British Comedy Awards in 1994 for his performance in &quot;The Day Today&quot;. He has won two BAFTA awards: the BAFTA Award for Best Short Film in 2002 for &quot;My Wrongs #8245–8249 &amp; 117&quot;, and the BAFTA Award for Outstanding Debut by a British director, writer or producer in 2011 for &quot;Four Lions&quot;.

==Personal life==
Morris and his wife, actress-turned-literary agent Jo Unwin, live in the Brixton district of London. The pair met in 1984 at the Edinburgh Festival, when he was playing bass guitar for the Cambridge Footlights Revue and she was in a comedy troupe called the Millies. They have two sons.

==Works==
===Film===
===Television===
===Other===
* Various works at BBC Radio Cambridgeshire (1986–1987) (presenter)
* &quot;No Known Cure&quot; (July 1987 – March 1990, BBC Radio Bristol) (presenter)
* &quot;Chris Morris&quot; (1988–1993, BBC GLR) (presenter)
* &quot;Morning Edition&quot; (July 1990, BBC Radio 5) (guest presenter)
* &quot;The Chris Morris Christmas Show&quot; (25 December 1990, BBC Radio 1)
* &quot;On the Hour&quot; (1991–1992, BBC Radio 4) (co-writer, performer)
* &quot;It&#x27;s Only TV&quot; (September 1992, LWT) (unbroadcast pilot)
* &quot;Why Bother?&quot; (1994, BBC Radio 3) (performer, editor)
* &quot;The Chris Morris Music Show&quot; (1994, BBC Radio 1) (presenter)
* &quot;Blue Jam&quot; (1997–1999, BBC Radio 1) (writer, director, performer, editor)
* &quot;Second Class Male/Time To Go&quot; (1999, newspaper column for &quot;The Observer&quot;)
* &quot;The Smokehammer&quot; (2002, website)
* &quot;Absolute Atrocity Special&quot; (2002, newspaper pullout for &quot;The Observer&quot;)

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q552780" start="0" end="21" title="Chris Morris (satirist)" label="Christopher J. Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616750" start="118" end="125" title="deadpan" label="deadpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="127" end="138" title="dark humour" label="dark humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="140" end="150" title="surrealism" label="surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="212" end="234" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q646929" start="331" end="347" title="Armando Iannucci" label="Armando Iannucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091380" start="383" end="394" title="On the Hour" label="On the Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729195" start="460" end="473" title="The Day Today" label="The Day Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q316709" start="513" end="525" title="Steve Coogan" label="Steve Coogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957865" start="662" end="671" title="Brass Eye" label="Brass Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q580995" start="772" end="782" title="apotheosis" label="apotheosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q116125950" start="811" end="842" title="Paedogeddon" label="a &amp;quot;Brass Eye&amp;quot; special"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914277" start="860" end="871" title="moral panic" label="moral panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8388" start="884" end="895" title="paedophilia" label="paedophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210534" start="1000" end="1010" title="Daily Mail" label="Daily Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="1115" end="1125" title="postmodern" label="postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="1126" end="1139" title="sketch comedy" label="sketch comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="1144" end="1157" title="ambient music" label="ambient music"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050138" start="1175" end="1183" title="Blue Jam" label="Blue Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="1199" end="1213" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127038" start="1255" end="1258" title="Jam (TV series)" label="Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q338757" start="1378" end="1409" title="BAFTA Award for Best Short Film" label="BAFTA Award for Best Short Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946654" start="1467" end="1496" title="My Wrongs 8245–8249 &amp;amp; 117" label="My Wrongs 8245–8249 &amp;amp; 117"/>
<link wikidata="Q498389" start="1512" end="1527" title="Paddy Considine" label="Paddy Considine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968889" start="1535" end="1548" title="Nathan Barley" label="Nathan Barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960837" start="1613" end="1628" title="Charlie Brooker" label="Charlie Brooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040465" start="1644" end="1652" title="hipster (contemporary subculture)" label="hipsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q239672" start="1743" end="1755" title="The IT Crowd" label="The IT Crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5590" start="1891" end="1901" title="Four Lions" label="Four Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q847731" start="1925" end="1942" title="Islamic terrorism" label="Islamic terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674069" start="1985" end="1999" title="British Muslim" label="British Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="2060" end="2076" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="BAFTA Film Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q569979" start="2092" end="2109" title="BAFTA Award for Outstanding Debut by a British Writer, Director or Producer" label="Outstanding Debut"/>
<link wikidata="Q74801" start="2183" end="2187" title="Veep (TV series)" label="Veep"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730725" start="2225" end="2235" title="The Double (2013 film)" label="The Double"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615851" start="2252" end="2285" title="Stewart Lee&amp;#x27;s Comedy Vehicle" label="Stewart Lee&amp;#x27;s Comedy Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q59771438" start="2376" end="2394" title="The Day Shall Come" label="The Day Shall Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q184163" start="2491" end="2501" title="Colchester" label="Colchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="2503" end="2508" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500773" start="2583" end="2585" title="general practitioner" label="GP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513591" start="2610" end="2619" title="birthmark" label="birthmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="2743" end="2752" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951638" start="2781" end="2804" title="Buckden, Cambridgeshire" label="Buckden, Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816945" start="2907" end="2917" title="Tom Morris (director)" label="Tom Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="3041" end="3047" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274271" start="3064" end="3082" title="Stonyhurst College" label="Stonyhurst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619622" start="3086" end="3108" title="Stonyhurst" label="Stonyhurst, Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="3127" end="3134" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q459506" start="3142" end="3163" title="University of Bristol" label="University of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3183" end="3186" title="2:1" label="2:1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834912" start="3431" end="3455" title="BBC Radio Cambridgeshire" label="BBC Radio Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="3546" end="3565" title="parody" label="spoofs and parodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q586619" start="3732" end="3749" title="BBC Radio Bristol" label="BBC Radio Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834838" start="4102" end="4122" title="BBC Radio London" label="Greater London Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q646929" start="4327" end="4343" title="Armando Iannucci" label="Armando Iannucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091380" start="4376" end="4387" title="On the Hour" label="On the Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="4408" end="4419" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q316709" start="4457" end="4469" title="Steve Coogan" label="Steve Coogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615848" start="4471" end="4482" title="Stewart Lee" label="Stewart Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3718911" start="4484" end="4499" title="Richard Herring" label="Richard Herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944303" start="4504" end="4517" title="Rebecca Front" label="Rebecca Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220109" start="4542" end="4553" title="Danny Baker" label="Danny Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="4719" end="4730" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172726" start="4741" end="4754" title="Peter Baynham" label="Peter Baynham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072743" start="4795" end="4806" title="Paul Garner (comedian)" label="Paul Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957865" start="4916" end="4925" title="Brass Eye" label="Brass Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q525970" start="4983" end="4993" title="Peter Cook" label="Peter Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800381" start="4998" end="5025" title="Sir Arthur Streeb-Greebling" label="Sir Arthur Streeb-Greebling"/>
<link wikidata="Q749608" start="5071" end="5082" title="BBC Radio 3" label="BBC Radio 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997728" start="5098" end="5109" title="Why Bother? (radio show)" label="Why Bother?"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="5165" end="5172" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729195" start="5259" end="5272" title="The Day Today" label="The Day Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q316709" start="5364" end="5376" title="Steve Coogan" label="Steve Coogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q489671" start="5384" end="5398" title="Alan Partridge" label="Alan Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q125737760" start="5492" end="5512" title="National Comedy Awards" label="British Comedy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942003" start="5556" end="5567" title="Jeremy Paxman" label="Paxmanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769291" start="5638" end="5657" title="The Time, The Place" label="The Time, The Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258883" start="5835" end="5849" title="John Stapleton (English journalist)" label="John Stapleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="5865" end="5877" title="black comedy" label="black humour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4957865" start="5985" end="5994" title="Brass Eye" label="Brass Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="6068" end="6077" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q259646" start="6459" end="6470" title="David Amess" label="David Amess"/>
<link wikidata="Q116125950" start="6645" end="6656" title="Paedogeddon" label="Paedogeddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050138" start="6896" end="6904" title="Blue Jam" label="Blue Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="6915" end="6926" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127038" start="7031" end="7034" title="Jam (TV series)" label="Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="7200" end="7205" title="short film" label="short"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946654" start="7212" end="7242" title="My Wrongs 8245–8249 &amp;amp; 117" label="My Wrongs #8245–8249 &amp;amp; 117"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969872" start="7379" end="7389" title="Warp Films" label="Warp Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q543707" start="7403" end="7415" title="Warp Records" label="Warp Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="7436" end="7441" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968889" start="7512" end="7525" title="Nathan Barley" label="Nathan Barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960837" start="7567" end="7582" title="Charlie Brooker" label="Charlie Brooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672184" start="7599" end="7607" title="TVGoHome" label="TVGoHome"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="7763" end="7772" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q239672" start="7876" end="7888" title="The IT Crowd" label="The IT Crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="7898" end="7907" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q947387" start="8055" end="8069" title="Graham Linehan" label="Graham Linehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804358" start="8190" end="8200" title="Ash Atalla" label="Ash Atalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="8606" end="8618" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q381603" start="8640" end="8653" title="Ronan Bennett" label="Ronan Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="8705" end="8717" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q310176" start="8795" end="8806" title="Martin Amis" label="Martin Amis"/>
<link wikidata="Q335075" start="9029" end="9038" title="Abu Hamza al-Masri" label="Abu Hamza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315426" start="9059" end="9081" title="inciting racial hatred" label="inciting racial hatred"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615851" start="9285" end="9318" title="Stewart Lee&amp;#x27;s Comedy Vehicle" label="Stewart Lee&amp;#x27;s Comedy Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615848" start="9357" end="9368" title="Stewart Lee" label="Stewart Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396222" start="9370" end="9381" title="Kevin Eldon" label="Kevin Eldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q646929" start="9386" end="9402" title="Armando Iannucci" label="Armando Iannucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5590" start="9705" end="9715" title="Four Lions" label="Four Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="9819" end="9841" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108255" start="9999" end="10008" title="Film Four" label="Film Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q221986" start="10028" end="10044" title="The Sunday Times" label="The Sunday Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q659575" start="10111" end="10126" title="Dad&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Dad&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="10170" end="10175" title="Nazism" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q74801" start="10325" end="10329" title="Veep (TV series)" label="Veep"/>
<link wikidata="Q568201" start="10391" end="10406" title="The Thick of It" label="The Thick of It"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333118" start="10586" end="10600" title="Richard Ayoade" label="Richard Ayoade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730725" start="10608" end="10630" title="The Double (2013 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Double&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q991" start="10665" end="10683" title="Fyodor Dostoyevsky" label="Fyodor Dostoyevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192975" start="10684" end="10708" title="The Double (Fyodor Dostoyevsky novel)" label="novella of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615848" start="10885" end="10896" title="Stewart Lee" label="Stewart Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388430" start="11252" end="11265" title="Noel Fielding" label="Noel Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108255" start="11625" end="11630" title="Film4" label="Film4"/>
<link wikidata="Q67701" start="11797" end="11810" title="Anna Kendrick" label="Anna Kendrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="11819" end="11837" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093638" start="11916" end="11928" title="Jim Gaffigan" label="Jim Gaffigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q314659" start="11933" end="11946" title="Rupert Friend" label="Rupert Friend"/>
<link wikidata="Q59771438" start="12104" end="12122" title="The Day Shall Come" label="The Day Shall Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q959755" start="12156" end="12174" title="South by Southwest" label="South by Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q188464" start="12419" end="12425" title="Pixies (band)" label="Pixies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288072" start="12478" end="12488" title="Flexi disc" label="flexi-disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447637" start="12519" end="12525" title="select magazine" label="Select"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430158" start="12584" end="12597" title="Saint Etienne (band)" label="Saint Etienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056636" start="12623" end="12647" title="You&amp;#x27;re in a Bad Way" label="You&amp;#x27;re in a Bad Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q316508" start="12786" end="12796" title="Amon Tobin" label="Amon Tobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q334652" start="12927" end="12936" title="Stereolab" label="Stereolab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279467" start="13011" end="13021" title="Sound-Dust" label="Sound-Dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="13122" end="13129" title="New York (magazine)" label="Vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="13385" end="13397" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="13463" end="13472" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q205533" start="13914" end="13919" title="Zippo" label="Zippo"/>
<link wikidata="Q795579" start="14283" end="14300" title="BBC Radio 4 Extra" label="BBC Radio 4 Extra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081782" start="14426" end="14441" title="Mary Anne Hobbs" label="Mary Anne Hobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q646929" start="14471" end="14487" title="Armando Iannucci" label="Armando Iannucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172726" start="14489" end="14502" title="Peter Baynham" label="Peter Baynham"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072743" start="14504" end="14515" title="Paul Garner (comedian)" label="Paul Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q125737760" start="14558" end="14581" title="British Comedy Awards winners" label="Best TV Comedy Newcomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729195" start="14656" end="14669" title="The Day Today" label="The Day Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="14692" end="14697" title="BAFTA" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q338757" start="14710" end="14741" title="BAFTA Award for Best Short Film" label="BAFTA Award for Best Short Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6946654" start="14760" end="14790" title="My Wrongs 8245–8249 &amp;amp; 117" label="My Wrongs #8245–8249 &amp;amp; 117"/>
<link wikidata="Q5590" start="14900" end="14910" title="Four Lions" label="Four Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q146690" start="15010" end="15017" title="Brixton" label="Brixton"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="15030" end="15036" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q829363" start="15066" end="15084" title="List of Edinburgh festivals" label="Edinburgh Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q857679" start="15126" end="15146" title="Footlights" label="Cambridge Footlights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834912" start="15294" end="15318" title="BBC Radio Cambridgeshire" label="BBC Radio Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q586619" start="15396" end="15413" title="BBC Radio Bristol" label="BBC Radio Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834838" start="15466" end="15473" title="BBC London 94.9" label="BBC GLR"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="15625" end="15636" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091380" start="15646" end="15657" title="On the Hour" label="On the Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076979" start="15761" end="15764" title="LWT" label="LWT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997728" start="15794" end="15805" title="Why Bother? (radio show)" label="Why Bother?"/>
<link wikidata="Q749608" start="15819" end="15830" title="BBC Radio 3" label="BBC Radio 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722698" start="15860" end="15887" title="The Chris Morris Music Show" label="The Chris Morris Music Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050138" start="15934" end="15942" title="Blue Jam" label="Blue Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443206" start="16020" end="16048" title="Second Class Male/Time To Go" label="Second Class Male/Time To Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="16089" end="16101" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="16230" end="16242" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
</links>
</doc>
