<doc id="104697" wikidata="Q186545" url="?curid=104697" title="Midwestern United States">
<text>The Midwestern United States (also referred to as the Midwest, the Heartland or the American Midwest) is one of the four census regions defined by the United States Census Bureau. It occupies the northern central part of the United States. It was officially named the North Central Region by the U.S. Census Bureau until 1984. It is between the Northeastern United States and the Western United States, with Canada to the north and the Southern United States to the south.

The U.S. Census Bureau&#x27;s definition consists of 12 states in the north central United States: Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin. The region generally lies on the broad Interior Plain between the states occupying the Appalachian Mountain range and the states occupying the Rocky Mountain range. Major rivers in the region include, from east to west, the Ohio River, the Upper Mississippi River, and the Missouri River. The 2020 United States census put the population of the Midwest at 68,995,685. The Midwest is divided by the U.S. Census Bureau into two divisions. The East North Central Division includes Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, and Wisconsin, all of which are also part of the Great Lakes region. The West North Central Division includes Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, North Dakota, Nebraska, and South Dakota, several of which are located, at least partly, within the Great Plains region.

Chicago is the most populous city in the American Midwest and the third-most populous in the United States. Chicago and its suburbs, colloquially known as Chicagoland, form the largest metropolitan area with 10 million people, making it the fourth-largest metropolitan area in North America, after Greater Mexico City, the New York metropolitan area, and Greater Los Angeles. Other large Midwestern cities include Columbus, Indianapolis, Detroit, Milwaukee, Kansas City, Omaha, Minneapolis, Wichita, Cleveland, Cincinnati, St. Paul, St. Louis, and Lincoln. Large midwestern metropolitan areas include Metro Detroit, Minneapolis–St. Paul, Indianapolis Metropolitan Area, Greater St. Louis, Greater Cincinnati, the Kansas City metro area, the Columbus metro area, and Greater Cleveland.

The region&#x27;s economy is a mix of heavy industry and agriculture, with extensive areas forming part of the United States&#x27; Corn Belt. Finance and services such as medicine and education are becoming increasingly important. Its central location makes it a transportation crossroads for river boats, railroads, autos, trucks, and airplanes. Politically, the region is composed of swing states, and therefore is heavily contested and often decisive in elections.

== The West ==
The term &quot;West&quot; was applied to the region in British America and in the early years of the United States, when the colonial territories had not extended far from the Atlantic coast and the Pacific seaboard was generally unknown. By the early 19th century, anything west of Appalachia was considered American frontier. Over time the American frontier moved to west of the Mississippi River. During the colonial period, the upper-Mississippi watershed including the valleys of the Missouri River and the Illinois River, which were settled in the 17th and 18th century and called Illinois Country. In 1787 the Northwest Ordinance was enacted, creating the Northwest Territory, which was bounded by the Great Lakes and the Ohio and Mississippi Rivers. Some entities in the Midwest have &quot;Northwest&quot; in their names for historical reasons, such as Northwestern University in Illinois.

One of the earliest late-19th-century uses of &quot;Midwest&quot; was in reference to Kansas and Nebraska to indicate that they were the civilized areas of the west. Another term applied to the same region is &quot;Heartland&quot;.

== Prehistory ==

=== Precolumbian ===
Among the Native Americans, Paleo-American cultures were the earliest in North America, with a presence in the Great Plains and Great Lakes areas from about 12,000 BCE to around 8,000 BCE.

Following the Paleo-American period is the Archaic period (8,000 BCE to 1,000 BCE), the Woodland Tradition (1,000 BCE to 100 CE), and the Mississippian Period (900 to 1500 CE). Archeological evidence indicates that Mississippian culture traits probably began in the St. Louis, Missouri area and spread northwest along the Mississippi and Illinois rivers and entered the state along the Kankakee River system. It also spread northward into Indiana along the Wabash, Tippecanoe, and White Rivers.

Mississippian peoples in the Midwest were mostly farmers who followed the rich, flat floodplains of Midwestern rivers. They brought with them a well-developed agricultural complex based on three major crops—maize, beans, and squash. Maize, or corn, was the primary crop of Mississippian farmers. They gathered a wide variety of seeds, nuts, and berries, and fished and hunted for fowl to supplement their diets. With such an intensive form of agriculture, this culture supported large populations.

The Mississippi period was characterized by a mound-building culture. The Mississippians suffered a tremendous population decline about 1400, coinciding with the global climate change of the Little Ice Age. Their culture effectively ended before 1492.

==== Great Lakes Native Americans ====
The major tribes of the Great Lakes region included the Huron, Ottawa, Ojibwe, Potawatomi, Ho-Chunk, Menominee, Sauk, Meskwaki, Neutrals, and the Miami. Most numerous were the Huron and Ho-Chunk. Fighting and battle were often launched between tribes, with the losers forced to flee.

Most are of the Algonquian language family. Some tribes—such as the Stockbridge-Munsee and the Brothertown—are also Algonkian-speaking tribes who relocated from the eastern seaboard to the Great Lakes region in the 19th century. The Oneida belong to the Iroquois language group and the Ho-Chunk of Wisconsin are one of the few Great Lakes tribes to speak a Siouan language. American Indians in this area did not develop a written form of language.
In the 16th century, the natives of the area used projectiles and tools of stone, bone, and wood to hunt and farm. They made canoes for fishing. Most of them lived in oval or conical wigwams that could be easily moved away. Various tribes had different ways of living. The Ojibwe were primarily hunters and fishing was also important in the Ojibwe economy. Other tribes such as Sac, Fox, and Miami, both hunted and farmed.

They were oriented toward the open prairies where they engaged in communal hunts for buffalo (bison). In the northern forests, the Ottawas and Potawatomis separated into small family groups for hunting. The Winnebagos and Menominees used both hunting methods interchangeably and built up widespread trade networks extending as far west as the Rockies, north to the Great Lakes, south to the Gulf of Mexico, and east to the Atlantic Ocean.
The Hurons reckoned descent through the female line, while the others favored the patrilineal method. All tribes were governed under chiefdoms or complex chiefdoms. For example, Hurons were divided into matrilineal clans, each represented by a chief in the town council, where they met with a town chief on civic matters. But Ojibwe people&#x27;s social and political life was simpler than that of settled tribes.

The religious beliefs varied among tribes. Hurons believed in &quot;Yoscaha&quot;, a supernatural being who lived in the sky and was believed to have created the world and the Huron people. At death, Hurons thought the soul left the body to live in a village in the sky. Ojibwe were a deeply religious people who believed in the Great Spirit. They worshiped the Great Spirit through all their seasonal activities, and viewed religion as a private matter: Each person&#x27;s relation with his personal guardian spirit was part of his thinking every day of life. Ottawa and Potawatomi people had very similar religious beliefs to those of the Ojibwe.

In the Ohio River Valley, the dominant food supply was not hunting but agriculture. There were orchards and fields of crops that were maintained by indigenous women. Corn was their most important crop.

==== Great Plains Indians ====


The Plains Indians are the indigenous peoples who live on the plains and rolling hills of the Great Plains of North America. Their colorful equestrian culture and famous conflicts with settlers and the US Army have made the Plains Indians archetypical in literature and art for American Indians everywhere.

Plains Indians are usually divided into two broad classifications, with some degree of overlap. The first group were fully nomadic, following the vast herds of buffalo. Some tribes occasionally engaged in agriculture, growing tobacco and corn primarily. These included the Blackfoot, Arapaho, Assiniboine, Cheyenne, Comanche, Crow, Gros Ventre, Kiowa, Lakota, Lipan, Plains Apache (or Kiowa Apache), Plains Cree, Plains Ojibwe, Sarsi, Shoshone, Stoney, and Tonkawa.

The second group of Plains Indians (sometimes referred to as Prairie Indians) were the semi-sedentary tribes who, in addition to hunting buffalo, lived in villages and raised crops. These included the Arikara, Hidatsa, Iowa, Kaw (or Kansa), Kitsai, Mandan, Missouria, Nez Perce, Omaha, Osage, Otoe, Pawnee, Ponca, Quapaw, Santee, Wichita, and Yankton.

The nomadic tribes of the Great Plains survived on hunting; some of their major hunts centered on deer and buffalo. Some tribes are described as part of the &quot;Buffalo Culture&quot; (sometimes called, for the American bison). Although the Plains Indians hunted other animals, such as elk or antelope, bison was their primary game food source. Bison flesh, hide, and bones from bison hunting provided the chief source of raw materials for items that Plains Indians made, including food, cups, decorations, crafting tools, knives, and clothing.

The tribes followed the bison&#x27;s seasonal grazing and migration. The Plains Indians lived in teepees because they were easily disassembled and allowed the nomadic life of following game. When Spanish horses were obtained, the Plains tribes rapidly integrated them into their daily lives. By the early 18th century, many tribes had fully adopted a horse culture. Before their adoption of guns, the Plains Indians hunted with spears, bows, and bows and arrows, and various forms of clubs. The use of horses by the Plains Indians made hunting (and warfare) much easier.

Among the most powerful and dominant tribes were the Dakota or Sioux, who occupied large amounts of territory in the Great Plains of the Midwest. The area of the Great Sioux Nation spread throughout the South and Midwest, up into the areas of Minnesota and stretching out west into the Rocky Mountains. At the same time, they occupied the heart of prime buffalo range, and also an excellent region for furs they could sell to French and American traders for goods such as guns. The Sioux (Dakota) became the most powerful of the Plains tribes and the greatest threat to American expansion.

The Sioux comprise three major divisions based on Siouan dialect and subculture:
* &quot;Isáŋyathi&quot; or &quot;Isáŋathi&quot; (&quot;Knife&quot;): residing in the extreme east of the Dakotas, Minnesota and northern Iowa, and are often referred to as the Santee or Eastern Dakota.
* &quot;Iháŋktȟuŋwaŋ&quot; and &quot;Iháŋktȟuŋwaŋna&quot; (&quot;Village-at-the-end&quot; and &quot;little village-at-the-end&quot;): residing in the Minnesota River area, they are considered the middle Sioux, and are often referred to as the Yankton and the Yanktonai, or, collectively, as the &quot;Wičhíyena&quot; (endonym) or the Western Dakota (and have been erroneously classified as &quot;Nakota&quot;).
* &quot;Thítȟuŋwaŋ&quot; or Teton (Prairie Dwellers): the westernmost Sioux, known for their hunting and warrior culture, are often referred to as the Lakota.

Today, the Sioux maintain many separate tribal governments scattered across several reservations, communities, and reserves in the Dakotas, Nebraska, Minnesota, and Montana in the United States, as well as Manitoba and southern Saskatchewan in Canada.

==History==
=== European exploration and early settlement ===
==== The Middle Ground theory ====
The theory of the middle ground was introduced in Richard White&#x27;s seminal work: &quot;The Middle Ground: Indians, Empires, and Republics in the Great Lakes Region, 1650–1815&quot; originally published in 1991. White defines the middle ground like so:

White specifically designates &quot;the lands bordering the rivers flowing into the northern Great Lakes and the lands south of the lakes to the Ohio&quot; as the location of the middle ground. This includes the modern Midwestern states of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Wisconsin, and Michigan as well as parts of Canada.

The middle ground was formed on the foundations of mutual accommodation and common meanings established between the French and the Indians that then transformed and degraded as both were steadily lost as the French ceded their influence in the region in the aftermath of their defeat in the Seven Years&#x27; War and the Louisiana Purchase.

Major aspects of the middle ground include blended culture, the fur trade, Native alliances with both the French and British, conflicts and treaties with the United States both during the Revolutionary War and after, and its ultimate clearing/erasure throughout the nineteenth century.

==== New France ====
European settlement of the area began in the 17th century following French exploration of the region and became known as New France, including the &quot;Illinois Country&quot;. The French period began with the exploration of the Saint Lawrence River by Jacques Cartier in 1534 and ending with their cessation of the majority of their holdings in North America to the Kingdom of Great Britain in the Treaty of Paris (1763).

==== Mapping of the Mississippi River ====

In 1673 the Governor of New France sent Jacques Marquette, a Catholic priest and missionary, and Louis Jolliet, a fur trader, to map the way to the Northwest Passage to the Pacific. They traveled through Michigan&#x27;s upper peninsula to the northern tip of Lake Michigan. On canoes, they crossed the massive lake and landed at present-day Green Bay, Wisconsin. They entered the Mississippi River on 17 June 1673.

Marquette and Jolliet were the first to map the northern portion of the Mississippi River. They confirmed that it was easy to travel from the St. Lawrence River through the Great Lakes all the way to the Gulf of Mexico by water, that the native peoples who lived along the route were generally friendly, and that the natural resources of the lands in between were extraordinary. New France officials led by LaSalle followed up and erected a network of fur trading posts.

=== Fur trade ===

The fur trade was an integral part of early European and Indian relations. It was the foundation upon which their interactions were built and was a system that would evolve over time.

Goods often traded included guns, clothing, blankets, strouds, cloth, tobacco, silver, and alcohol.

==== France ====

The French and Indian exchange of goods was called an exchange of gifts rather than a trade. These gifts held greater meaning to the relationship between the two than a simple economic exchange because the trade itself was inseparable from the social relations it fostered and the alliance it created. In the meshed French and Algonquian system of trade, the Algonquian familial metaphor of a father and his children shaped the political relationship between the French and the Natives in this region. The French, regarded as the metaphoric father, were expected to provide for the needs of the Algonquians and, in return, the Algonquians, the metaphoric children, would be obligated to assist and obey them. Traders coming into Indian villages facilitated this system of symbolic exchange to establish or maintain alliances and friendships.

Marriage also became an important aspect of the trade in both the Ohio River valley and the French &quot;pays d&#x27;en haut&quot; with the temporary closing of the French fur trade from 1690 to 1716 and beyond. French fur traders were forced to abandon most posts and those remaining in the region became illegal traders who potentially sought these marriages to secure their safety. Another benefit for French traders marrying Indian women was that the Indian women were in charge of the processing of the pelts necessary to the fur trade. Women were integral to the fur trade and their contributions were lauded, so much so that the absence of the involvement of an Indian Woman was once cited as the cause for a trader&#x27;s failure. When the French fur trade re-opened in 1716 upon the discovery that their overstock of pelts had been ruined, legal French traders continued to marry Indian women and remain in their villages. With the growing influence of women in the fur trade also came the increasing demand of cloth which very quickly grew to be the most desired trade good.

==== Britain ====
English traders entered the Ohio country as a serious competitor to the French in the fur trade around the 1690s. English (and later British) traders almost consistently offered the Indians better goods and better rates than the French, with the Indians being able to play that to their advantage, thrusting the French and the British into competition with each other to their own benefit. The Indian demand for certain kinds of cloth in particular fueled this competition. This, however, changed following the Seven Years&#x27; War with Britain&#x27;s victory over France and the cession of New France to Great Britain.

The British attempted to establish a more assertive relationship with the Indians of the &quot;pays d&#x27;en haut&quot;, eliminating the practise of gift giving which they now saw as unnecessary. This, in combination with an underwhelming trade relationship with a surplus of whiskey, increase in prices generally, and a shortage of other goods led to unrest among the Indians that was exacerbated by the decision to significantly reduce the amount of rum being traded, a product that British merchants had been including in the trade for years. This would eventually culminate in Pontiac&#x27;s War, which broke out in 1763. Following the conflict, the British government was forced to compromise and loosely re-created a trade system that was an echo of the French one.

=== American settlement ===

While French control ended in 1763 after their defeat in the Seven Years&#x27; War, most of the several hundred French settlers in small villages along the Mississippi River and its tributaries remained, and were not disturbed by the new British administration. By the terms of the Treaty of Paris, Spain was given Louisiana; the area west of the Mississippi. St. Louis and Ste. Genevieve in Missouri were the main towns, but there was little new settlement. France regained Louisiana from Spain in exchange for Tuscany by the terms of the Treaty of San Ildefonso in 1800. Napoleon had lost interest in re-establishing a French colonial empire in North America following the Haitian Revolution and together with the fact that France could not effectively defend Louisiana from a possible British attack, he sold the territory to the United States in the Louisiana Purchase of 1803. Meanwhile, the British maintained forts and trading posts in U.S. territory, refusing to give them up until 1796 by the Jay Treaty. American settlement began either via routes over the Appalachian Mountains or through the waterways of the Great Lakes. Fort Pitt (now Pittsburgh) at the source of the Ohio River became the main base for settlers moving into the Midwest. Marietta, Ohio in 1787 became the first settlement in Ohio, but not until the defeat of Native American tribes at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794 was large-scale settlement possible. Large numbers also came north from Kentucky into southern Ohio, Indiana and Illinois.

The region&#x27;s fertile soil produced corn and vegetables; most farmers were self-sufficient. They cut trees and claimed the land, then sold it to newcomers and then moved further west to repeat the process.

==== Squatters ====


Settlers without legal claims, called &quot;squatters&quot;, had been moving into the Midwest for years before 1776. They pushed further and further down the Ohio River during the 1760s and 1770s and sometimes engaged in conflict with the Native Americans. British officials were outraged. These squatters were characterized by British General Thomas Gage as &quot;too Numerous, too Lawless, and Licentious ever to be restrained&quot;, and regarded them as &quot;almost out of Reach of Law and government; Neither the Endeavors of Government, or Fear of Indians has kept them properly within Bounds.&quot; The British had a long-standing goal of establishing a Native American buffer state in the American Midwest to resist American westward expansion.

With victory in the American Revolution the new government considered evicting the squatters from areas that were now federally owned public lands. In 1785, soldiers under General Josiah Harmar were sent into the Ohio country to destroy the crops and burn down the homes of any squatters they found living there. But overall the federal policy was to move Indians to western lands (such as the Indian Territory in modern Oklahoma) and allow a very large numbers of farmers to replace a small number of hunters. Congress repeatedly debated how to legalize settlements. On the one hand, Whigs such as Henry Clay wanted the government to get maximum revenue and also wanted stable middle-class law-abiding settlements of the sort that supported towns (and bankers). Jacksonian Democrats such as Thomas Hart Benton wanted the support of poor farmers, who reproduced rapidly, had little cash, and were eager to acquire cheap land in the West. Democrats did not want a big government, and keeping revenues low helped that cause. Democrats avoided words like &quot;squatter&quot; and regarded &quot;actual settlers&quot; as those who gained title to land, settled on it, and then improved upon it by building a house, clearing the ground, and planting crops. A number of means facilitated the legal settlement of the territories in the Midwest: land speculation, federal public land auctions, bounty land grants in lieu of pay to military veterans, and, later, preemption rights for squatters. The &quot;squatters&quot; became &quot;pioneers&quot; and were increasingly able to purchase the lands on which they had settled for the minimum price thanks to various preemption acts and laws passed throughout the 1810s-1840s. In Washington, Jacksonian Democrats favored squatter rights while banker-oriented Whigs were opposed; the Democrats prevailed.

==== Native American wars ====
In 1791, General Arthur St. Clair became commander of the United States Army and led a punitive expedition with two Regular Army regiments and some militia. Near modern-day Fort Recovery, his force advanced to the location of Native American settlements near the headwaters of the Wabash River, but on November 4 they were routed in battle by a tribal confederation led by Miami Chief Little Turtle and Shawnee chief Blue Jacket. More than 600 soldiers and scores of women and children were killed in the battle, which has since borne the name &quot;St. Clair&#x27;s Defeat&quot;. It remains the greatest defeat of a U.S. Army by Native Americans.

The British demanded the establishment of a Native American barrier state at the Treaty of Ghent which ended the War of 1812, but American negotiators rejected the idea because Britain had lost control of the region in the Battle of Lake Erie and the Battle of the Thames in 1813, where Tecumseh was killed by U.S. forces. The British then abandoned their Native American allies south of the lakes. The Native Americans ended being the main losers in the War of 1812. Apart from the short Black Hawk War of 1832, the days of Native American warfare east of the Mississippi River had ended.

==== Lewis and Clark ====

In 1803, President Thomas Jefferson commissioned the Lewis and Clark Expedition that took place between May 1804 and September 1806. Launching from Camp Dubois in Illinois, the goal was to explore the Louisiana Purchase, and establish trade and U.S. sovereignty over the native peoples along the Missouri River. The Lewis and Clark Expedition established relations with more than two dozen indigenous nations west of the Missouri River.
The Expedition returned east to St. Louis in the spring of 1806.

===Party politics===
The Midwest has been a key swing district in national elections, with highly contested elections in closely divided states often deciding the national result. From 1860 to 1920, both parties tried to find their presidential and vice presidential candidates from the region.

One of the two major political parties in the United States, the Republican Party, originated in the Midwest in the 1850s; Ripon, Wisconsin, had the first local meeting while Jackson, Michigan, had the first statewide meeting of the new party. Its membership included many Yankees out of New England and New York who had settled the upper Midwest. The party opposed the expansion of slavery and stressed the Protestant ideals of thrift, a hard work ethic, self-reliance, democratic decision making, and religious tolerance.

In the early 1890s, the wheat-growing regions were strongholds of the short-lived Populist movement in the Plains states.

Starting in the 1890s, the middle class urban Progressive movement became influential in the region (as it was in other regions), with Wisconsin a major center. Under the La Follettes, Wisconsin fought against the Republican bosses and for efficiency, modernization, and the use of experts to solve social, economic, and political problems.

Theodore Roosevelt&#x27;s 1912 Progressive Party had the best showing in this region, carrying the states of Michigan, Minnesota, and South Dakota. In 1924, La Follette, Sr.&#x27;s 1924 Progressive Party did well in the region, but carried only his home base of Wisconsin.

The Midwest—especially the areas west of Chicago—has always been a stronghold of isolationism, a belief that America should not involve itself in foreign entanglements. This position was largely based on the many German American and Swedish-American communities. Isolationist leaders included the La Follettes, Ohio&#x27;s Robert A. Taft, and Colonel Robert McCormick, publisher of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;.

==== Yankees and ethnocultural politics ====

Yankee settlers from New England started arriving in Ohio before 1800, and spread throughout the northern half of the Midwest. Most of them started as farmers, but later the larger proportion moved to towns and cities as entrepreneurs, businessmen, and urban professionals. Since its beginnings in the 1830s, Chicago has grown to dominate the Midwestern metropolis landscape for over a century.

Historian John Bunker has examined the worldview of the Yankee settlers in the Midwest:

Because they arrived first and had a strong sense of community and mission, Yankees were able to transplant New England institutions, values, and mores, altered only by the conditions of frontier life. They established a public culture that emphasized the work ethic, the sanctity of private property, individual responsibility, faith in residential and social mobility, practicality, piety, public order and decorum, reverence for public education, activists, honest and frugal government, town meeting democracy, and he believed that there was a public interest that transcends particular and stick ambitions. Regarding themselves as the elect and just in a world rife with sin, air, and corruption, they felt a strong moral obligation to define and enforce standards of community and personal behavior...This pietistic worldview was substantially shared by British, Scandinavian, Swiss, English-Canadian and Dutch Reformed immigrants, as well as by German Protestants and many of the Forty-Eighters.

Midwestern politics pitted Yankees against the German Catholics and Lutherans, who were often led by the Irish Catholics. These large groups, Buenker argues:

Generally subscribed to the work ethic, a strong sense of community, and activist government, but were less committed to economic individualism and privatism and ferociously opposed to government supervision of the personal habits. Southern and eastern European immigrants generally leaned more toward the Germanic view of things, while modernization, industrialization, and urbanization modified nearly everyone&#x27;s sense of individual economic responsibility and put a premium on organization, political involvement, and education.

=== Development of transportation ===
==== Waterways ====

Three waterways have been important to the development of the Midwest. The first and foremost was the Ohio River, which flowed into the Mississippi River. Development of the region was halted until 1795 by Spain&#x27;s control of the southern part of the Mississippi and its refusal to allow the shipment of American crops down the river and into the Atlantic Ocean. This was changed with the 1795 signing of Pinckney&#x27;s Treaty.

The second waterway is the network of routes within the Great Lakes. The opening of the Erie Canal in 1825 completed an all-water shipping route, more direct than the Mississippi, to New York and the seaport of New York City. In 1848, The Illinois and Michigan Canal breached the continental divide spanning the Chicago Portage and linking the waters of the Great Lakes with those of the Mississippi Valley and the Gulf of Mexico. Lakeport and river cities grew up to handle these new shipping routes. During the Industrial Revolution, the lakes became a conduit for iron ore from the Mesabi Range of Minnesota to steel mills in the Mid-Atlantic States. The Saint Lawrence Seaway, completed in 1959, opened the Midwest to the Atlantic Ocean.

The third waterway, the Missouri River, extended water travel from the Mississippi almost to the Rocky Mountains.

In the 1870s and 1880s, the Mississippi River inspired two classic books—&quot;Life on the Mississippi&quot; and &quot;Adventures of Huckleberry Finn&quot;—written by native Missourian Samuel Clemens, who used the pseudonym Mark Twain. His stories became staples of Midwestern lore. Twain&#x27;s hometown of Hannibal, Missouri, is a tourist attraction offering a glimpse into the Midwest of his time.

Inland canals in Ohio and Indiana constituted another important waterway, which connected with Great Lakes and Ohio River traffic. The commodities that the Midwest funneled into the Erie Canal down the Ohio River contributed to the wealth of New York City, which overtook Boston and Philadelphia.

==== Railroads and the automobile ====
During the mid-19th century, the region got its first railroads, and the railroad junction in Chicago became the world&#x27;s largest. During the century, Chicago became the nation&#x27;s railroad center. By 1910, over 20 railroads operated passenger service out of six different downtown terminals. Even today, a century after Henry Ford, six Class I railroads (Union Pacific, BNSF, Norfolk Southern, CSX, Canadian National, and Canadian Pacific) meet in Chicago.

In the period from 1890 to 1930, many Midwestern cities were connected by electric interurban railroads, similar to streetcars. The Midwest had more interurbans than any other region. In 1916, Ohio led all states with , Indiana followed with . These two states alone had almost a third of the country&#x27;s interurban trackage. The nation&#x27;s largest interurban junction was in Indianapolis. During the decade of the early 1900s, that city&#x27;s 38 percent growth in population was attributed largely to the interurban.

Competition with automobiles and buses undermined the interurban and other railroad passenger business. By 1900, Detroit was the world center of the auto industry, and soon practically every city within was producing auto parts that fed into its giant factories.

In 1903, Henry Ford founded the Ford Motor Company. Ford&#x27;s manufacturing—and those of automotive pioneers William C. Durant, the Dodge brothers, Packard, and Walter Chrysler—established Detroit&#x27;s status in the early 20th century as the world&#x27;s automotive capital. The proliferation of businesses created a synergy that also encouraged truck manufacturers such as Rapid and Grabowsky.

The growth of the auto industry was reflected by changes in businesses throughout the Midwest and nation, with the development of garages to service vehicles and gas stations, as well as factories for parts and tires. Today, greater Detroit remains home to General Motors, Chrysler, and the Ford Motor Company.

=== American Civil War ===
==== Slavery prohibition and the Underground Railroad ====

The Northwest Ordinance region, comprising the heart of the Midwest, was the first large region of the United States that prohibited slavery (the Northeastern United States emancipated slaves into the 1830s). The regional southern boundary was the Ohio River, the border of freedom and slavery in American history and literature (see &quot;Uncle Tom&#x27;s Cabin&quot; by Harriet Beecher Stowe and &quot;Beloved&quot; by Toni Morrison).

The Midwest, particularly Ohio, provided the primary routes for the Underground Railroad, whereby Midwesterners assisted slaves to freedom from their crossing of the Ohio River through their departure on Lake Erie to Canada. Created in the early 19th century, the Underground Railroad was at its height between 1850 and 1860. One estimate suggests that by 1850, 100,000 slaves had escaped via the Underground Railroad.

The Underground Railroad consisted of meeting points, secret routes, transportation, and safe houses and assistance provided by abolitionist sympathizers. Individuals were often organized in small, independent groups; this helped to maintain secrecy because individuals knew some connecting &quot;stations&quot; along the route, but knew few details of their immediate area. Escaped slaves would move north along the route from one way station to the next. Although the fugitives sometimes traveled on boat or train, they usually traveled on foot or by wagon.

The region was shaped by the relative absence of slavery (except for Missouri), pioneer settlement, education in one-room free public schools, democratic notions brought by American Revolutionary War veterans, Protestant faiths and experimentation, and agricultural wealth transported on the Ohio River riverboats, flatboats, canal boats, and railroads.

==== Bleeding Kansas ====

The first violent conflicts leading up to the American Civil War occurred between two neighboring Midwestern states, Kansas and Missouri, involving anti-slavery Free-Staters and pro-slavery &quot;Border Ruffian&quot; elements, that took place in the Kansas Territory and the western frontier towns of Missouri roughly between 1854 and 1858. At the heart of the conflict was the question of whether Kansas would enter the Union as a free state or slave state. As such, Bleeding Kansas was a proxy war between Northerners and Southerners over the issue of slavery. The term &quot;Bleeding Kansas&quot; was coined by Horace Greeley of the &quot;New-York Tribune&quot;.

The immediate cause of the events was the Kansas–Nebraska Act of 1854. The Act created the territories of Kansas and Nebraska, opened new lands that would help settlement in them, repealed the Missouri Compromise, and allowed settlers in those territories to determine through popular sovereignty whether to allow slavery within their boundaries. It was hoped the Act would ease relations between the North and the South, because the South could expand slavery to new territories, but the North still had the right to abolish slavery in its states. Instead, opponents denounced the law as a concession to the slave power of the South.

An ostensibly democratic idea, popular sovereignty stated that the inhabitants of each territory or state should decide whether it would be a free or slave state; however, this resulted in immigration &quot;en masse&quot; to Kansas by activists from both sides. At one point, Kansas had two separate governments, each with its own constitution, although only one was federally recognized. On January 29, 1861, Kansas was admitted to the Union as a free state, less than three months before the Battle of Fort Sumter officially began the Civil War.

On May 21, 1856, the Free Soil town of Lawrence, Kansas, was sacked by an armed pro-slavery force from Missouri. A few days later, the Sacking of Lawrence led abolitionist John Brown and six of his followers to execute five men along the Pottawatomie Creek in Franklin County, Kansas, in retaliation. The so-called &quot;Border War&quot; lasted from May through October between armed bands of pro-slavery and Free Soil men. The U.S. Army had two garrisons in Kansas, the First Cavalry Regiment at Fort Leavenworth and the Second Dragoons and Sixth Infantry at Fort Riley. The skirmishes endured until a new governor, John W. Geary, managed to prevail upon the Missourians to return home in late 1856.

National reaction to the events in Kansas demonstrated how deeply divided the country had become. The Border Ruffians were widely applauded in the South, even though their actions had cost the lives of numerous people. In the North, the murders committed by Brown and his followers were ignored by most, and lauded by a few. The election of Abraham Lincoln in November 1860 was the final trigger for secession by the Southern states.

The U.S. federal government was supported by 20 mostly-Northern free states in which slavery already had been abolished, and by five slave states that became known as the border states. All of the Midwestern states but one, Missouri, banned slavery. Though most battles were fought in the South, skirmishes between Kansas and Missouri continued until culmination with the Lawrence Massacre on August 21, 1863, in which Quantrill&#x27;s Raiders raided and plundered Lawrence, killing more than 150 and burning all the business buildings and most of the dwellings.

=== Immigration and industrialization ===


By the time of the American Civil War, European immigrants bypassed the East Coast of the United States to settle directly in the interior: German immigrants to Ohio, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Michigan, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, Nebraska, Kansas, and Missouri; Irish immigrants to port cities on the Great Lakes, like Cleveland and Chicago; Danes, Czechs, Swedes, and Norwegians to Iowa, Nebraska, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and the Dakotas; and Finns to Upper Michigan and northern/central Minnesota and Wisconsin. Poles, Hungarians, and Jews settled in Midwestern cities.

The U.S. was predominantly rural at the time of the Civil War. The Midwest was no exception, dotted with small farms all across the region. The late 19th century saw industrialization, immigration, and urbanization that fed the Industrial Revolution, and the heart of industrial domination and innovation was in the Great Lakes states of the Midwest, which only began its slow decline by the late 20th century.

A flourishing economy brought residents from rural communities and immigrants from abroad. Manufacturing and retail and finance sectors became dominant, influencing the American economy.

In addition to manufacturing, printing, publishing, and food processing also play major roles in the Midwest&#x27;s largest economy. Chicago was the base of commercial operations for industrialists John Crerar, John Whitfield Bunn, Richard Teller Crane, Marshall Field, John Farwell, Julius Rosenwald, and many other commercial visionaries who laid the foundation for Midwestern and global industry. Meanwhile, John D. Rockefeller, creator of the Standard Oil Company, made his billions in Cleveland. At one point during the late 19th century, Cleveland was home to more than 50% of the world&#x27;s millionaires, many living on the famous Millionaire&#x27;s Row on Euclid Avenue.

In the 20th century, African American migration from the Southern United States into the Midwestern states changed Chicago, St. Louis, Cleveland, Milwaukee, Kansas City, Cincinnati, Detroit, Omaha, Minneapolis, and many other cities in the Midwest, as factories and schools enticed families by the thousands to new opportunities. Chicago alone gained hundreds of thousands of black citizens from the Great Migration and the Second Great Migration.

The Gateway Arch monument in St. Louis, clad in stainless steel and built in the form of a flattened catenary arch, is the tallest man-made monument in the United States, and the world&#x27;s tallest arch. Built as a monument to the westward expansion of the United States, it is the centerpiece of the Gateway Arch National Park, which was known as the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial until 2018, and has become an internationally famous symbol of St. Louis and the Midwest.

==== German Americans ====


As the Midwest opened up to settlement via waterways and rail in the mid-1800s, Germans began to settle there in large numbers. The largest flow of German immigration to America occurred between 1820 and World War I, during which time nearly six million Germans immigrated to the United States. From 1840 to 1880, they were the largest group of immigrants.

The Midwestern cities of Milwaukee, Cincinnati, St. Louis, and Chicago were favored destinations of German immigrants. By 1900, the populations of the cities of Cleveland, Milwaukee, Hoboken, and Cincinnati were all more than 40 percent German American. Dubuque and Davenport, Iowa, had even larger proportions; in Omaha, Nebraska, the proportion of German Americans was 57 percent in 1910. In many other cities of the Midwest, such as Fort Wayne, Indiana, German Americans were at least 30 percent of the population. Many concentrations acquired distinctive names suggesting their heritage, such as the &quot;Over-the-Rhine&quot; district in Cincinnati and &quot;German Village&quot; in Columbus, Ohio.

A favorite destination was Milwaukee, known as &quot;the German Athens&quot;. Radical Germans trained in politics in the old country dominated the city&#x27;s Socialists. Skilled workers dominated many crafts, while entrepreneurs created the brewing industry; the most famous brands included Pabst, Schlitz, Miller, and Blatz.

While half of German immigrants settled in cities, the other half established farms in the Midwest. From Ohio to the Plains states, a heavy presence persists in rural areas into the 21st century.

Throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, German Americans showed a high interest in becoming farmers, and keeping their children and grandchildren on the land. Western railroads, with large land grants available to attract farmers, set up agencies in Hamburg and other German cities, promising cheap transportation, and sales of farmland on easy terms. For example, the Santa Fe Railroad hired its own commissioner for immigration, and sold over to German-speaking farmers.

===Politics 1860s–1920s===
The Midwest was a battleground for political and economic issues after the Civil War, with voters splitting along ethnic and religious lines rather than class. The temperance, Greenback, and populist movements gained attention in the region, with pietists supporting the Republicans and ritualists backing the Democrats. Prohibition was a major issue in the Midwest, with both the Women&#x27;s Christian Temperance Union and the Anti-Saloon League originating in the region. The 18th Amendment was ratified by most Midwestern state legislatures, but the Midwest also became a center of resistance to Prohibition, with ethnic, urban Catholic and German Lutheran voters supporting repeal while native-born, rural pietistic Protestant Midwesterners opposed it.

====Women====
The presence of women in the Midwest public stage in the late 19th and early 20th centuries aligned with the growing movements for women&#x27;s rights and prohibition. Women&#x27;s activism was often presented as an extension of their domestic cleaning role. Activists at the local and state level used the Woman&#x27;s Christian Temperance Union&#x27;s crusade against alcohol, as a way to push for the right to vote. Midwestern states began allowing women to vote before the 19th Amendment was passed, and the leader of the campaign for the suffrage amendment was Carrie Chapman Catt from Iowa. The 1970s feminist movement also had Midwestern roots, with Betty Friedan from Illinois writing &quot;The Feminine Mystique&quot; in 1963. Economic necessity and the desire for a career also drove women to work outside the home, and certain occupations such as teaching and nursing became feminized.

====Workers and Populists====

The Midwest saw labor unrest and rebellion against the capitalist economic order, with strikes in Chicago in 1887 and 1894. Labor leaders organized a protest meeting at Haymarket Square in Chicago in 1886, where a bomb was thrown among police and eight anarchists were convicted of conspiracy for murder, an event known as the Haymarket affair. The Pullman Strike of 1894 was a shutdown of most rail traffic in the Midwest and West. It turned violent and was broken by federal troops. Eugene V. Debs, leader of the striking American Railway Union, went to prison where he converted to Socialism. His version of socialism appealed to some immigrant groups but was too radical for most Midwesterners.

Farmers distrusted big business and adopted cooperative arrangements, such as those offered by the Grange in the 1870s or the Farmers&#x27; Alliance in the 1890s. They wanted cooperatives controlled by farmers to handle farm products, a reduction in rail freight rates, and the coining of silver money to raise prices. The Alliance turned to political action with the creation of the Populist Party in 1892. It had local success in the wheat belt and silver mining areas. This venture as a third party was short-lived and they fused with the Democrats in 1896 and voted for Democrat William Jennings Bryan. Leftwing rural politics continued in the 20th century in the Dakotas and Minnesota with the Farmer-Labor party

===1920s===
The second Ku Klux Klan experienced a short surge in the Midwest in the early 1920s, fueled by anti-immigrant and anti-Catholic fears. The KKK in the 1920s was a local membership organization, but its autonomous locals were not coordinated and it had little impact on legislation. Members wanted enforcement of vice laws, especially Prohibition, which many immigrants violated. The Klan reached its peak of visibility in Indiana, where the governor supposedly had connections to the secret group. However, the hundreds of Indiana Klan chapters collapsed overnight due to a scandal involving the kidnapping and rape and death of a young woman by its state leader. The Klan represented a conformist impulse. Middletown (actually the city of Muncie, Indiana) was the base for a pioneering sociological study conducted by Robert S. Lynd. The book revealed a powerful business class that promoted civic boosterism, patriotism, and straight-ticket voting, while discouraging political activism and dissent.

====Progressive Era====
The negative effects of industrialization triggered the political movement of progressivism, which aimed to address its negative consequences through social reform and government regulation. Jane Addams and Ellen Gates Starr pioneered the settlement house outreach to newly arrived immigrants by establishing Hull House in Chicago in 1889. Settlement houses provided social services and played an active role in civic life, helping immigrants prepare for naturalization and campaigning for regulation and services from city government. Midwestern mayors—especially Hazen S. Pingree and Tom L. Johnson, led early reforms against boss-dominated municipal politics, while Samuel M. Jones advocated public ownership of local utilities. Robert M. La Follette, the most famous leader of Midwestern progressivism, began his career by winning election against his state&#x27;s Republican party in 1900. The machine was temporarily defeated, allowing reformers to launch the &quot;Wisconsin idea&quot; of expanded democracy. This idea included major reforms such as direct primaries, campaign finance controls, civil service to replace patronage, restrictions on lobbyists, state income and inheritance taxes, child labor restrictions, pure food, and workmen&#x27;s compensation laws. La Follette promoted government regulation of railroads, public utilities, factories, and banks. Although La Follette lost influence in the national party in 1912, the Wisconsin reforms became a model for progressivism in other states.

== Geography ==



According to Brian Page and Richard Walker: The sequence of settlement that helped define the subregions of the Midwest was roughly as follows:1800-20, from Pittsburgh down the Ohio Valley to St. Louis at the junction of the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers; &lt;br&gt;1820-40, the southern Great Lakes shores, from northern Ohio to Milwaukee; &lt;br&gt;1840-60, infill of the Prairie heartland across to eastern Iowa and southern Minnesota;&lt;br&gt;post-Civil War, the penetration of the northern woodlands and eastern plains from the central Midwest.

The vast central area of the U.S., into Canada, is a landscape of low, flat to rolling terrain in the Interior Plains, ideal for farming and growing food. Most of its eastern two-thirds form the Interior Lowlands. The Lowlands gradually rise westward, from a line passing through eastern Kansas, up to over in the unit known as the Great Plains. Most of the Great Plains area is now farmed.

While these states are for the most part relatively flat, consisting either of plains or of rolling and small hills, there is a measure of geographical variation. In particular, the following areas exhibit a high degree of topographical variety: the eastern Midwest near the foothills of the Appalachian Mountains; the Great Lakes Basin; the heavily glaciated uplands of the North Shore of Lake Superior in Minnesota, part of the ruggedly volcanic Canadian Shield; the Ozark Mountains of southern Missouri; and the deeply eroded Driftless Area of southwest Wisconsin, southeast Minnesota, northeast Iowa, and northwest Illinois.

Proceeding westward, the Appalachian Plateau topography gradually gives way to gently rolling hills, and then (in central Ohio) to flat lands converted principally to farms and urban areas. This is the beginning of the vast Interior Plains of North America. As a result, prairies cover most of the Great Plains states. Iowa and much of Illinois lie within an area called the prairie peninsula, an eastward extension of prairies that borders conifer and mixed forests to the north, and hardwood deciduous forests to the east and south.

Geographers subdivide the Interior Plains into the Interior Lowlands and the Great Plains on the basis of elevation. The Lowlands are mostly below above sea level whereas the Great Plains to the west are higher, rising in Colorado to around .
The Lowlands, then, are confined to parts of Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Michigan, Tennessee, and Kentucky. Missouri and Arkansas have regions of Lowlands elevations, contrasting with their Ozark region (within the Interior Highlands). Eastern Ohio&#x27;s hills are an extension of the Appalachian Plateau.

The Interior Plains are largely coincident with the vast Mississippi River Drainage System (other major components are the Missouri and Ohio Rivers). These rivers have for tens of millions of years been eroding downward into the mostly horizontal sedimentary rocks of Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Cenozoic ages. The modern Mississippi River system has developed during the Pleistocene Epoch of the Cenozoic.

Rainfall decreases from east to west, resulting in different types of prairies, with the tallgrass prairie in the wetter eastern region, mixed-grass prairie in the central Great Plains, and shortgrass prairie towards the rain shadow of the Rockies. Today, these three prairie types largely correspond to the corn/soybean area, the wheat belt, and the western rangelands, respectively.

Much of the coniferous forests of the Upper Midwest were clear-cut in the late 19th century, and mixed hardwood forests have become a major component of the new woodlands since then. The majority of the Midwest can now be categorized as urbanized areas or pastoral agricultural areas.

=== Definitions ===

The first recorded use of the term &quot;Midwestern&quot; to refer to a region of the central U.S. occurred in 1886; &quot;Midwest&quot; appeared in 1894, and &quot;Midwesterner&quot; in 1916. One of the earliest late-19th-century uses of &quot;Midwest&quot; was in reference to Kansas and Nebraska to indicate that they were the civilized areas of the west. The term &quot;Midwestern&quot; has been in use since the 1880s to refer to portions of the central United States. A variant term, &quot;Middle West&quot;, has been used since the 19th century and remains relatively common.

Traditional definitions of the Midwest include the Northwest Ordinance &quot;Old Northwest&quot; states and many states that were part of the Louisiana Purchase. The states of the Old Northwest are also known as Great Lakes states and are east-north central in the United States. The Ohio River runs along the southeastern section, and the Mississippi River runs north to south near the center. Many of the Louisiana Purchase states in the west-north central United States are also known as the Great Plains states, and the Missouri River is a major waterway joining with the Mississippi. The Midwest lies north of the 36°30′ parallel, which the 1820 Missouri Compromise established as the dividing line between future slave and non-slave states.

The Midwest Region is defined by the U.S. Census Bureau as these 12 states:
* Illinois: Old Northwest, Mississippi River (Missouri River joins near the state border), Ohio River, and Great Lakes state
* Indiana: Old Northwest, Ohio River, and Great Lakes state
* Iowa: Louisiana Purchase, Mississippi River, and Missouri River state
* Kansas: Louisiana Purchase, Great Plains, and Missouri River state
* Michigan: Old Northwest and Great Lakes state
* Minnesota: Old Northwest, Louisiana Purchase, Mississippi River, part of Red River Colony before 1818, Great Lakes state
* Missouri: Louisiana Purchase, Mississippi River (Ohio River joins near the state border), Missouri River, and border state
* Nebraska: Louisiana Purchase, Great Plains, and Missouri River state
* North Dakota: Louisiana Purchase, part of Red River Colony before 1818, Great Plains, and Missouri River state
* Ohio: Old Northwest (Historic Connecticut Western Reserve), Ohio River, and Great Lakes state. The southeastern part of the state is part of northern Appalachia
* South Dakota: Louisiana Purchase, Great Plains, and Missouri River state
* Wisconsin: Old Northwest, Mississippi River, and Great Lakes state

Various organizations define the Midwest with slightly different groups of states. For example, the Council of State Governments, an organization for communication and coordination among state governments, includes in its Midwest regional office eleven states from the above list, omitting Missouri, which is in the CSG South region. The Midwest Region of the National Park Service consists of these twelve states plus the state of Arkansas. The Midwest Archives Conference, a professional archives organization, covers the above twelve states, plus Kentucky. A 2023 Emerson College/&quot;Middle West Review&quot; poll includes the above twelve states, plus Oklahoma and Wyoming.

=== Major metropolitan areas ===
== Demographics ==
According to the 2022 American Community Survey, 22.6% of the Midwest&#x27;s population report German ancestry, 10.6% report Irish ancestry, 9.4% report English ancestry, 5.9% report Mexican ancestry, 4.8% identify their ancestry as American, 4.3% report Polish ancestry, and 2.6% report Norwegian ancestry. The Midwest is home to the largest concentration of German-Americans within the US, with this group making up over 30% of the population in North Dakota, South Dakota, Wisconsin, Iowa, and Nebraska. In addition to German-Americans, the upper Midwest is home to a large population of Scandinavian Americans. In Minnesota, 11.8% of the population identifies with Norwegian ancestry, while 6.4% report Swedish ancestry. In North Dakota, 22% of the population reports Norwegian ancestry, the highest rate in the country.

While the Midwest historically had a very small Black population, this changed in the early 20th century as numerous African Americans left the South for major urban areas in the North and West, fleeing racial persecution and seeking new economic opportunities in a population movement known as the Great Migration. This drastically changed the demographics of many Midwestern cities that had previously been almost entirely populated by White Americans, leading to segregation and discrimination against the growing Black population, racial violence, and &quot;white flight&quot; to suburban areas. From 1910 to 1970, Black Americans increased from 2% of Chicago&#x27;s population to 33%, and became almost half of the population in Detroit. As a result of the Great Migration, Black Americans currently make up 10% of the Midwest&#x27;s population, with over 96% being concentrated in urban areas, including major cities like Chicago, Detroit, Cleveland, and Milwaukee, as well as medium sized cities like Gary and Flint. At the same time, most of the rural Midwest has remained overwhelmingly White, with almost two-thirds of the 1,055 counties in the Midwest being over 95% White.

Illinois is the most populous and racially diverse state in the Midwest, and out of all 50 states, it is also ranked as the most representative of the overall demographics of the United States on several metrics, including religion, race/ethnicity, and urban/rural divide.

As of 2022, the median household income in the Midwest is $70,283, slightly lower than the national average of $74,755. 12.2% of the region&#x27;s population lives below the poverty line, including roughly 16% of children under 18, and 10% of seniors over 65. The average household size in the Midwest is 2.4 people

As of 2022, the median age in the Midwest is 39.2 years, with 22% of the population being under 18, and 18% being over 65. The age distribution in the Midwest broadly matches the US as a whole. In terms of sex, 50.3% of the region&#x27;s population are female, and 49.7% are male. Half of the population over the age of 15 are married, while half are unmarried

=== Religion ===
Like the rest of the United States, the Midwest is predominantly Christian.

The majority of Midwesterners are Protestants, with rates from 48 percent in Illinois to 63 percent in Iowa. However, the Catholic Church is the single largest denomination, varying between 18 percent and 34 percent of the state populations. Lutherans are prevalent in the Upper Midwest, especially in Michigan, Minnesota, the Dakotas, and Wisconsin with their large German and Scandinavian populations. Southern Baptists compose about 15 percent of Missouri&#x27;s population, but much smaller percentages in other Midwestern states.

Judaism and Islam are collectively practiced by 2 percent of the population, with higher concentrations in major urban areas. 35 percent of Midwesterners attend religious services every week, and 69 percent attend at least a few times a year. People with no religious affiliation make up 22 percent of the Midwest&#x27;s population.

== Economy ==
=== Farming and agriculture ===
Agriculture is one of the biggest drivers of local economies in the Midwest, accounting for billions of dollars worth of exports and thousands of jobs. The area consists of some of the richest farming land in the world. The region&#x27;s fertile soil combined with the steel plow has made it possible for farmers to produce abundant harvests of grain and cereal crops, including corn, wheat, soybeans, oats, and barley, to become known today as the nation&#x27;s &quot;breadbasket&quot;. Henry A. Wallace, a pioneer of hybrid seeds, declared in 1956 that the Corn Belt developed the &quot;most productive agricultural civilization the world has ever seen&quot;. Today, the U.S. produces 40 percent of the world crop.

The very dense soil of the Midwest plagued the first settlers who were using wooden plows, which were more suitable for loose forest soil. On the prairie, the plows bounced around and the soil stuck to them. This problem was solved in 1837 by an Illinois blacksmith named John Deere who developed a steel moldboard plow that was stronger and cut the roots, making the fertile soils of the prairie ready for farming. Farms spread from the colonies westward along with the settlers. In cooler regions, wheat was often the crop of choice when lands were newly settled, leading to a &quot;wheat frontier&quot; that moved westward over the course of years. Also very common in the antebellum Midwest was farming corn while raising hogs, complementing each other especially since it was difficult to get grain to market before the canals and railroads. After the &quot;wheat frontier&quot; had passed through an area, more diversified farms including dairy and beef cattle generally took its place. The introduction and broad adoption of scientific agriculture since the mid-19th century contributed to economic growth in the United States.

This development was facilitated by the Morrill Act and the Hatch Act of 1887 which established in each state a land-grant university (with a mission to teach and study agriculture) and a federally funded system of agricultural experiment stations and cooperative extension networks which place extension agents in each state. Iowa State University became the nation&#x27;s first designated land-grant institution when the Iowa Legislature accepted the provisions of the 1862 Morrill Act on September 11, 1862, making Iowa the first state in the nation to do so. Soybeans were not widely cultivated in the United States until the early 1930s, and by 1942, the U.S. became the world&#x27;s largest soybean producer, partially because of World War II and the &quot;need for domestic sources of fats, oils, and meal&quot;. Between 1930 and 1942, the United States&#x27; share of world soybean production skyrocketed from 3 percent to 46.5 percent, largely as a result of increase in the Midwest, and by 1969, it had risen to 76 percent.
Iowa and Illinois rank first and second in the nation in soybean production. In 2012, Iowa produced 14.5 percent, and Illinois produced 13.3 percent of the nation&#x27;s soybeans.

The tallgrass prairie has been converted into one of the most intensive crop producing areas in North America. Less than one tenth of one percent (&lt;0.09%) of the original landcover of the tallgrass prairie biome remains. States formerly with landcover in native tallgrass prairie such as Iowa, Illinois, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Nebraska, and Missouri have become valued for their highly productive soils.

The Corn Belt is a region of the Midwest where corn has, since the 1850s, been the predominant crop, replacing the native tall grasses. The &quot;Corn Belt&quot; region is defined typically to include Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, southern Michigan, western Ohio, eastern Nebraska, eastern Kansas, southern Minnesota, and parts of Missouri. , the top four corn-producing states were Iowa, Illinois, Nebraska, and Minnesota, together accounting for more than half of the corn grown in the United States. The Corn Belt also sometimes is defined to include parts of South Dakota, North Dakota, Wisconsin, and Kentucky. The region is characterized by relatively level land and deep, fertile soils, high in organic matter.

Iowa produces the largest corn crop of any state. In 2012, Iowa farmers produced 18.3 percent of the nation&#x27;s corn, while Illinois produced 15.3 percent. In 2011, there were 13.7 million harvested acres of corn for grain, producing 2.36 billion bushels, which yielded 172.0 bu/acre, with US$14.5 billion of corn value of production.

Wheat is produced throughout the Midwest and is the principal cereal grain in the country. The U.S. is ranked third in production volume of wheat, with almost 58 million tons produced in the 2012–2013 growing season, behind only China and India (the combined production of all European Union nations is larger than China) The U.S. ranks first in crop export volume; almost 50 percent of total wheat produced is exported. The U.S. Department of Agriculture defines eight official classes of wheat: durum wheat, hard red spring wheat, hard red winter wheat, soft red winter wheat, hard white wheat, soft white wheat, unclassed wheat, and mixed wheat. Winter wheat accounts for 70 to 80 percent of total production in the U.S., with the largest amounts produced in Kansas (10.8 million tons) and North Dakota (9.8 million tons). Of the total wheat produced in the country, 50 percent is exported, valued at US$9 billion.

Midwestern states also lead the nation in other agricultural commodities, including pork (Iowa), beef and veal (Nebraska), dairy (Wisconsin), and chicken eggs (Iowa).

===Finance===

Chicago is the largest economic and financial center of the Midwest, and has the third largest gross metropolitan product in North America—approximately $689 billion, after the regions of New York City and Los Angeles. Chicago was named the fourth most important business center in the world in the MasterCard Worldwide Centers of Commerce Index. The 2021 Global Financial Centres Index ranked Chicago as the fourth most competitive city in the country and eleventh in the world, directly behind Paris and Tokyo. The Chicago Board of Trade (established 1848) listed the first ever standardized &quot;exchange traded&quot; forward contracts, which were called futures contracts. As a world financial center, Chicago is home to major financial and futures exchanges including the CME Group which owns the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (&quot;the Merc&quot;), Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX), the Dow Jones Indexes, and the Commodities Exchange Inc. (COMEX). Other major exchanges include the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE), the largest options exchange in the Western Hemisphere; and the Chicago Stock Exchange. In addition, Chicago is also home to the headquarters of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (the Seventh District of the Federal Reserve).

Outside of Chicago, many other Midwest cities are host to financial centers as well. Federal Reserve Bank districts are also headquartered in Cleveland, Kansas City, Minneapolis, and St. Louis. Major United States bank headquarters are located throughout Ohio including Huntington Bancshares in Columbus, Fifth Third Bank in Cincinnati, and KeyCorp in Cleveland. Insurance Companies such as Elevance Health in Indianapolis, Nationwide Insurance in Columbus, American Family Insurance in Madison, Wisconsin, Berkshire Hathaway in Omaha, State Farm Insurance in Bloomington, Illinois, Reinsurance Group of America in Chesterfield, Missouri, Cincinnati Financial Corporation and American Modern Insurance Group of Cincinnati, and Progressive Insurance and Medical Mutual of Ohio in Cleveland also spread throughout the Midwest.

===Manufacturing===

Navigable terrain, waterways, and ports spurred an unprecedented construction of transportation infrastructure throughout the region. The region is a global leader in advanced manufacturing and research and development, with significant innovations in both production processes and business organization. John D. Rockefeller&#x27;s Standard Oil set precedents for centralized pricing, uniform distribution, and controlled product standards through Standard Oil, which started as a consolidated refinery in Cleveland. Cyrus McCormick&#x27;s Reaper and other manufacturers of agricultural machinery consolidated into International Harvester in Chicago. Andrew Carnegie&#x27;s steel production integrated large-scale open-hearth and Bessemer processes into the world&#x27;s most efficient and profitable mills. The largest, most comprehensive monopoly in the world, United States Steel, consolidated steel production throughout the region. Many of the world&#x27;s largest employers began in the Great Lakes region.

Advantages of accessible waterways, highly developed transportation infrastructure, finance, and a prosperous market base makes the region the global leader in automobile production and a global business location. Henry Ford&#x27;s movable assembly line and integrated production set the model and standard for major car manufactures. The Detroit area emerged as the world&#x27;s automotive center, with facilities throughout the region. Akron, Ohio became the global leader in rubber production, driven by the demand for tires. Over 200 million tons of cargo are shipped annually through the Great Lakes.

== Culture ==

Following the sociological Middletown studies of 1929, which were based on Muncie, Indiana, commentators took Midwestern cities and the Midwest generally to be &quot;typical&quot; of the United States. Earlier, the rhetorical question &quot;Will it play in Peoria?&quot; had become a stock phrase, using Peoria, Illinois to signal whether something would appeal to mainstream America. As of 2010 the Midwest has a higher employment-to-population ratio than the Northeastern United States, the Southern United States, or the Western United States.

Euchre, a trick-taking card game, remains popular in the Midwest and parts of the Upper South, particularly in Michigan, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Kentucky, and Pennsylvania.

=== Education ===
Many Midwestern universities are members of the Association of American Universities (AAU), a bi-national organization founded in Chicago of leading research universities. Of the 69 members from the U.S. and Canada, 17 are located in the Midwest. These include private schools Case Western Reserve University, the University of Chicago, Northwestern University, University of Notre Dame, and Washington University in St. Louis and public institutions, the University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign, Indiana University Bloomington, the University of Iowa, the University of Kansas, the University of Michigan, Michigan State University, the University of Minnesota, the University of Missouri, the Ohio State University, Purdue University, and the University of Wisconsin–Madison.

Other notable major research-intensive public universities include the University of Cincinnati, the University of Illinois at Chicago, Iowa State University, Kansas State University, the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Ohio University, Southern Illinois University, and Wayne State University.

Numerous state university systems have established regional campuses statewide. The numerous state teachers colleges were upgraded into state universities after 1945.

Other notable private institutions include Beloit College, John Carroll University, Saint Louis University, Butler University, Loyola University Chicago, DePaul University, Creighton University, Drake University, Marquette University, University of Dayton, and Xavier University. Local boosters, usually with a church affiliation, created numerous colleges in the mid-19th century. In terms of national rankings, the most prominent liberal arts colleges today include Augustana College, Carleton College, Denison University, DePauw University, Earlham College, Grinnell College, Hamline University, Kalamazoo College, Kenyon College, Knox College, Macalester College, Lawrence University, Oberlin College, St. Olaf College, College of Saint Benedict and Saint John&#x27;s University, Mount Union University, Wabash College, Wheaton College, and The College of Wooster.

=== Health ===
The rate of potentially preventable hospitalizations in the Midwestern United States fell from 2005 to 2011 for overall conditions, acute conditions, and chronic conditions.

=== Linguistics ===
The accents of the region are generally distinct from those of the American South and of the urban areas of the American Northeast. To a lesser degree, they are also distinct from the accent of the American West.

The accent characteristic of most of the Midwest is popularly considered to be that of &quot;standard&quot; American English or General American. This accent is typically preferred by many national radio and television producers. Linguist Thomas Bonfiglio argues that, &quot;American English pronunciation standardized as &#x27;network standard&#x27; or, informally, &#x27;Midwestern&#x27; in the 20th century.&quot; He identifies radio as the chief factor.

Currently, many cities in the Great Lakes region are undergoing the Northern Cities Vowel Shift away from the standard pronunciation of vowels.

The dialect of Minnesota, western Wisconsin, much of North Dakota and Michigan&#x27;s Upper Peninsula is referred to as the Upper Midwestern Dialect (or &quot;Minnesotan&quot;), and has Scandinavian and Canadian influences.

Missouri has elements of three dialects, specifically: Northern Midland, in the extreme northern part of the state, with a distinctive variation in St. Louis and the surrounding area; Southern Midland, in the majority of the state; and Southern, in the southwestern and southeastern parts of the state, with a bulge extending north in the central part, to include approximately the southern one-third.

=== Music ===

The heavy German immigration played a major role in establishing musical traditions, especially choral and orchestral music. Czech and German traditions combined to sponsor the polka.

The Southern Diaspora of the 20th century saw more than twenty million Southerners move throughout the country, many of whom moved into major Midwestern industrial cities such as Chicago, Detroit, Cleveland, and St. Louis. Along with them, they brought jazz to the Midwest, as well as blues, bluegrass, and rock and roll, with major contributions to jazz, funk, and R&amp;B, and even new subgenres such as the Motown Sound and techno from Detroit or house music from Chicago. In the 1920s, South Side Chicago was the base for Jelly Roll Morton (1890–1941). Kansas City developed its own jazz style.

The electrified Chicago blues sound exemplifies the genre, as popularized by record labels Chess and Alligator and portrayed in film &quot;The Blues Brothers&quot;.

Rock and roll music was first identified as a new genre in 1951 by Cleveland disc jockey Alan Freed who began playing this music style while popularizing the term &quot;rock and roll&quot; to describe it. By the mid-1950s, rock and roll emerged as a defined musical style in the United States, deriving most directly from the rhythm and blues music of the 1940s, which itself developed from earlier blues, boogie woogie, jazz, and swing music, and was also influenced by gospel, country and western, and traditional folk music. Freed&#x27;s contribution in identifying rock as a new genre helped establish the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, located in Cleveland. Chuck Berry, a Midwesterner from St. Louis, influenced many other rock musicians.
Since the founding of rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll music, an uncountable number of rock, soul, R&amp;B, hip-hop, dance, blues, and jazz acts have emerged from Chicago onto the global and national music scene. Detroit has greatly contributed to the international music scene as a result of being the original home of the legendary Motown Records. Notable soul and R&amp;B musicians associated with Motown that had their origins in the area include Aretha Franklin, the Supremes, Mary Wells, Four Tops, the Jackson 5, Smokey Robinson &amp; the Miracles, Stevie Wonder, the Marvelettes, the Temptations, and Martha and the Vandellas. These artists achieved their greatest success in the 1960s and 1970s.

Midwest music fans loved country music, heavy metal, arena rock, heartland rock, and TOP 40. In the 1970s and 1980s, native Midwestern musicians such as Bob Seger, John Mellencamp and Warren Zevon found great success with a style of rock music that came to be known as heartland rock, characterized by lyrical themes that focused on and appealed to the Midwestern working class. Other successful Midwestern rock artists emerged during this time, including REO Speedwagon (Illinois), Styx (Illinois), and Kansas.

Prince, The Time, Morris Day, Jesse Johnson, Alexander O&#x27;Neal, The Family (USA), St. Paul (Paul Peterson), Apollonia 6, Vanity 6, Sheila E., and Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis recorded Minneapolis sound.

House Music, the first form of Electronic Dance Music, had its beginning in Chicago in the early 1980s, and by the late 1980s and the early 1990s house music had become popular on an international scale. House artists such as Frankie Knuckles, Marshall Jefferson released many house music records. With the creation of house music in the city of Chicago, the first form of the globally popular electronic dance music genre was created. Techno had its start in Detroit in the late 1980s and early 1990s with techno pioneers such as Juan Atkins, Derrick May, and Kevin Saunderson. The genre, while popular in America, became much more popular overseas such as in Europe.

Numerous classical composers live and have lived in midwestern states, including Easley Blackwood, Kenneth Gaburo, Salvatore Martirano, and Ralph Shapey (Illinois); Glenn Miller and Meredith Willson (Iowa); Leslie Bassett, William Bolcom, Michael Daugherty, and David Gillingham (Michigan); Donald Erb (Ohio); Dominick Argento and Stephen Paulus (Minnesota).

=== Sports ===

Professional sports leagues such as the National Football League (NFL), Major League Baseball (MLB), National Basketball Association (NBA), Women&#x27;s National Basketball Association (WNBA), National Hockey League (NHL), Major League Soccer (MLS), and National Women&#x27;s Soccer League (NWSL), have team franchises in following Midwestern cities:
* Chicago: Bears (NFL), Cubs, White Sox (MLB), Bulls (NBA), Sky (WNBA), Blackhawks (NHL), Fire (MLS), Stars (NWSL)
* Cincinnati: Bengals (NFL), Reds (MLB), FC Cincinnati or the Garys (MLS)
* Cleveland: Browns (NFL), Guardians (MLB), Cavaliers (NBA)
* Columbus: Blue Jackets (NHL), Crew (MLS)
* Detroit: Lions (NFL), Tigers (MLB), Pistons (NBA), Red Wings (NHL)
* Green Bay: Packers (NFL)
* Indianapolis: Colts (NFL), Pacers (NBA), Fever (WNBA)
* Kansas City: Chiefs (NFL), Royals (MLB), Sporting or the Wizards (MLS), Current (NWSL)
* Milwaukee: Brewers (MLB), Bucks (NBA)
* Minneapolis–Saint Paul: Vikings (NFL), Twins (MLB), Timberwolves (NBA), Lynx (WNBA), Wild (NHL), United or the Loons (MLS)
* St. Louis: Cardinals (MLB), Blues (NHL), City SC (MLS)

Popular teams include the St. Louis Cardinals (11 World Series titles), Cincinnati Reds (5 World Series titles), Chicago Bulls (6 NBA titles), the Detroit Pistons (3 NBA titles), Milwaukee Bucks (2 NBA titles), the Minnesota Lynx (4 WNBA titles), the Green Bay Packers (4 Super Bowl titles, 13 total NFL championships), the Chicago Bears (1 Super Bowl title, 9 total NFL championships), the Cleveland Browns (4 AAFC championships, 4 NFL championships), the Kansas City Chiefs (3 Super Bowl titles, 4 total NFL championships), Kansas City Royals (2 World Series titles), the Detroit Red Wings (11 Stanley Cup titles), the Detroit Tigers (4 World Series titles), the Chicago Blackhawks (6 Stanley Cup titles), and the Columbus Crew (3 MLS Cups).

In NCAA college sports, the Big Ten Conference and the Big 12 Conference feature the largest concentration of top Midwestern Division I football and men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s basketball teams in the region, including the Cincinnati Bearcats, Illinois Fighting Illini, Indiana Hoosiers, Iowa Hawkeyes, Iowa State Cyclones, Kansas Jayhawks, Kansas State Wildcats, Michigan Wolverines, Michigan State Spartans, Minnesota Golden Gophers, Nebraska Cornhuskers, Northwestern Wildcats, Ohio State Buckeyes, Purdue Boilermakers, and the Wisconsin Badgers. Other notable Midwestern college sports teams include the Akron Zips, Ball State Cardinals, Butler Bulldogs, Creighton Bluejays, Central Michigan Chippewas Dayton Flyers, Grand Valley State Lakers, Indiana State Sycamores, Kent State Golden Flashes, Marquette Golden Eagles, Miami RedHawks, Milwaukee Panthers, Missouri Tigers, Missouri State Bears, Northern Illinois Huskies, North Dakota State Bison, Notre Dame Fighting Irish, Ohio Bobcats, South Dakota State Jackrabbits, Toledo Rockets, Western Michigan Broncos, Wichita State Shockers, and Xavier Musketeers. Of this second group of schools, Butler, Dayton, Indiana State, Missouri State, North Dakota State, and South Dakota State do not play top-level college football (all playing in the second-tier Division I FCS), and Creighton, Marquette, Milwaukee, Wichita State and Xavier do not sponsor football at all.

The Milwaukee Mile hosted its first automobile race in 1903, and is one of the oldest tracks in the world, though as of 2019 is presently inactive. The Indianapolis Motor Speedway, opened in 1909, is a prestigious auto racing track which annually hosts the internationally famous Indianapolis 500-Mile Race (part of the IndyCar series), the Brickyard 400 (NASCAR), and the IndyCar Grand Prix (IndyCar series). The Road America and Mid-Ohio road courses opened in the 1950s and 1960s respectively. Other motorsport venues in the Midwest are Indianapolis Raceway Park (home of the NHRA U.S. Nationals), Michigan International Speedway, Chicagoland Speedway, Kansas Speedway, Gateway International Raceway, and the Iowa Speedway. The Kentucky Speedway is just outside the officially defined Midwest, but is linked with the region because the track is located in the Cincinnati metropolitan area.

Notable professional golf tournaments in the Midwest include the Memorial Tournament, BMW Championship and John Deere Classic.

=== Cultural overlap ===
Differences in the definition of the Midwest mainly split between the Great Plains region on one side, and the Great Lakes region on the other. Although some point to the small towns and agricultural communities in Kansas, Iowa, the Dakotas, and Nebraska of the Great Plains as representative of traditional Midwestern lifestyles and values, others assert that the industrial cities of the Great Lakes—with their histories of 19th century and early 20th century immigration, manufacturing base, and strong Catholic influence—are more representative of the Midwestern experience. In South Dakota, for instance, West River (the region west of the Missouri River) shares cultural elements with the western United States, while East River has more in common with the rest of the Midwest.

Two other regions, Appalachia and the Ozark Mountains, overlap geographically with the Midwest—Appalachia in Southern Ohio and the Ozarks in Southern Missouri. The Ohio River has long been a boundary between North and South and between the Midwest and the Upper South. All of the lower Midwestern states, especially Missouri, have major Southern components and influences, as they neighbor the Southern region. Historically, Missouri was a slave state before the American Civil War (1861–1865) due to the Missouri Compromise.

Western Pennsylvania, which contains the cities of Erie and Pittsburgh, shares history with the Midwest, and overlaps with Appalachia and the Northeast as well.

Kentucky is not considered part of the Midwest; it is a northern region of the South, although certain northern parts of the state could have possibly been grouped with the Midwest in a geographical context, even though it is geographically in the Southeast overall. Kentucky is categorized as Southern by the U.S. Census Bureau due to its industries and especially from a historical and cultural standpoint with the majority of the state having a thoroughly majority Southern accent, demographic, history, and culture in line with her sister states of Virginia and Tennessee and even the areas that have certain Midwestern influences tend to be mixed with the native Southern culture of the area.

In addition to intra-American regional overlaps, the Upper Peninsula of Michigan has historically had strong cultural ties to Canada, partly as a result of early settlement by French Canadians. Moreover, the Yooper accent shares some traits with Canadian English, further demonstrating transnational cultural connections. Similar but less pronounced mutual Canadian-American cultural influence occurs throughout the Great Lakes region.

== Politics ==


The Midwestern United States is a politically divided region, with the Democratic Party being stronger in the Great Lakes Region and the Republican Party being stronger in the Great Plains regions. The Upper Midwestern states of Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin reliably voted Democratic in every presidential election from 1992 to 2012. Meanwhile, Minnesota has the longest Democratic voting streak in the nation, having last voted for a Republican presidential candidate in 1972. Recently, Republicans have made serious inroads in Iowa and Ohio, two states that were previously considered swing states.

Missouri has been won by Republicans in every presidential election since 2000, despite its former bellwether status. Indiana has been won by Republicans in every presidential election since 1940, except for Lyndon Johnson in 1964 and Barack Obama in 2008. The Great Plains states of North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, and Kansas have voted for the Republican candidate in every presidential election since 1940, except for Democrat Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964. The unicameral Nebraska Legislature is officially nonpartisan.

All Midwestern states use primary elections to select delegates for both the Democratic and Republican national conventions, except for Iowa. The Iowa caucuses in early January of leap years are the first votes in the presidential nominating process for both major parties, and attract enormous media attention.

=== East North Central ===
As of 2024, the state government of Illinois currently has a Democratic Governor J.B. Pritzker and Democratic supermajorities in both houses of the Illinois General Assembly. Illinois also has 2 Democratic U.S. senators and a 14–3 Democratic majority U.S. House delegation.

As of 2024, Wisconsin has a Democratic Governor Tony Evers and a Republican-controlled Wisconsin Legislature. Wisconsin also has 1 Democratic and 1 Republican Senator and a 6-2 Republican majority U.S. House delegation. Wisconsin is considered a purple state, as the state was decided by less than 1 percentage point in 2016, 2020, and 2024, with the nationwide winner also taking Wisconsin each time.

From 1992 to 2012, Michigan consistently voted for the Democratic presidential candidate, though in four of those six elections, the margin of victory was in the single digits. Beginning in 2016, it has evolved into a true swing state, with Donald Trump winning Michigan in his two successful presidential bids in 2016 and 2024. The Michigan Legislature is also closely divided; the Democrats currently hold the minimum 20-18 majority in the Senate and the Republicans hold a narrow 58-52 majority in the House. As of 2025, Michigan has 2 Democratic U.S. Senators and a 7-6 bare Republican majority in their U.S. House of Representatives delegation.

Indiana is considered a Republican stronghold, having voting for that party&#x27;s presidential candidate in every election since 1940, except for Johnson in 1964 and Barack Obama in 2008. As of 2023, the Republican party controls both U.S. Senate seats, has a 7–2 majority U.S. House congressional delegation, and has a state-level trifecta (the governorship and both houses of the Indiana General Assembly).

As of 2024, Ohio currently has a Republican Governor Mike DeWine and Republican majorities in the Ohio General Assembly. Ohio also has 1 Democratic and 1 Republican U.S. Senator and a 10-5 Republican majority U.S. House delegation. Ohio has been a battleground state in presidential elections, and no Republican has won the office without winning Ohio. Donald Trump won Ohio by about 8 percentage points in both the 2016 and 2020 presidential elections, signaling a shift towards the right for the state&#x27;s federal electorate. The 2022 midterms resulted in strong Republican support at the state level, and moderate Republican support at the federal level, with Republican governor Mike DeWine winning reelection in a landslide and Republican author JD Vance winning election to the U.S. Senate by about 6 percentage points.

=== West North Central ===
The Great Plains states of North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, and Kansas have been strongholds for the Republicans for many decades. These four states have gone for the Republican candidate in every presidential election since 1940, except for Lyndon B. Johnson&#x27;s landslide over Barry Goldwater in 1964. Although North Dakota and South Dakota have often elected Democrats to Congress, after the 2012 election both states&#x27; congressional delegations are majority Republican. Nebraska has elected Democrats to the Senate and as governor in recent years, but both of its senators have been Republican since the retirement of Ben Nelson in 2012. Kansas has elected a majority of Democrats as governor since 1956, but has not elected a Democratic senator since 1932. From 1997 to 2010 and again since 2019, Kansas has had at least one Democratic House member (two in 2007 and &#x27;08).

Iowa had a Democratic governor from 1999 until Terry Branstad was re-elected in the mid-term elections in 2010, and has had both one Democratic and one Republican senator since the early 1980s until the 2014 election when Republican Joni Ernst defeated Democrat Bruce Braley in a tightly contested race. Between 1988 and 2012, Iowa also voted for the Democratic presidential candidate in all elections except 2004 (backing George W. Bush by less than 1%), but in 2016 and 2020 Donald Trump won the state by about 9 and 8 percentage points, respectively. Since the 2016 elections, Republicans have held a majority in both houses of the Iowa General Assembly. Following the 2022 elections, Iowa is considered a red state as Republicans hold all but one statewide office, both U.S. Senate seats, all four U.S. House seats, and Republican governor Kim Reynolds was reelected by a margin of nearly 20 points. Trump won Iowa for a third time in 2024, this time by more than 13 percentage points, the largest margin of victory for a Republican in the state since Richard Nixon in 1972.

Minnesota voters have not voted for a Republican candidate for president since 1972, longer than any other state. Minnesota was the only state (along with Washington, D.C.) to vote for its native son Walter Mondale over Ronald Reagan in 1984. However, recent Democratic victories have often been fairly narrow, such as the 2016 presidential election. The Democratic Party narrowly controls the Minnesota state legislature as well as the governor&#x27;s office as of 2024, but the State House will be evenly split 67-67 beginning in 2025. The Minnesota congressional delegation has 2 Democratic Senators but a 4-4 evenly split U.S. House delegation.

Missouri was historically considered a bellwether state, having voted for the winner in every presidential election from 1904 to 2004 except for 1956, when it backed losing Democrat Adlai Stevenson by 0.22% and less than 4,000 votes. Democrats generally only hold sway in the large cities at the opposite ends of the state, Kansas City and St. Louis, with the Republicans winning the rest of the state. Since the 2012 elections, Republicans have had a 6–2 majority in the state&#x27;s U.S. House delegation, with African-American Democrats representing the two major cities. Missouri has had a Republican governor since the 2016 elections, as well as both U.S. Senators being Republican since the 2018 United States Senate elections. As of 2023, Republicans have supermajorities in both houses of the Missouri General Assembly.

== See also ==
* Cuisine of the Midwestern United States
* Territories of the United States on stamps

== References ==
== Further reading ==
** Sisson, Richard, Christian Zacher, and Andrew Cayton, eds. &quot;The American Midwest: An Interpretive Encyclopedia&quot; (Indiana University Press, 2006), 1916 pp of articles by scholars on all topics covering the 12 states. online
* Aley, Ginette et al. eds. &quot;Union Heartland: The Midwestern Home Front during the Civil War&quot; (2013)
* Anderson, Rodney, ed. &quot;The Rural Midwest Since World War II&quot; (Northern Illinois UP, 2014). online
* Barlow, Philip, and Mark Silk. &quot;Religion and Public Life in the Midwest: America&#x27;s Common Denominator?&quot; (2004)
* Bidwell, Percy and Falconer, John I. &quot;History of Agriculture in the Northern United States 1620–1860&quot; (1941) online
* Billington, Ray Allen. &quot;The Origins of Middle Western Isolationism&quot;. &quot;Political Science Quarterly&quot; (1945): 44–64. in JSTOR
* Bogue, Allan G. &quot;From Prairie to Cornbelt: Farming on the Illinois and Iowa Prairies in the Nineteenth Century&quot; (U of Chicago Press, 1963).
* Buley, R. Carlyle. &quot;The Old Northwest: Pioneer Period 1815–1840&quot; 2 vol (1951), Pulitzer Prize; online
* Buss, James Joseph. &quot;Winning the West with Words, Language and Conquest in the Lower Great Lakes&quot; (U of Oklahoma Press, 2011) online
* Campbell, Rex R. et al. &quot;A Revolution in the Heartland: Changes in Rural Culture, Family and Communities, 1900–2000&quot; (University of Missouri: Department of Rural Sociology, 2004) online
* Cayton, Andrew R. L. &quot;Midwest and the Nation&quot; (1990) online
* Cayton, Andrew R. L. and Susan E. Gray, Eds. &quot;The Identity of the American Midwest: Essays on Regional History&quot; (2001)
* Cordier, Mary Hurlbut. &quot;Schoolwomen of the Prairies and Plains: Personal Narratives from Iowa, Kansas, and Nebraska, 1860s-1920s&quot; (1997) online
* Cronon, William. &quot;Nature&#x27;s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West&quot; (1992), influential study 1850–1900 online
* Friedberger, Mark. &quot;The Transformation of the Rural Midwest, 1945–1985,&quot; &quot;Old Northwest,&quot; 1992, Vol. 16 Issue 1, pp. 13–36
* Friedberger, Mark. &quot;The Farm Family and the Inheritance Process: Evidence from the Corn Belt, 1870–1950.&quot; &quot;Agricultural History&quot; 57.1 (1983): 1–13. uses Iowa census and sales data
* Friedberger, Mark. &quot;Shake-Out: Iowa Farm Families in the 1980s&quot; (1989)
* Fry, John. &quot; &#x27;Good Farming – Clear Thinking – Right Living&#x27;: Midwestern Farm Newspapers, Social Reform, and Rural Readers in the Early Twentieth Century&quot;. &quot;Agricultural History&quot; 78#1 ( 2004): 34–49. online
* Garland, John H. &quot;The North American Midwest: A Regional Geography&quot; (1955)
* Gates, Paul W. &quot;The Farmers&#x27; Age: Agriculture, 1815–1860&quot; (1960) online
* Gjerde, John. &quot;Minds of the West: Ethnocultural Evolution in the Rural Middle West, 1830–1917&quot; (1999) online
* High, Stephen C. &quot;Industrial Sunset: The Making of North America&#x27;s Rust Belt, 1969–1984&quot; (Toronto, 2003)
* Hoganson, Kristin L. &quot; The Heartland: An American History&quot; (Penguin Random House, 2019) online reviews
* Jensen, Richard. &quot;The Winning of the Midwest: Social and Political Conflict, 1888–1896&quot; (1971) online
* Jordan, Philip D.&quot;Ohio Comes of Age: 1873–1900 Volume 5&quot; (1968) online
* Lauck, Jon K. &quot;The Good Country: A History of the American Midwest, 1800–1900&quot; (2022) online
* Lauck, Jon K. &quot;Trump and The Midwest: The 2016 Presidential Election and The Avenues of Midwestern Historiography&quot; &quot;Studies in Midwestern History&quot; (2017) vol 3#1 online
* Lauck, Jon K. and Catherine McNicol Stock, eds. &quot;The Conservative Heartland: A Political History of the Postwar American Midwest&quot; (UP of Kansas, 2020) online review
* Longworth, Richard C. &quot;Caught in the Middle: America&#x27;s Heartland in the Age of Globalism&quot; (2008) online
* Meyer, David R. &quot;Midwestern Industrialization and the American Manufacturing Belt in the Nineteenth Century&quot;, &quot;The Journal of Economic History&quot;, 49#4 (1989) pp. 921–937.in JSTOR
* Miller, John E. &quot;Small Town Dreams: Stories of Midwestern Boys Who Shaped America&quot; (UP of Kansas, 2014) online.
* Miner, Horace Mitchell. &quot;Culture and agriculture; an anthropological study of a corn belt county&quot; (1949) online edition
* Nelson, Daniel. &quot;Farm and Factory: Workers in the Midwest 1880–1990&quot; (1995),
* Nordin, Dennis S., and Roy V. Scott. &quot;From Prairie Farmer to Entrepreneur: The Transformation of Midwestern Agriculture&quot;. (2005) online
* Nye, Russel B. &quot;Midwestern Progressive Politics&quot; (1959) online
* Page, Brian, and Richard Walker. &quot;From settlement to Fordism: the agro-industrial revolution in the American Midwest&quot;. &quot;Economic Geography&quot; (1991): 281–315. in JSTOR
* Rikoon, J. Sanford. &quot;Threshing in the Midwest, 1820-1940: A Study of Traditional Culture and Technological Change&quot; (Indiana University Press, 1988). online
* Scheiber, Harry N. ed. &quot;The Old Northwest; studies in regional history, 1787–1910&quot; (1969) 16 essays by scholars on economic and social topics. online
* Scranton, Philip. &quot;Multiple industrializations: urban manufacturing development in the American Midwest, 1880–1925.&quot; &quot;Journal of Design History&quot; 12.1 (1999): 45-63.
* Shannon, Fred A. &quot;The Status of the Midwestern Farmer in 1900&quot; &quot;The Mississippi Valley Historical Review&quot; 37#3. (1950), pp. 491–510. in JSTOR
* Shortridge, James R. &quot;The Middle West: Its Meaning in American Culture&quot; (1989) online
* Slade, Joseph W. and Judith Lee. &quot;The Midwest: The Greenwood Encyclopedia of American Regional Cultures&quot; (2004) online
* Sleeper-Smith, Susan. &quot;Indigenous Prosperity and American Conquest: Indian Women of the Ohio River Valley, 1690–1792&quot; (The Omohundro Institute of Early American History and Culture; 2018) online
* Teaford, Jon C. &quot;Cities of the heartland: The rise and fall of the industrial Midwest&quot; (Indiana UP, 1993). online
* Tucker, Spencer, ed. &quot;American Civil War: A State-by-State Encyclopedia&quot; (2 vol., 2015) 1019pp online
* White, Richard. &quot;The Middle Ground: Indians, Empires, and Republics in the Great Lakes Region, 1650–1815&quot; (Cambridge UP; 1991) online
* Wuthnow, Robert. &quot;Remaking the Heartland: Middle America Since the 1950s&quot; (Princeton UP, 2011) online

===Historiography and memory===

* Brown, David S. &quot;Beyond the Frontier: The Midwestern Voice in American Historical Writing&quot; (2009) online
* Frederick; John T., ed. &quot;Out of the Midwest: A Collection of Present-Day Writing&quot; (1944) prose and poetry. 
* Garry, Patrick. &quot;Cherished Lives and Lasting Values: Memoirs of the Rural Midwest.&quot; &quot;Middle West Review&quot; 10.1 (2023): 183-194. Reviews ten autobiographical memoirs of Midwest. excerpt
* Good, David F. &quot;American History through a Midwestern Lens&quot;. &quot;Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft&quot; 38.2 (2012): 435+ online
* Hoganson, Kristin L. &quot;The Heartland: An American History&quot; (2019) online reviews
* Hurt, R. Douglas. &quot;Writing Midwestern State Histories.&quot; &quot;Middle West Review&quot; 10#1 (2023): 195-201. excerpt
* Lauck, Jon K. &quot;The Lost Region: Toward a Revival of Midwestern History&quot; (University of Iowa Press; 2013) 166 pages; criticizes the neglect of the Midwest in contemporary historiography and argues for a revival of attention. online
* Lauck, Jon K. &quot;Trump and The Midwest: The 2016 Presidential Election and The Avenues of Midwestern Historiography.&quot; &quot;Studies in Midwestern History&quot; 3.1 (2017): 1-24. online

===Primary sources===
* Grant, H. Roger, ed. &quot;Railroads in the Heartland: Steam and Traction in the Golden Age of Postcards&quot; (1997) over 100 historic photographs from 1905-1915. online

== External links ==

* Issues of &quot;Middle West Review&quot;
* The Midwest History Association, scholarly association that published &quot;Middle West Review&quot;
* Archives of photo images, upper Midwest</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="4" end="28" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="50" end="61" title="Midwestern United States" label="the Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="67" end="76" title="Midwestern United States" label="Heartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="84" end="100" title="Midwestern United States" label="American Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264649" start="121" end="135" title="List of regions of the United States" label="census regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="151" end="178" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="225" end="238" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="268" end="288" title="Midwestern United States" label="North Central Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="345" end="371" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="380" end="401" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="408" end="414" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="436" end="458" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="573" end="581" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="583" end="590" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="592" end="596" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="598" end="604" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="606" end="614" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="616" end="625" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="627" end="635" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="637" end="645" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="647" end="659" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="661" end="665" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="667" end="679" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="685" end="694" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q603872" start="735" end="749" title="Interior Plain" label="Interior Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="783" end="809" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="839" end="859" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="920" end="930" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="942" end="959" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="969" end="983" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="989" end="1014" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189467" start="1137" end="1164" title="East North Central States" label="East North Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="1258" end="1276" title="Great Lakes region" label="Great Lakes region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524187" start="1282" end="1309" title="West North Central States" label="West North Central Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="1454" end="1466" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1476" end="1483" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="1600" end="1606" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754965" start="1631" end="1642" title="Chicago metropolitan area" label="Chicagoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="1661" end="1678" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1753" end="1766" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q665894" start="1774" end="1793" title="Greater Mexico City" label="Greater Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="1799" end="1825" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="1831" end="1850" title="Greater Los Angeles" label="Greater Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="1890" end="1898" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="1900" end="1912" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="1914" end="1921" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="1923" end="1932" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="1934" end="1945" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="1947" end="1952" title="Omaha, Nebraska" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="1954" end="1965" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q49266" start="1967" end="1974" title="Wichita, Kansas" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="1976" end="1985" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="1987" end="1997" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848" start="1999" end="2007" title="Saint Paul, Minnesota" label="St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="2009" end="2018" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28260" start="2024" end="2031" title="Lincoln, Nebraska" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925718" start="2077" end="2090" title="Metro Detroit" label="Metro Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480013" start="2092" end="2112" title="Minneapolis–St. Paul" label="Minneapolis–St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575924" start="2114" end="2144" title="Indianapolis Metropolitan Area" label="Indianapolis Metropolitan Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q944269" start="2146" end="2163" title="Greater St. Louis" label="Greater St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120360" start="2165" end="2183" title="Greater Cincinnati" label="Greater Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307187" start="2189" end="2211" title="Kansas City metropolitan area" label="Kansas City metro area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149985" start="2217" end="2236" title="Columbus, Ohio metropolitan area" label="Columbus metro area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600502" start="2242" end="2259" title="Greater Cleveland" label="Greater Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133130" start="2393" end="2402" title="Corn Belt" label="Corn Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="2648" end="2659" title="swing state" label="swing state"/>
<link wikidata="Q258532" start="2801" end="2816" title="British America" label="British America"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="2945" end="2961" title="West Coast of the United States" label="Pacific seaboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="3029" end="3039" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14947899" start="3055" end="3072" title="American frontier" label="American frontier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="3127" end="3144" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="3235" end="3249" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q8321" start="3258" end="3272" title="Illinois River" label="Illinois River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554770" start="3333" end="3349" title="Illinois Country" label="Illinois Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q280537" start="3363" end="3382" title="Northwest Ordinance" label="Northwest Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="3409" end="3428" title="Northwest Territory" label="Northwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="3607" end="3630" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692796" start="3860" end="3869" title="Heartland (United States)" label="Heartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="3927" end="3943" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q888099" start="3945" end="3959" title="Paleo-Indians" label="Paleo-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q632376" start="4150" end="4157" title="Archaic period in the Americas" label="Archaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299963" start="4195" end="4213" title="Woodland period" label="Woodland Tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="4322" end="4343" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="4373" end="4392" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q8642" start="4493" end="4507" title="Kankakee River" label="Kankakee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q196183" start="4564" end="4570" title="Wabash River" label="Wabash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136667" start="4572" end="4582" title="Tippecanoe River" label="Tippecanoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430262" start="4588" end="4593" title="White River (Indiana)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="4810" end="4815" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="4817" end="4822" title="beans" label="beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339301" start="4828" end="4834" title="squash (plant)" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="5046" end="5057" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q262714" start="5148" end="5162" title="mound builder (people)" label="mound-building"/>
<link wikidata="Q190530" start="5293" end="5307" title="Little Ice Age" label="Little Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="5418" end="5429" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q213396" start="5450" end="5455" title="Wyandot people" label="Huron"/>
<link wikidata="Q536116" start="5457" end="5463" title="Odawa people" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="5465" end="5471" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065583" start="5473" end="5483" title="Potawatomi" label="Potawatomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537653" start="5485" end="5493" title="Ho-Chunk" label="Ho-Chunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447438" start="5495" end="5504" title="Menominee" label="Menominee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437595" start="5506" end="5510" title="Sauk people" label="Sauk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440169" start="5512" end="5520" title="Meskwaki" label="Meskwaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816665" start="5522" end="5530" title="Neutral Nation" label="Neutrals"/>
<link wikidata="Q956264" start="5540" end="5545" title="Miami people" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="5695" end="5714" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695829" start="5747" end="5765" title="Stockbridge-Munsee Community" label="Stockbridge-Munsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975735" start="5774" end="5785" title="Brothertown Indians" label="Brothertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572875" start="5912" end="5918" title="Oneida people" label="Oneida"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="5933" end="5941" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537653" start="5965" end="5973" title="Ho-Chunk" label="Ho-Chunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q34181" start="6036" end="6042" title="Siouan languages" label="Siouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="6252" end="6257" title="canoe" label="canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q277986" start="6310" end="6316" title="wigwam" label="wigwam"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="6636" end="6651" title="American Bison" label="buffalo (bison)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="6942" end="6956" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="6974" end="6988" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642488" start="7123" end="7131" title="chiefdom" label="chiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q255872" start="7316" end="7322" title="Ojibwe" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="8318" end="8336" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="8401" end="8414" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="8759" end="8766" title="American bison" label="buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q388264" start="8872" end="8881" title="Blackfoot" label="Blackfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q626136" start="8883" end="8890" title="Arapaho" label="Arapaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q682808" start="8892" end="8903" title="Assiniboine people" label="Assiniboine"/>
<link wikidata="Q322951" start="8905" end="8913" title="Cheyenne" label="Cheyenne"/>
<link wikidata="Q117133" start="8915" end="8923" title="Comanche" label="Comanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q331789" start="8925" end="8929" title="Crow Nation" label="Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q510032" start="8931" end="8942" title="Gros Ventres" label="Gros Ventre"/>
<link wikidata="Q117100" start="8944" end="8949" title="Kiowa" label="Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q333049" start="8951" end="8957" title="Lakota people" label="Lakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402468" start="8959" end="8964" title="Lipan Apache people" label="Lipan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523166" start="8966" end="8979" title="Plains Apache" label="Plains Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q117191" start="8999" end="9010" title="Plains Cree people" label="Plains Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q541421" start="9012" end="9025" title="Saulteaux" label="Plains Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q123033" start="9027" end="9032" title="Tsuu T&amp;#x27;ina Nation" label="Sarsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q26774" start="9034" end="9042" title="Shoshone" label="Shoshone"/>
<link wikidata="Q492150" start="9044" end="9050" title="Nakoda (people)" label="Stoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493185" start="9056" end="9063" title="Tonkawa" label="Tonkawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256681" start="9267" end="9274" title="Arikara" label="Arikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q503333" start="9276" end="9283" title="Hidatsa" label="Hidatsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517496" start="9285" end="9289" title="Iowa tribe" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723904" start="9291" end="9305" title="Kaw (tribe)" label="Kaw (or Kansa)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197600" start="9307" end="9313" title="Kichai people" label="Kitsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q510048" start="9315" end="9321" title="Mandan" label="Mandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939219" start="9323" end="9332" title="Missouria" label="Missouria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123923" start="9334" end="9343" title="Nez Perce tribe" label="Nez Perce"/>
<link wikidata="Q120601" start="9345" end="9350" title="Omaha (tribe)" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q947650" start="9352" end="9357" title="Osage Nation" label="Osage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790907" start="9359" end="9363" title="Otoe tribe" label="Otoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q750947" start="9365" end="9371" title="Pawnee people" label="Pawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754891" start="9373" end="9378" title="Ponca" label="Ponca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268882" start="9380" end="9386" title="Quapaw" label="Quapaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148367" start="9388" end="9394" title="Dakota people" label="Santee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425238" start="9396" end="9403" title="Wichita (tribe)" label="Wichita"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="9409" end="9416" title="Sioux" label="Yankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="9470" end="9477" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="9631" end="9645" title="American bison" label="American bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="9706" end="9709" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="9713" end="9721" title="Pronghorn" label="antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068524" start="9799" end="9812" title="bison hunting" label="bison hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q134932" start="10063" end="10070" title="teepees" label="teepees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818224" start="10317" end="10330" title="horse culture" label="horse culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="10394" end="10399" title="spear" label="spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827042" start="10402" end="10406" title="bow (weapon)" label="bows"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827042" start="10412" end="10427" title="bows and arrows" label="bows and arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q392326" start="10450" end="10455" title="club (weapon)" label="clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148367" start="10591" end="10597" title="Dakota people" label="Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="10601" end="10606" title="Sioux" label="Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q107434" start="10700" end="10718" title="Great Sioux Nation" label="Great Sioux Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136502" start="11562" end="11577" title="Minnesota River" label="Minnesota River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248791" start="11808" end="11814" title="Nakota" label="Nakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948" start="12189" end="12197" title="Manitoba" label="Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989" start="12211" end="12223" title="Saskatchewan" label="Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478434" start="13179" end="13191" title="France in the Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="their defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="13199" end="13220" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="13229" end="13247" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q502534" start="13314" end="13323" title="North American fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780878" start="13427" end="13455" title="Western theater of the American Revolutionary War" label="during the Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q849680" start="13460" end="13465" title="American Indian Wars" label="after"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="13679" end="13689" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554770" start="13711" end="13727" title="Illinois Country" label="Illinois Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="13787" end="13807" title="Saint Lawrence River" label="Saint Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321" start="13811" end="13826" title="Jacques Cartier" label="Jacques Cartier"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="13925" end="13949" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="13957" end="13979" title="Treaty of Paris (1763)" label="Treaty of Paris (1763)"/>
<link wikidata="Q833211" start="14038" end="14060" title="Governor of New France" label="Governor of New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q336630" start="14066" end="14083" title="Jacques Marquette" label="Jacques Marquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q506618" start="14123" end="14136" title="Louis Jolliet" label="Louis Jolliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="14140" end="14150" title="fur trader" label="fur trader"/>
<link wikidata="Q47430" start="14367" end="14387" title="Green Bay, Wisconsin" label="Green Bay, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="14937" end="14946" title="fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621197" start="15596" end="15606" title="Algonquian peoples" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143100" start="16185" end="16204" title="Pays d&amp;#x27;en Haut" label="pays d&amp;#x27;en haut"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="17184" end="17191" title="Kingdom of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="17695" end="17716" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q29828922" start="17722" end="17744" title="Great Britain in the Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="17790" end="17803" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179077" start="18388" end="18406" title="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War" label="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="18765" end="18782" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q156211" start="18891" end="18906" title="Treaty of Paris (1763)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q748300" start="18924" end="18933" title="Louisiana (New Spain)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="18969" end="18978" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q959718" start="18983" end="18997" title="Ste. Genevieve, Missouri" label="Ste. Genevieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="19121" end="19128" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259275" start="19149" end="19172" title="Third Treaty of San Ildefonso" label="Treaty of San Ildefonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="19230" end="19269" title="New France" label="French colonial empire in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="19284" end="19302" title="Haitian Revolution" label="Haitian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q658054" start="19371" end="19380" title="Louisiana (New France)" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="19463" end="19481" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568837" start="19611" end="19621" title="Jay Treaty" label="Jay Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q209377" start="19743" end="19752" title="Fort Pitt (Pennsylvania)" label="Fort Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="19758" end="19768" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="19791" end="19801" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q985482" start="19861" end="19875" title="Marietta, Ohio" label="Marietta, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237537" start="19979" end="20003" title="Battle of Fallen Timbers" label="Battle of Fallen Timbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="20176" end="20180" title="maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q581935" start="20713" end="20724" title="Thomas Gage" label="Thomas Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070813" start="21030" end="21058" title="Indian barrier state" label="Native American buffer state"/>
<link wikidata="Q604642" start="21303" end="21316" title="Josiah Harmar" label="Josiah Harmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q868245" start="21517" end="21533" title="Indian Territory" label="Indian Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q319630" start="21722" end="21732" title="Henry Clay" label="Henry Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317969" start="21915" end="21933" title="Thomas Hart Benton (politician)" label="Thomas Hart Benton"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="22461" end="22477" title="Speculation" label="land speculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871222" start="22479" end="22507" title="Public domain (land)" label="federal public land auctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217027" start="22516" end="22526" title="land grant" label="land grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239740" start="22577" end="22594" title="Preemption (land)" label="preemption rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q464245" start="23015" end="23031" title="Arthur St. Clair" label="Arthur St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="23056" end="23074" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q582956" start="23085" end="23104" title="punitive expedition" label="punitive expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471897" start="23171" end="23184" title="Fort Recovery" label="Fort Recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q196183" start="23279" end="23291" title="Wabash River" label="Wabash River"/>
<link wikidata="Q956264" start="23371" end="23376" title="Miami tribe" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355169" start="23383" end="23396" title="Little Turtle" label="Little Turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q885741" start="23415" end="23426" title="Blue Jacket" label="Blue Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q962450" start="23548" end="23571" title="St. Clair&amp;#x27;s Defeat" label="St. Clair&amp;#x27;s Defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q21070813" start="23691" end="23720" title="Indian barrier state" label="Native American barrier state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324198" start="23728" end="23743" title="Treaty of Ghent" label="Treaty of Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="23760" end="23771" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q990715" start="23870" end="23889" title="Battle of Lake Erie" label="Battle of Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q645288" start="23898" end="23918" title="Battle of the Thames" label="Battle of the Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q257808" start="23934" end="23942" title="Tecumseh" label="Tecumseh"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="24102" end="24113" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q879980" start="24136" end="24150" title="Black Hawk War" label="Black Hawk War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="24284" end="24300" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="24318" end="24344" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935211" start="24413" end="24424" title="Camp Dubois" label="Camp Dubois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="24428" end="24436" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="24466" end="24484" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="24561" end="24575" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="24734" end="24743" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870609" start="25129" end="25145" title="History of the Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025333" start="25187" end="25203" title="Ripon, Wisconsin" label="Ripon, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q984374" start="25239" end="25256" title="Jackson, Michigan" label="Jackson, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q692062" start="25337" end="25343" title="Yankee" label="Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="25671" end="25688" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (United States)" label="Populist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="25758" end="25778" title="Progressive movement" label="Progressive movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q878682" start="25883" end="25895" title="Robert M. La Follette, Sr." label="La Follettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363538" start="26080" end="26102" title="Progressive Party (United States, 1912)" label="1912 Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638786" start="26235" end="26257" title="Progressive Party (United States, 1924–34)" label="1924 Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155530" start="26409" end="26421" title="United States non-interventionism" label="isolationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="26541" end="26556" title="German American" label="German American"/>
<link wikidata="Q115026" start="26561" end="26577" title="Swedish-American" label="Swedish-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q519730" start="26651" end="26665" title="Robert A. Taft" label="Robert A. Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436138" start="26671" end="26695" title="Robert R. McCormick" label="Colonel Robert McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q315189" start="28262" end="28276" title="Forty-Eighters" label="Forty-Eighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="29137" end="29147" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="29171" end="29188" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095499" start="29444" end="29466" title="Pinckney&amp;#x27;s Treaty" label="Pinckney&amp;#x27;s Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q459578" start="29557" end="29567" title="Erie Canal" label="Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="29652" end="29660" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q952760" start="29708" end="29735" title="Illinois and Michigan Canal" label="Illinois and Michigan Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q604673" start="29749" end="29767" title="continental divide" label="continental divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095748" start="29781" end="29796" title="Chicago Portage" label="Chicago Portage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="29857" end="29875" title="Mississippi Valley" label="Mississippi Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="29884" end="29898" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="29982" end="30003" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="30036" end="30044" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q909225" start="30054" end="30066" title="Mesabi Range" label="Mesabi Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069494" start="30083" end="30093" title="steel mill" label="steel mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q632014" start="30102" end="30121" title="Mid-Atlantic States" label="Mid-Atlantic States"/>
<link wikidata="Q753288" start="30127" end="30148" title="Saint Lawrence Seaway" label="Saint Lawrence Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="30236" end="30250" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131648" start="30406" end="30429" title="Life on the Mississippi" label="Life on the Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q215410" start="30446" end="30476" title="Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" label="Adventures of Huckleberry Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="30551" end="30561" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q961975" start="30635" end="30653" title="Hannibal, Missouri" label="Hannibal, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q459578" start="30911" end="30921" title="Erie Canal" label="Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="31001" end="31007" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="31012" end="31024" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="31394" end="31404" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428122" start="31410" end="31426" title="Class I railroad" label="Class I railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="31429" end="31442" title="Union Pacific" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="31444" end="31448" title="BNSF" label="BNSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="31450" end="31466" title="Norfolk Southern" label="Norfolk Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="31468" end="31471" title="CSX" label="CSX"/>
<link wikidata="Q624798" start="31473" end="31490" title="Canadian National" label="Canadian National"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="31496" end="31512" title="Canadian Pacific" label="Canadian Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664428" start="31615" end="31625" title="interurban" label="interurban"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="32171" end="32178" title="Detroit, Michigan" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="32354" end="32372" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q381381" start="32433" end="32450" title="William C. Durant" label="William C. Durant"/>
<link wikidata="Q27564" start="32456" end="32461" title="Dodge" label="Dodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q40971" start="32472" end="32479" title="Packard" label="Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q318044" start="32485" end="32500" title="Walter Chrysler" label="Walter Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q28993" start="32710" end="32719" title="GMC (automobile)" label="Grabowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="32979" end="32993" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q181114" start="32995" end="33003" title="Chrysler" label="Chrysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="33254" end="33261" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="33267" end="33293" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="33294" end="33305" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="emancipated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222" start="33461" end="33483" title="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin" label="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q102513" start="33493" end="33514" title="Harriet Beecher Stowe" label="Harriet Beecher Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q971767" start="33525" end="33532" title="Beloved (novel)" label="Beloved"/>
<link wikidata="Q72334" start="33542" end="33555" title="Toni Morrison" label="Toni Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q868393" start="33627" end="33647" title="Underground Railroad" label="Underground Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492" start="33763" end="33772" title="Lake Erie" label="Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308121" start="34653" end="34681" title="one-room school" label="one-room free public schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="34713" end="34739" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="34750" end="34760" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q863970" start="34843" end="34852" title="riverboat" label="riverboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426123" start="34855" end="34863" title="flatboat" label="flatboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16518" start="34866" end="34877" title="Barge" label="canal boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="34883" end="34892" title="rail transport" label="railroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="34968" end="34986" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="35070" end="35082" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="anti-slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499603" start="35083" end="35095" title="Free-Stater (Kansas)" label="Free-Staters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910733" start="35118" end="35132" title="Border Ruffian" label="Border Ruffian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723905" start="35172" end="35188" title="Kansas Territory" label="Kansas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="35343" end="35348" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q331377" start="35390" end="35405" title="Bleeding Kansas" label="Bleeding Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q864113" start="35412" end="35421" title="proxy war" label="proxy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357541" start="35430" end="35441" title="Northern United States" label="Northerners"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="35446" end="35457" title="Southern United States" label="Southerners"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="35476" end="35483" title="slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q436790" start="35536" end="35550" title="Horace Greeley" label="Horace Greeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q983247" start="35564" end="35580" title="New-York Tribune" label="New-York Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q619762" start="35631" end="35658" title="Kansas–Nebraska Act" label="Kansas–Nebraska Act of 1854"/>
<link wikidata="Q727854" start="35782" end="35801" title="Missouri Compromise of 1820" label="Missouri Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229762" start="35866" end="35885" title="Popular sovereignty in the United States" label="popular sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522748" start="36198" end="36209" title="The Slave Power" label="slave power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="36239" end="36249" title="democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="36662" end="36667" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q543165" start="36719" end="36740" title="Battle of Fort Sumter" label="Battle of Fort Sumter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346993" start="36795" end="36804" title="Free Soil Party" label="Free Soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q493840" start="36813" end="36829" title="Lawrence, Kansas" label="Lawrence, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474969" start="36909" end="36928" title="Sacking of Lawrence" label="Sacking of Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="36933" end="36945" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q189366" start="36946" end="36956" title="John Brown (abolitionist)" label="John Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489516" start="37012" end="37030" title="Pottawatomie massacre" label="Pottawatomie Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q374989" start="37034" end="37057" title="Franklin County, Kansas" label="Franklin County, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q590879" start="37271" end="37287" title="Fort Leavenworth" label="Fort Leavenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q210609" start="37296" end="37311" title="2nd Stryker Cavalry Regiment (United States)" label="Second Dragoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438701" start="37334" end="37344" title="Fort Riley" label="Fort Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="37817" end="37832" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="37876" end="37885" title="secession" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q669269" start="38082" end="38095" title="border states (American Civil War)" label="border states"/>
<link wikidata="Q460143" start="38283" end="38300" title="Lawrence Massacre" label="Lawrence Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268957" start="38330" end="38354" title="Quantrill&amp;#x27;s Raiders" label="Quantrill&amp;#x27;s Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="38538" end="38556" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309633" start="38567" end="38577" title="Immigration to the United States" label="immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="38591" end="38622" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="38659" end="38676" title="German American" label="German immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="38775" end="38791" title="Irish American" label="Irish immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q164714" start="38855" end="38860" title="Danes" label="Danes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170217" start="38862" end="38868" title="Czechs" label="Czechs"/>
<link wikidata="Q165192" start="38870" end="38876" title="Swedes" label="Swedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q188779" start="38882" end="38892" title="Norwegians" label="Norwegians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304424" start="38942" end="38949" title="Dakotas" label="Dakotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q170284" start="38955" end="38960" title="Finns" label="Finns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338" start="38964" end="38978" title="Upper Peninsula of Michigan" label="Upper Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="39025" end="39030" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="39032" end="39042" title="Hungarian people" label="Hungarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="39250" end="39267" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="39269" end="39280" title="immigration" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="39286" end="39298" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="39312" end="39333" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="39400" end="39418" title="Great Lakes region (North America)" label="Great Lakes states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309633" start="39563" end="39573" title="Immigration to the United States" label="immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227606" start="39882" end="39893" title="John Crerar (industrialist)" label="John Crerar"/>
<link wikidata="Q104008585" start="39895" end="39914" title="John Whitfield Bunn" label="John Whitfield Bunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329340" start="39916" end="39936" title="Richard Teller Crane" label="Richard Teller Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902746" start="39938" end="39952" title="Marshall Field" label="Marshall Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q17309021" start="39954" end="39966" title="John Farwell" label="John Farwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137028" start="39968" end="39984" title="Julius Rosenwald" label="Julius Rosenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="40095" end="40114" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="40131" end="40143" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q10585463" start="40324" end="40346" title="Millionaire&amp;#x27;s Row" label="Millionaire&amp;#x27;s Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="40387" end="40403" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="40423" end="40445" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="40766" end="40781" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659877" start="40790" end="40812" title="Second Great Migration (African American)" label="Second Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027162" start="40819" end="40831" title="Gateway Arch" label="Gateway Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406613" start="40916" end="40929" title="catenary arch" label="catenary arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q787170" start="41048" end="41087" title="westward expansion of the United States" label="westward expansion of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q45234" start="41118" end="41144" title="Gateway Arch National Park" label="Gateway Arch National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="41710" end="41719" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="41721" end="41731" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="41733" end="41742" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="41748" end="41755" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="41846" end="41855" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q138578" start="41868" end="41875" title="Hoboken, New Jersey" label="Hoboken"/>
<link wikidata="Q493794" start="41939" end="41946" title="Dubuque, Iowa" label="Dubuque"/>
<link wikidata="Q26887" start="41951" end="41966" title="Davenport, Iowa" label="Davenport, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43199" start="42000" end="42005" title="Omaha" label="Omaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q49268" start="42121" end="42140" title="Fort Wayne, Indiana" label="Fort Wayne, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113367" start="42295" end="42309" title="Over-the-Rhine" label="Over-the-Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420834" start="42349" end="42363" title="German Village" label="German Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="42373" end="42381" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q684127" start="42549" end="42559" title="Social Democratic Party (United States)" label="Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360013" start="42682" end="42687" title="Pabst Brewing Company" label="Pabst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286885" start="42689" end="42696" title="Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company" label="Schlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q658637" start="42698" end="42704" title="Miller Brewing Company" label="Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7910733" start="42710" end="42715" title="Valentin Blatz Brewing Company" label="Blatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="43165" end="43172" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q753942" start="43284" end="43301" title="Santa Fe Railroad" label="Santa Fe Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934208" start="43580" end="43590" title="Temperance movement in the United States" label="temperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q475261" start="43592" end="43601" title="Greenback Party" label="Greenback"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="43607" end="43615" title="Populist movement (United States, 19th Century)" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="43663" end="43671" title="Pietism" label="pietists"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="43737" end="43748" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592931" start="43797" end="43836" title="Woman&amp;#x27;s Christian Temperance Union" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Christian Temperance Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774264" start="43845" end="43863" title="Anti-Saloon League" label="Anti-Saloon League"/>
<link wikidata="Q156784" start="43895" end="43909" title="Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="18th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592931" start="44496" end="44535" title="Woman&amp;#x27;s Christian Temperance Union" label="Woman&amp;#x27;s Christian Temperance Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q205304" start="44666" end="44680" title="Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="19th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q270207" start="44755" end="44774" title="Carrie Chapman Catt" label="Carrie Chapman Catt"/>
<link wikidata="Q234604" start="44846" end="44859" title="Betty Friedan" label="Betty Friedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107463123" start="45287" end="45303" title="Haymarket Square (Chicago)" label="Haymarket Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q214148" start="45445" end="45461" title="Haymarket affair" label="Haymarket affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348639" start="45467" end="45489" title="Pullman Strike" label="Pullman Strike of 1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q334993" start="45603" end="45617" title="Eugene V. Debs" label="Eugene V. Debs"/>
<link wikidata="Q466585" start="45642" end="45664" title="American Railway Union" label="American Railway Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753183" start="45917" end="45923" title="National Grange of the Order of Patrons of Husbandry" label="Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435751" start="45944" end="45966" title="Farmers&amp;#x27; Alliance" label="Farmers&amp;#x27; Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q337794" start="46202" end="46216" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (United States)" label="Populist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="46401" end="46423" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066954" start="46517" end="46535" title="Farmer-Labor party" label="Farmer-Labor party"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="46560" end="46572" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023303" start="47071" end="47083" title="Indiana Klan" label="Indiana Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q932981" start="47288" end="47303" title="Muncie, Indiana" label="Muncie, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842128" start="47324" end="47353" title="Middletown studies" label="pioneering sociological study"/>
<link wikidata="Q445646" start="47367" end="47381" title="Robert S. Lynd" label="Robert S. Lynd"/>
<link wikidata="Q180989" start="47766" end="47777" title="Jane Addams" label="Jane Addams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331815" start="47782" end="47799" title="Ellen Gates Starr" label="Ellen Gates Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582905" start="47884" end="47894" title="Hull House" label="Hull House"/>
<link wikidata="Q371387" start="48140" end="48156" title="Hazen S. Pingree" label="Hazen S. Pingree"/>
<link wikidata="Q175239" start="48161" end="48175" title="Tom L. Johnson" label="Tom L. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412071" start="48244" end="48259" title="Samuel M. Jones" label="Samuel M. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q878682" start="48307" end="48328" title="Robert M. La Follette" label="Robert M. La Follette"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027205" start="48547" end="48561" title="Wisconsin idea" label="Wisconsin idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q603872" start="49763" end="49778" title="Interior Plains" label="Interior Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892634" start="49856" end="49873" title="Geography of the Interior United States" label="Interior Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="49993" end="50005" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="50345" end="50366" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599423" start="50372" end="50389" title="Great Lakes Basin" label="Great Lakes Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056653" start="50428" end="50456" title="North Shore (Lake Superior)" label="North Shore of Lake Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q76034" start="50501" end="50516" title="Canadian Shield" label="Canadian Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321468" start="50522" end="50537" title="Ozark Mountains" label="Ozark Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307487" start="50582" end="50596" title="Driftless Area" label="Driftless Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q620627" start="50708" end="50727" title="Appalachian Plateau" label="Appalachian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q194281" start="50954" end="50961" title="prairie" label="prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q96399941" start="51058" end="51075" title="prairie peninsula" label="prairie peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="51124" end="51131" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266509" start="51168" end="51176" title="hardwood" label="hardwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="51177" end="51186" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="51441" end="51449" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="51548" end="51557" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="51563" end="51571" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="51586" end="51594" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="51830" end="51847" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="51896" end="51904" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="52041" end="52050" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="52052" end="52060" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102416" start="52066" end="52074" title="Cenozoic" label="Cenozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680132" start="52267" end="52284" title="tallgrass prairie" label="tallgrass prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="52350" end="52362" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502172" start="52368" end="52386" title="shortgrass prairie" label="shortgrass prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="52399" end="52410" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="52486" end="52490" title="Maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="52491" end="52498" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="52509" end="52514" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52576" end="52594" title="Forest#Types" label="coniferous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061941" start="52667" end="52683" title="Central U.S. hardwood forests" label="hardwood forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="52801" end="52810" title="city" label="urbanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="52829" end="52841" title="agricultural" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="53532" end="53545" title="Northwest Territory" label="Old Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="53597" end="53615" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="53667" end="53685" title="Great Lakes region (North America)" label="Great Lakes states"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="53950" end="53962" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952511" start="54074" end="54089" title="Parallel 36°30′ north" label="36°30′ parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q727854" start="54106" end="54125" title="Missouri Compromise" label="Missouri Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="54174" end="54200" title="Slave and free states" label="slave and non-slave states"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="54240" end="54258" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="54281" end="54289" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="54406" end="54413" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="54466" end="54470" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558" start="54538" end="54544" title="Kansas" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="54607" end="54615" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="54655" end="54664" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032545" start="54728" end="54744" title="Red River Colony" label="Red River Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="54778" end="54786" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q669269" start="54888" end="54894" title="Border states (American Civil War)" label="border"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="54903" end="54911" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="54974" end="54986" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="55087" end="55091" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126227" start="55117" end="55144" title="Connecticut Western Reserve" label="Connecticut Western Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q14234625" start="55186" end="55198" title="Appalachian Ohio" label="southeastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="55237" end="55247" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="55250" end="55262" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="55325" end="55334" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176505" start="55493" end="55521" title="Council of State Governments" label="Council of State Governments"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55731" end="55745" title="Organization of the National Park Service#Midwest Region" label="Midwest Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="55753" end="55774" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="55825" end="55833" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q85785367" start="55839" end="55866" title="Midwest Archives Conference" label="Midwest Archives Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="55943" end="55951" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335573" start="55960" end="55975" title="Emerson College" label="Emerson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="56051" end="56059" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="56064" end="56071" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="56221" end="56227" title="German Americans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="56251" end="56256" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344183" start="56279" end="56286" title="English Americans" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="56309" end="56316" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745454" start="56359" end="56367" title="American ancestry" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="56486" end="56502" title="German Americans" label="German-Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207" start="56574" end="56586" title="North Dakota" label="North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="56588" end="56600" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="56602" end="56611" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="56613" end="56617" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553" start="56623" end="56631" title="Nebraska" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984465" start="56670" end="56683" title="upper Midwest" label="upper Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q105753422" start="56717" end="56739" title="Nordic and Scandinavian Americans" label="Scandinavian Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193808" start="56795" end="56804" title="Norwegian Americans" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q115026" start="56833" end="56840" title="Swedish Americans" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="57000" end="57005" title="African Americans" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="57096" end="57101" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="57251" end="57266" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453838" start="57418" end="57429" title="Redlining" label="segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784082" start="57487" end="57502" title="Race riots in the United States" label="racial violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989605" start="57514" end="57526" title="white flight" label="white flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="57536" end="57542" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="57608" end="57622" title="Chicago" label="Chicago&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="57686" end="57693" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="57714" end="57729" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="57898" end="57907" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="57913" end="57922" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q184116" start="57960" end="57964" title="Gary, Indiana" label="Gary"/>
<link wikidata="Q490584" start="57969" end="57974" title="Flint, Michigan" label="Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="58138" end="58146" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965974" start="58297" end="58330" title="demographics of the United States" label="demographics of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q290" start="58935" end="58938" title="sex" label="sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="59173" end="59182" title="Christians" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="59219" end="59229" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q769585" start="59307" end="59322" title="Catholic Church in the United States" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="59427" end="59436" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutherans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984465" start="59458" end="59471" title="Upper Midwest" label="Upper Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304424" start="59508" end="59519" title="the Dakotas" label="the Dakotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="59589" end="59606" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="59721" end="59728" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="59733" end="59738" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867335" start="60101" end="60112" title="History of agriculture in the United States" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="60480" end="60484" title="maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="60486" end="60491" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="60493" end="60501" title="soybeans" label="soybeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="60503" end="60507" title="oats" label="oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="60513" end="60519" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q251666" start="60589" end="60605" title="Henry A. Wallace" label="Henry A. Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464" start="60903" end="60908" title="Plough" label="plows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="61074" end="61084" title="blacksmith" label="blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776475" start="61091" end="61101" title="John Deere (inventor)" label="John Deere"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="61118" end="61123" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="61545" end="61549" title="Hog (swine)" label="hogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915" start="61764" end="61769" title="dairy cattle" label="dairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208989" start="61774" end="61785" title="beef cattle" label="beef cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066087" start="61995" end="62006" title="Morrill Act" label="Morrill Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11974426" start="62015" end="62032" title="Hatch Act of 1887" label="Hatch Act of 1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="62067" end="62088" title="land-grant university" label="land-grant university"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826572" start="62170" end="62201" title="agricultural experiment station" label="agricultural experiment station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167909" start="62207" end="62228" title="cooperative extension" label="cooperative extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693964" start="62250" end="62265" title="extension agent" label="extension agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="62282" end="62303" title="Iowa State University" label="Iowa State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064424" start="62378" end="62394" title="Iowa Legislature" label="Iowa Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="62518" end="62525" title="Soybean" label="Soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680132" start="63174" end="63191" title="tallgrass prairie" label="tallgrass prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133130" start="63581" end="63590" title="Corn Belt" label="Corn Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="64630" end="64635" title="Wheat" label="Wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="64692" end="64698" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="65055" end="65085" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="U.S. Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q618324" start="65127" end="65132" title="durum" label="durum"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="65633" end="65637" title="pork" label="pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="65646" end="65650" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q957434" start="65655" end="65659" title="veal" label="veal"/>
<link wikidata="Q637776" start="65672" end="65677" title="dairy" label="dairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="65695" end="65707" title="chicken eggs" label="chicken eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="65732" end="65739" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079848" start="65827" end="65853" title="List of cities by GDP" label="gross metropolitan product"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772346" start="66088" end="66118" title="Global Financial Centres Index" label="Global Financial Centres Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071867" start="66249" end="66271" title="Chicago Board of Trade" label="Chicago Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q183984" start="66391" end="66407" title="futures contract" label="futures contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298435" start="66478" end="66494" title="futures exchange" label="futures exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023876" start="66510" end="66519" title="CME Group" label="CME Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071967" start="66535" end="66562" title="Chicago Mercantile Exchange" label="Chicago Mercantile Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071867" start="66587" end="66609" title="Chicago Board of Trade" label="Chicago Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q120233" start="66622" end="66650" title="New York Mercantile Exchange" label="New York Mercantile Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253020" start="66664" end="66681" title="Dow Jones Indexes" label="Dow Jones Indexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q30635731" start="66760" end="66790" title="Chicago Board Options Exchange" label="Chicago Board Options Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="66835" end="66853" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633007" start="66863" end="66885" title="Chicago Stock Exchange" label="Chicago Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q965251" start="66948" end="66979" title="Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago" label="Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384538" start="67170" end="67179" title="Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166296" start="67181" end="67192" title="Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503528" start="67194" end="67205" title="Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383730" start="67211" end="67220" title="Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q798819" start="67298" end="67319" title="Huntington Bancshares" label="Huntington Bancshares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411810" start="67333" end="67349" title="Fifth Third Bank" label="Fifth Third Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740314" start="67369" end="67376" title="KeyCorp" label="KeyCorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q677488" start="67419" end="67434" title="Elevance Health" label="Elevance Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979886" start="67452" end="67472" title="Nationwide Insurance" label="Nationwide Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743730" start="67486" end="67511" title="American Family Insurance" label="American Family Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q217583" start="67535" end="67553" title="Berkshire Hathaway" label="Berkshire Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007336" start="67564" end="67584" title="State Farm Insurance" label="State Farm Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793182" start="67611" end="67639" title="Reinsurance Group of America" label="Reinsurance Group of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q959443" start="67643" end="67665" title="Chesterfield, Missouri" label="Chesterfield, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120253" start="67667" end="67699" title="Cincinnati Financial Corporation" label="Cincinnati Financial Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744450" start="67704" end="67735" title="American Modern Insurance Group" label="American Modern Insurance Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248721" start="67755" end="67776" title="Progressive Insurance" label="Progressive Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806388" start="67781" end="67803" title="Medical Mutual of Ohio" label="Medical Mutual of Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="67956" end="67965" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="67971" end="67985" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="68180" end="68199" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="John D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="68207" end="68219" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q719357" start="68392" end="68407" title="Cyrus McCormick" label="Cyrus McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q263800" start="68490" end="68513" title="International Harvester" label="International Harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="68526" end="68541" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Andrew Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q334055" start="68605" end="68623" title="Bessemer steel" label="Bessemer processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q72539" start="68738" end="68757" title="United States Steel" label="United States Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8768" start="69103" end="69113" title="Henry Ford" label="Henry Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q163132" start="69327" end="69338" title="Akron, Ohio" label="Akron, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="69443" end="69448" title="cargo" label="cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842128" start="69538" end="69556" title="Middletown studies" label="Middletown studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q932981" start="69586" end="69601" title="Muncie, Indiana" label="Muncie, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003229" start="69752" end="69775" title="Will it play in Peoria?" label="Will it play in Peoria?"/>
<link wikidata="Q233129" start="69815" end="69831" title="Peoria, Illinois" label="Peoria, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q829714" start="69932" end="69962" title="employment-to-population ratio" label="employment-to-population ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="69972" end="69998" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="70004" end="70026" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="70035" end="70056" title="Western United States" label="Western United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059474" start="70059" end="70065" title="Euchre" label="Euchre"/>
<link wikidata="Q743812" start="70300" end="70336" title="Association of American Universities" label="Association of American Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="70401" end="70422" title="research universities" label="research universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047060" start="70529" end="70560" title="Case Western Reserve University" label="Case Western Reserve University"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="70566" end="70587" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="70589" end="70612" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q178848" start="70614" end="70638" title="University of Notre Dame" label="University of Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="70644" end="70678" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="70708" end="70747" title="University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign" label="University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079140" start="70749" end="70779" title="Indiana University Bloomington" label="Indiana University Bloomington"/>
<link wikidata="Q182973" start="70785" end="70803" title="University of Iowa" label="University of Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q52413" start="70809" end="70829" title="University of Kansas" label="University of Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="70835" end="70857" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="70859" end="70884" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="70890" end="70913" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q579968" start="70919" end="70941" title="University of Missouri" label="University of Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="70947" end="70968" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q217741" start="70970" end="70987" title="Purdue University" label="Purdue University"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="70997" end="71028" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636494" start="71051" end="71069" title="List of research universities in the United States" label="research-intensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q153265" start="71102" end="71126" title="University of Cincinnati" label="University of Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q955764" start="71132" end="71165" title="University of Illinois at Chicago" label="University of Illinois at Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136919" start="71167" end="71188" title="Iowa State University" label="Iowa State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q31249" start="71190" end="71213" title="Kansas State University" label="Kansas State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353679" start="71219" end="71249" title="University of Nebraska-Lincoln" label="University of Nebraska-Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075339" start="71251" end="71266" title="Ohio University" label="Ohio University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472474" start="71268" end="71296" title="Southern Illinois University" label="Southern Illinois University"/>
<link wikidata="Q349055" start="71302" end="71324" title="Wayne State University" label="Wayne State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904557" start="71538" end="71552" title="Beloit College" label="Beloit College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666981" start="71554" end="71577" title="John Carroll University" label="John Carroll University"/>
<link wikidata="Q734774" start="71579" end="71601" title="Saint Louis University" label="Saint Louis University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017974" start="71603" end="71620" title="Butler University" label="Butler University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537759" start="71622" end="71647" title="Loyola University Chicago" label="Loyola University Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179603" start="71649" end="71666" title="DePaul University" label="DePaul University"/>
<link wikidata="Q770544" start="71668" end="71688" title="Creighton University" label="Creighton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305629" start="71690" end="71706" title="Drake University" label="Drake University"/>
<link wikidata="Q188370" start="71708" end="71728" title="Marquette University" label="Marquette University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092392" start="71730" end="71750" title="University of Dayton" label="University of Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849843" start="71756" end="71773" title="Xavier University" label="Xavier University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377182" start="71927" end="71948" title="liberal arts colleges" label="liberal arts colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298337" start="71963" end="71980" title="Augustana College (Illinois)" label="Augustana College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041671" start="71982" end="71998" title="Carleton College" label="Carleton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493503" start="72000" end="72018" title="Denison University" label="Denison University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179599" start="72020" end="72037" title="DePauw University" label="DePauw University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326502" start="72039" end="72054" title="Earlham College" label="Earlham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982991" start="72056" end="72072" title="Grinnell College" label="Grinnell College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366519" start="72074" end="72092" title="Hamline University" label="Hamline University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350383" start="72094" end="72111" title="Kalamazoo College" label="Kalamazoo College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797768" start="72113" end="72127" title="Kenyon College" label="Kenyon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q669442" start="72129" end="72141" title="Knox College (Illinois)" label="Knox College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141571" start="72143" end="72161" title="Macalester College" label="Macalester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809286" start="72163" end="72182" title="Lawrence University" label="Lawrence University"/>
<link wikidata="Q616591" start="72184" end="72199" title="Oberlin College" label="Oberlin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515763" start="72201" end="72217" title="St. Olaf College" label="St. Olaf College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146820" start="72219" end="72277" title="College of Saint Benedict and Saint John&amp;#x27;s University" label="College of Saint Benedict and Saint John&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551642" start="72279" end="72301" title="Mount Union University" label="Mount Union University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958639" start="72303" end="72317" title="Wabash College" label="Wabash College"/>
<link wikidata="Q747179" start="72319" end="72334" title="Wheaton College (Illinois)" label="Wheaton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109093" start="72340" end="72362" title="The College of Wooster" label="The College of Wooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="72642" end="72656" title="American South" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="72687" end="72705" title="Northeastern United States" label="American Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q12612" start="72773" end="72786" title="American West" label="American West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308526" start="72917" end="72933" title="General American" label="General American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057961" start="73316" end="73343" title="Northern Cities Vowel Shift" label="Northern Cities Vowel Shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060510" start="73517" end="73541" title="North Central American English" label="Upper Midwestern Dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="73579" end="73590" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="73596" end="73604" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842305" start="73673" end="73689" title="Midland American English" label="Northern Midland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144345" start="73854" end="73862" title="Southern American English" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506365" start="74304" end="74331" title="Great Migration (African American)" label="move throughout the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="74506" end="74511" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="74513" end="74522" title="bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="74528" end="74541" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="74571" end="74575" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="74577" end="74581" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="74587" end="74594" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="74631" end="74637" title="Motown" label="Motown"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="74648" end="74654" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="74671" end="74682" title="house music" label="house music"/>
<link wikidata="Q317128" start="74747" end="74764" title="Jelly Roll Morton" label="Jelly Roll Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q166813" start="74800" end="74818" title="Kansas City jazz" label="its own jazz style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071873" start="74837" end="74850" title="Chicago blues" label="Chicago blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q772494" start="74912" end="74917" title="Chess Records" label="Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093233" start="74922" end="74931" title="Alligator Records" label="Alligator"/>
<link wikidata="Q109767" start="74960" end="74978" title="The Blues Brothers (film)" label="The Blues Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="74987" end="75000" title="Rock and roll" label="Rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="75054" end="75063" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="75064" end="75075" title="disc jockey" label="disc jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q453956" start="75076" end="75086" title="Alan Freed" label="Alan Freed"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="75313" end="75329" title="rhythm and blues" label="rhythm and blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="75386" end="75391" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q212952" start="75393" end="75406" title="boogie woogie" label="boogie woogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="75408" end="75412" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q203775" start="75418" end="75429" title="swing music" label="swing music"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="75458" end="75464" title="gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="75466" end="75485" title="country music" label="country and western"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="75503" end="75513" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="75597" end="75623" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921" start="75647" end="75658" title="Chuck Berry" label="Chuck Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="76054" end="76068" title="Motown Records" label="Motown Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q125121" start="76171" end="76186" title="Aretha Franklin" label="Aretha Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q218837" start="76188" end="76200" title="the Supremes" label="the Supremes"/>
<link wikidata="Q435857" start="76202" end="76212" title="Mary Wells" label="Mary Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q653480" start="76214" end="76223" title="Four Tops" label="Four Tops"/>
<link wikidata="Q43267" start="76225" end="76238" title="the Jackson 5" label="the Jackson 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761222" start="76240" end="76274" title="The Miracles" label="Smokey Robinson &amp;amp; the Miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="76276" end="76289" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542338" start="76291" end="76306" title="the Marvelettes" label="the Marvelettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q846373" start="76308" end="76323" title="the Temptations" label="the Temptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326522" start="76329" end="76353" title="Martha and the Vandellas" label="Martha and the Vandellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="76466" end="76477" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q379033" start="76479" end="76489" title="arena rock" label="arena rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q747717" start="76491" end="76505" title="heartland rock" label="heartland rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q364131" start="76579" end="76588" title="Bob Seger" label="Bob Seger"/>
<link wikidata="Q345431" start="76590" end="76605" title="John Mellencamp" label="John Mellencamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q375792" start="76610" end="76622" title="Warren Zevon" label="Warren Zevon"/>
<link wikidata="Q747717" start="76695" end="76709" title="heartland rock" label="heartland rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q845084" start="76882" end="76896" title="REO Speedwagon" label="REO Speedwagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q590102" start="76909" end="76913" title="Styx (band)" label="Styx"/>
<link wikidata="Q204328" start="76930" end="76936" title="Kansas (band)" label="Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="76939" end="76945" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571747" start="76947" end="76955" title="The Time (band)" label="The Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618166" start="76957" end="76967" title="Morris Day" label="Morris Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688167" start="76969" end="76982" title="Jesse Johnson (musician)" label="Jesse Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q472895" start="76984" end="77005" title="Alexander O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Alexander O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733289" start="77007" end="77017" title="The Family (band)" label="The Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152926" start="77035" end="77048" title="Paul Peterson" label="Paul Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q619324" start="77051" end="77062" title="Apollonia 6" label="Apollonia 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992193" start="77064" end="77072" title="Vanity 6" label="Vanity 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063111" start="77089" end="77114" title="Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis" label="Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868046" start="77124" end="77141" title="Minneapolis sound" label="Minneapolis sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="77144" end="77155" title="House Music" label="House Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="77175" end="77197" title="Electronic Dance Music" label="Electronic Dance Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q205322" start="77370" end="77386" title="Frankie Knuckles" label="Frankie Knuckles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351604" start="77388" end="77406" title="Marshall Jefferson" label="Marshall Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="77580" end="77586" title="Techno" label="Techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q366714" start="77675" end="77686" title="Juan Atkins" label="Juan Atkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q923104" start="77688" end="77699" title="Derrick May (musician)" label="Derrick May"/>
<link wikidata="Q923090" start="77705" end="77721" title="Kevin Saunderson" label="Kevin Saunderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="77823" end="77832" title="classical music" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="77833" end="77841" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644646" start="77895" end="77911" title="Easley Blackwood, Jr." label="Easley Blackwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390127" start="77913" end="77927" title="Kenneth Gaburo" label="Kenneth Gaburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470396" start="77929" end="77948" title="Salvatore Martirano" label="Salvatore Martirano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129780" start="77954" end="77966" title="Ralph Shapey" label="Ralph Shapey"/>
<link wikidata="Q103651" start="77979" end="77991" title="Glenn Miller" label="Glenn Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281750" start="77996" end="78012" title="Meredith Willson" label="Meredith Willson"/>
<link wikidata="Q958467" start="78021" end="78035" title="Leslie Bassett" label="Leslie Bassett"/>
<link wikidata="Q710714" start="78037" end="78051" title="William Bolcom" label="William Bolcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251665" start="78053" end="78070" title="Michael Daugherty" label="Michael Daugherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q511191" start="78076" end="78092" title="David Gillingham" label="David Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239841" start="78105" end="78115" title="Donald Erb" label="Donald Erb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630943" start="78124" end="78140" title="Dominick Argento" label="Dominick Argento"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498629" start="78145" end="78159" title="Stephen Paulus" label="Stephen Paulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="78230" end="78254" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="78262" end="78283" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="78291" end="78322" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="78330" end="78374" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="78383" end="78405" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="78413" end="78432" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101443" start="78444" end="78479" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer League" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="78543" end="78550" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="78552" end="78557" title="Chicago Bears" label="Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="78565" end="78569" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="78571" end="78580" title="Chicago White Sox" label="White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="78588" end="78593" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q796358" start="78601" end="78604" title="Chicago Sky" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="78613" end="78623" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q308683" start="78631" end="78635" title="Chicago Fire FC" label="Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071986" start="78643" end="78648" title="Chicago Stars Football Club" label="Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="78658" end="78668" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q223511" start="78670" end="78677" title="Cincinnati Bengals" label="Bengals"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="78685" end="78689" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q20855983" start="78697" end="78710" title="FC Cincinnati" label="FC Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="78732" end="78741" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="78743" end="78749" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="78757" end="78766" title="Cleveland Guardians" label="Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q162990" start="78774" end="78783" title="Cleveland Cavaliers" label="Cavaliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="78792" end="78800" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207507" start="78802" end="78814" title="Columbus Blue Jackets" label="Blue Jackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q457163" start="78822" end="78826" title="Columbus Crew SC" label="Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="78835" end="78842" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q271880" start="78844" end="78849" title="Detroit Lions" label="Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="78857" end="78863" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="78871" end="78878" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="78886" end="78895" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q47430" start="78904" end="78913" title="Green Bay, Wisconsin" label="Green Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="78915" end="78922" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="78931" end="78943" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="78945" end="78950" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q170329" start="78958" end="78964" title="Indiana Pacers" label="Pacers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631017" start="78972" end="78977" title="Indiana Fever" label="Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307187" start="78987" end="78998" title="Kansas City" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="79000" end="79006" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="79014" end="79020" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q329812" start="79028" end="79036" title="Sporting Kansas City" label="Sporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q104804155" start="79059" end="79066" title="Kansas City Current" label="Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="79076" end="79085" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="79087" end="79094" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q169637" start="79102" end="79107" title="Milwaukee Bucks" label="Bucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480013" start="79116" end="79138" title="Minneapolis–Saint Paul" label="Minneapolis–Saint Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q221150" start="79140" end="79147" title="Minnesota Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q604879" start="79155" end="79160" title="Minnesota Twins" label="Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q170558" start="79168" end="79180" title="Minnesota Timberwolves" label="Timberwolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474850" start="79188" end="79192" title="Minnesota Lynx" label="Lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q206357" start="79201" end="79205" title="Minnesota Wild" label="Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828435" start="79213" end="79219" title="Minnesota United FC" label="United"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="79241" end="79250" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="79252" end="79261" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q207735" start="79269" end="79274" title="St. Louis Blues" label="Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q66642491" start="79282" end="79289" title="St. Louis MLS team" label="City SC"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="79323" end="79342" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q862958" start="79347" end="79366" title="List of World Series champions" label="World Series titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="79369" end="79384" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q862958" start="79388" end="79407" title="List of World Series champions" label="World Series titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q128109" start="79410" end="79423" title="Chicago Bulls" label="Chicago Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626167" start="79427" end="79437" title="List of NBA champions" label="NBA titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="79444" end="79459" title="Detroit Pistons" label="Detroit Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626167" start="79463" end="79473" title="List of NBA champions" label="NBA titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q169637" start="79476" end="79491" title="Milwaukee Bucks" label="Milwaukee Bucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626167" start="79495" end="79505" title="List of NBA champions" label="NBA titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474850" start="79512" end="79526" title="Minnesota Lynx" label="Minnesota Lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262883" start="79530" end="79541" title="List of WNBA champions" label="WNBA titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="79548" end="79565" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q909800" start="79569" end="79586" title="List of Super Bowl champions" label="Super Bowl titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q205033" start="79621" end="79634" title="Chicago Bears" label="Chicago Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q909800" start="79638" end="79654" title="List of Super Bowl champions" label="Super Bowl title"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="79688" end="79704" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q223522" start="79754" end="79772" title="Kansas City Chiefs" label="Kansas City Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q909800" start="79776" end="79793" title="List of Super Bowl champions" label="Super Bowl titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="79823" end="79841" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q862958" start="79845" end="79864" title="List of World Series champions" label="World Series titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q194116" start="79871" end="79888" title="Detroit Red Wings" label="Detroit Red Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783598" start="79893" end="79911" title="List of Stanley Cup champions" label="Stanley Cup titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="79918" end="79932" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q209636" start="79962" end="79980" title="Chicago Blackhawks" label="Chicago Blackhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q457163" start="80013" end="80026" title="Columbus Crew" label="Columbus Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="80045" end="80049" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q729478" start="80070" end="80088" title="Big Ten Conference" label="Big Ten Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q858430" start="80097" end="80114" title="Big 12 Conference" label="Big 12 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892868" start="80265" end="80284" title="Cincinnati Bearcats" label="Cincinnati Bearcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071648" start="80286" end="80310" title="Illinois Fighting Illini" label="Illinois Fighting Illini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140337" start="80312" end="80328" title="Indiana Hoosiers" label="Indiana Hoosiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918449" start="80330" end="80343" title="Iowa Hawkeyes" label="Iowa Hawkeyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008553" start="80345" end="80364" title="Iowa State Cyclones" label="Iowa State Cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163297" start="80366" end="80381" title="Kansas Jayhawks" label="Kansas Jayhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568142" start="80383" end="80404" title="Kansas State Wildcats" label="Kansas State Wildcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174102" start="80406" end="80425" title="Michigan Wolverines" label="Michigan Wolverines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325235" start="80427" end="80450" title="Michigan State Spartans" label="Michigan State Spartans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465468" start="80452" end="80476" title="Minnesota Golden Gophers" label="Minnesota Golden Gophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q691912" start="80478" end="80498" title="Nebraska Cornhuskers" label="Nebraska Cornhuskers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568143" start="80500" end="80521" title="Northwestern Wildcats" label="Northwestern Wildcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927468" start="80523" end="80542" title="Ohio State Buckeyes" label="Ohio State Buckeyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752323" start="80544" end="80563" title="Purdue Boilermakers" label="Purdue Boilermakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098117" start="80573" end="80590" title="Wisconsin Badgers" label="Wisconsin Badgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3575607" start="80650" end="80660" title="Akron Zips" label="Akron Zips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938064" start="80662" end="80682" title="Ball State Cardinals" label="Ball State Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919388" start="80684" end="80699" title="Butler Bulldogs" label="Butler Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184000" start="80701" end="80719" title="Creighton Bluejays" label="Creighton Bluejays"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074591" start="80748" end="80761" title="Dayton Flyers" label="Dayton Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595224" start="80763" end="80788" title="Grand Valley State Lakers" label="Grand Valley State Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3506780" start="80790" end="80813" title="Indiana State Sycamores" label="Indiana State Sycamores"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110049" start="80815" end="80840" title="Kent State Golden Flashes" label="Kent State Golden Flashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837064" start="80842" end="80865" title="Marquette Golden Eagles" label="Marquette Golden Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422875" start="80867" end="80881" title="Miami RedHawks" label="Miami RedHawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191824" start="80883" end="80901" title="Milwaukee Panthers" label="Milwaukee Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q264545" start="80903" end="80918" title="Missouri Tigers" label="Missouri Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679994" start="80920" end="80940" title="Missouri State Bears" label="Missouri State Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143452" start="80942" end="80967" title="Northern Illinois Huskies" label="Northern Illinois Huskies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055047" start="80969" end="80993" title="North Dakota State Bison" label="North Dakota State Bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q592253" start="80995" end="81020" title="Notre Dame Fighting Irish" label="Notre Dame Fighting Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908034" start="81022" end="81034" title="Ohio Bobcats" label="Ohio Bobcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566988" start="81036" end="81066" title="South Dakota State Jackrabbits" label="South Dakota State Jackrabbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437966" start="81068" end="81082" title="Toledo Rockets" label="Toledo Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926069" start="81084" end="81108" title="Western Michigan Broncos" label="Western Michigan Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167295" start="81110" end="81132" title="Wichita State Shockers" label="Wichita State Shockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043281" start="81138" end="81155" title="Xavier Musketeers" label="Xavier Musketeers"/>
<link wikidata="Q86660967" start="81351" end="81365" title="Football Championship Subdivision" label="Division I FCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284224" start="81467" end="81481" title="Milwaukee Mile" label="Milwaukee Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q172732" start="81615" end="81642" title="Indianapolis Motor Speedway" label="Indianapolis Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="81743" end="81769" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500-Mile Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="81783" end="81797" title="IndyCar series" label="IndyCar series"/>
<link wikidata="Q913496" start="81804" end="81817" title="Brickyard 400" label="Brickyard 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="81819" end="81825" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q10534956" start="81836" end="81854" title="IndyCar Grand Prix" label="IndyCar Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q648512" start="81877" end="81889" title="Road America" label="Road America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931770" start="81894" end="81902" title="Mid-Ohio Sports Car Course" label="Mid-Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q742207" start="82003" end="82028" title="Lucas Oil Raceway at Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis Raceway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954100" start="82042" end="82061" title="NHRA U.S. Nationals" label="NHRA U.S. Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723278" start="82064" end="82095" title="Michigan International Speedway" label="Michigan International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q764291" start="82097" end="82117" title="Chicagoland Speedway" label="Chicagoland Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723946" start="82119" end="82134" title="Kansas Speedway" label="Kansas Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362127" start="82136" end="82165" title="Gateway International Raceway" label="Gateway International Raceway"/>
<link wikidata="Q605644" start="82175" end="82188" title="Iowa Speedway" label="Iowa Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660757" start="82194" end="82211" title="Kentucky Speedway" label="Kentucky Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120360" start="82326" end="82354" title="Cincinnati metropolitan area" label="Cincinnati metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371046" start="82422" end="82441" title="Memorial Tournament" label="Memorial Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505370" start="82443" end="82459" title="BMW Championship (PGA Tour)" label="BMW Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120006" start="82464" end="82482" title="John Deere Classic" label="John Deere Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986373" start="83120" end="83130" title="West River (South Dakota)" label="West River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329270" start="83234" end="83244" title="East River (South Dakota)" label="East River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="83314" end="83324" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="83513" end="83518" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399638" start="83551" end="83562" title="Upper South" label="Upper South"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="83735" end="83740" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slave"/>
<link wikidata="Q727854" start="83800" end="83819" title="Missouri Compromise" label="Missouri Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988152" start="83822" end="83842" title="Western Pennsylvania" label="Western Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q234061" start="83873" end="83877" title="Erie, Pennsylvania" label="Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="83882" end="83892" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q24460" start="83964" end="83973" title="Northeastern United States" label="Northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="83984" end="83992" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="84059" end="84068" title="Southern United States" label="the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338" start="84736" end="84763" title="Upper Peninsula of Michigan" label="Upper Peninsula of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="84859" end="84875" title="French Canadians" label="French Canadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060510" start="84891" end="84904" title="Yooper accent" label="Yooper accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q44676" start="84929" end="84945" title="Canadian English" label="Canadian English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="85247" end="85265" title="Great Lakes Region" label="Great Lakes Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="85313" end="85325" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879807" start="85836" end="85860" title="Missouri Bellwether" label="former bellwether status"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="85970" end="85974" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="85995" end="85999" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="86180" end="86197" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="86201" end="86205" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q996610" start="86222" end="86242" title="Nebraska Legislature" label="Nebraska Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443004" start="86417" end="86430" title="Iowa caucuses" label="Iowa caucuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q47566" start="86489" end="86520" title="United States presidential election" label="presidential nominating process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="86647" end="86655" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6103950" start="86692" end="86705" title="J. B. Pritzker" label="J.B. Pritzker"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="86710" end="86720" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437547" start="86759" end="86784" title="Illinois General Assembly" label="Illinois General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q833443" start="86862" end="86883" title="United States congressional delegations from Illinois" label="U.S. House delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822309" start="86934" end="86944" title="Tony Evers" label="Tony Evers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270274" start="86973" end="86994" title="Wisconsin Legislature" label="Wisconsin Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846966" start="87083" end="87104" title="United States congressional delegations from Wisconsin" label="U.S. House delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q195594" start="87132" end="87144" title="purple state" label="purple state"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018345" start="87206" end="87210" title="2016 United States presidential election in Wisconsin" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q60519469" start="87212" end="87216" title="2020 United States presidential election in Wisconsin" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q109448232" start="87222" end="87226" title="2024 United States presidential election in Wisconsin" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892846" start="87294" end="87298" title="1992 United States presidential election in Michigan" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100257" start="87302" end="87306" title="2012 United States presidential election in Michigan" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="87308" end="87316" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018291" start="87479" end="87483" title="2016 United States presidential election in Michigan" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="87530" end="87542" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q109727353" start="87612" end="87616" title="2024 United States presidential election in Michigan" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270273" start="87622" end="87642" title="Michigan Legislature" label="Michigan Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494600" start="87731" end="87737" title="Michigan Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494590" start="87794" end="87799" title="Michigan House of Representatives" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851292" start="87897" end="87937" title="United States congressional delegations from Michigan" label="U.S. House of Representatives delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="88087" end="88094" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="88107" end="88119" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q14776422" start="88214" end="88249" title="United States congressional delegations from Indiana" label="U.S. House congressional delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634937" start="88323" end="88347" title="Indiana General Assembly" label="Indiana General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363468" start="88404" end="88415" title="Mike DeWine" label="Mike DeWine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080820" start="88449" end="88470" title="Ohio General Assembly" label="Ohio General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="88704" end="88716" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018318" start="88767" end="88771" title="2016 United States presidential election in Ohio" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q60442050" start="88776" end="88780" title="2020 United States presidential election in Ohio" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405094" start="88886" end="88899" title="2022 United States elections" label="2022 midterms"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370994" start="89073" end="89082" title="2022 Ohio gubernatorial election" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935729" start="89105" end="89113" title="JD Vance" label="JD Vance"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038270" start="89131" end="89149" title="2022 United States Senate election in Ohio" label="to the U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="89455" end="89472" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="89495" end="89510" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q699646" start="89514" end="89518" title="1964 United States presidential election" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q718542" start="89842" end="89852" title="Ben Nelson" label="Ben Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q39609" start="90150" end="90164" title="Terry Branstad" label="Terry Branstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q13475242" start="90336" end="90346" title="Joni Ernst" label="Joni Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q966154" start="90365" end="90377" title="Bruce Braley" label="Bruce Braley"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="90526" end="90540" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="90580" end="90592" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064424" start="90738" end="90759" title="Iowa General Assembly" label="Iowa General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q115823593" start="90775" end="90789" title="2022 Iowa elections" label="2022 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190344" start="90812" end="90821" title="Red states and blue states" label="red state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409269" start="90947" end="90959" title="Kim Reynolds" label="Kim Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901784" start="90964" end="90973" title="2022 Iowa gubernatorial election" label="reelected"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="91159" end="91172" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="91383" end="91397" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="91403" end="91416" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q699872" start="91506" end="91532" title="2016 United States Presidential Election" label="2016 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117432" start="91577" end="91604" title="Minnesota legislature" label="Minnesota state legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589682" start="91616" end="91642" title="Governor of Minnesota" label="the governor&amp;#x27;s office"/>
<link wikidata="Q782050" start="91663" end="91674" title="Minnesota House of Representatives" label="State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892381" start="91790" end="91830" title="United States congressional delegations from Minnesota" label="a 4-4 evenly split U.S. House delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892872" start="91978" end="91982" title="1956 United States presidential election in Missouri" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q311719" start="92015" end="92030" title="Adlai Stevenson II" label="Adlai Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781762" start="92318" end="92339" title="United States congressional delegations from Missouri" label="U.S. House delegation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892140" start="92530" end="92565" title="2018 United States Senate elections" label="2018 United States Senate elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879566" start="92634" end="92659" title="Missouri General Assembly" label="Missouri General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192803" start="92679" end="92718" title="Cuisine of the Midwestern United States" label="Cuisine of the Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934244" start="92721" end="92763" title="Territories of the United States on stamps" label="Territories of the United States on stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014377" start="95514" end="95528" title="Paul Wallace Gates" label="Gates, Paul W."/>
<link wikidata="Q7743576" start="96878" end="96909" title="The Journal of Economic History" label="The Journal of Economic History"/>
<link wikidata="Q15707062" start="98304" end="98344" title="The Mississippi Valley Historical Review" label="The Mississippi Valley Historical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q50082892" start="98825" end="98840" title="Jon C. Teaford" label="Teaford, Jon C."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104698" wikidata="Q65616" url="?curid=104698" title="Sardis City, Alabama">
<text>Sardis City is a town in Etowah and Marshall counties in the U.S. state of Alabama. It is part of the Gadsden Metropolitan Statistical Area. It originally incorporated in May 1963 under the name of &quot;Sardis&quot;. It became Sardis City in the 1980s. At the 2020 census, the population was 1,814.

==Geography==
Sardis City is located in northern Etowah County at (34.173967, -86.121319). A very small section of the town extends north into Marshall County. The town is bordered to the north by the city of Boaz. U.S. Route 431 passes through the west side of the town, leading northwest through Boaz to Albertville and southeast to Gadsden, the Etowah county seat.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Sardis City has a total area of , of which , or 0.20%, are water. The town sits at above sea level atop the plateau of Sand Mountain. The town drains east to Short Creek, a north-flowing tributary of the Tennessee River. The Tennessee Valley Divide passes just west of the town limits.

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
At the 2000 census there were 1,438 people, 572 households, and 458 families living in the town. The population density was . There were 597 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 99.10% White, 0.14% Black or African American, 0.07% Native American, 0.14% Pacific Islander, and 0.56% from two or more races. 0.63% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 572 households 32.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 68.7% were married couples living together, 8.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 19.9% were non-families. 18.5% of households were one person and 9.6% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.51 and the average family size was 2.82.

The age distribution was 22.2% under the age of 18, 9.3% from 18 to 24, 28.4% from 25 to 44, 26.1% from 45 to 64, and 14.0% 65 or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.6 males.

The median household income was $36,000 and the median family income was $44,063. Males had a median income of $31,875 versus $21,711 for females. The per capita income for the town was $18,411. About 7.4% of families and 10.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.9% of those under age 18 and 10.7% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census there were 1,704 people, 657 households, and 509 families living in the town. The population density was . There were 703 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 98.2% White, 0.4% Black or African American, 0.1% Native American, 0.0% Pacific Islander, and 0.6% from two or more races. 0.7% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 657 households 31.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 63.0% were married couples living together, 10.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.5% were non-families. 18.5% of households were one person and 10.5% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.59 and the average family size was 2.97.

The age distribution was 24.4% under the age of 18, 6.8% from 18 to 24, 24.6% from 25 to 44, 28.1% from 45 to 64, and 16.1% 65 or older. The median age was 40.9 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.3 males.

The median household income was $45,714 and the median family income was $59,352. Males had a median income of $44,091 versus $28,333 for females. The per capita income for the town was $22,767. About 6.2% of families and 11.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.9% of those under age 18 and 33.5% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,814 people, 686 households, and 481 families residing in the town.

== References ==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q65616" start="0" end="11" title="Sardis City, Alabama" label="Sardis City"/>
<link wikidata="Q493951" start="25" end="31" title="Etowah County, Alabama" label="Etowah"/>
<link wikidata="Q502925" start="36" end="44" title="Marshall County, Alabama" label="Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="61" end="71" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="75" end="82" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q493951" start="102" end="139" title="Gadsden Metropolitan Statistical Area" label="Gadsden Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="261" end="272" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q79855" start="510" end="514" title="Boaz, Alabama" label="Boaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816707" start="516" end="530" title="U.S. Route 431" label="U.S. Route 431"/>
<link wikidata="Q79675" start="607" end="618" title="Albertville, Alabama" label="Albertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q79389" start="636" end="643" title="Gadsden, Alabama" label="Gadsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="656" end="667" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="687" end="705" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415837" start="826" end="839" title="Sand Mountain (Alabama)" label="Sand Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="911" end="926" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700226" start="932" end="955" title="Tennessee Valley Divide" label="Tennessee Valley Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="1036" end="1047" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1215" end="1228" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2332" end="2344" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2445" end="2456" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2624" end="2637" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3738" end="3750" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3854" end="3879" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104699" wikidata="Q65928" url="?curid=104699" title="Walnut Grove, Alabama">
<text>Walnut Grove is a town in Etowah County, Alabama, United States. It is part of the Gadsden Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2010 census the population was 698 (is much larger than census reports as most do not fill out the census reports in the area and most have an Altoona mailing address as well. ) . From 1880 until the 1960 U.S. Census, with the exclusion of 1890 when no figure was reported, Walnut Grove had the distinction of being the least populated community wholly within Etowah County. It lost that distinction in 1970 to newly incorporated Ridgeville which has held the title since.

==History==
Walnut Grove was part of Blount County before it was included in Baine County (now Etowah) in 1866. Walnut Grove was settled by the Battles family in 1813, the Morton family, and the Carnes family (namesake of the Carnes Chapel area near the ghost town of Bennettsville off of US 278) in 1823. Around 1825, the town was known as &quot;Thomas Crossroads&quot;, after landowner Jordan D. Thomas. In 1848, the town was named &quot;Cornelius&quot;, after postmaster Harvey Cornelius. In 1849, it was renamed &quot;Walnut Grove&quot;.

Walnut Grove was burned during the Civil War.

The first college preparatory school for males and females in northeast Alabama was established by act of Legislature in 1884. The Walnut Grove College ran for 15 years, and during the college&#x27;s peak the town had grown to have 13 stores, including a drug store with a soda fountain. The Walnut Grove College closed in 1899 as high schools were being established in Etowah County.

The town was incorporated in 1886, with Colonel W.T Murphree as the first mayor.

In 1917, the finest grade of magnesium was discovered near Silver Gap at Red Mountain, at the western edge of town. The magnesium was mined and refined by Bessemer Mills in Birmingham and Eastman Corporation in Kingsport, Tennessee, in the 1930s and 1940s.

==Geography==
Walnut Grove is located in western Etowah County at . It is bordered to the south by the town of Altoona and to the west by Blount County. U.S. Route 278 passes through the town, leading east to Gadsden, the Etowah County seat, and west to Cullman.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Walnut Grove has a total area of , of which , or 0.24%, is water.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 710 people, 273 households, and 209 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 294 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 98.31% White, 0.14% Native American, 0.14% Asian, and 1.41% from two or more races. 0.42% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 273 households, out of which 39.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.9% were married couples living together, 13.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 23.1% were non-families. 21.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.60 and the average family size was 3.02.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 30.1% under the age of 18, 8.2% from 18 to 24, 27.7% from 25 to 44, 25.2% from 45 to 64, and 8.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.0 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $26,688, and the median income for a family was $29,519. Males had a median income of $25,982 versus $17,279 for females. The per capita income for the town was $12,372. About 15.3% of families and 17.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.9% of those under age 18 and 17.5% of those age 65 or over.

==Climate==
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Walnut Grove has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps. 

On March 13, 1993, Walnut Grove set the record for the highest 24-hour snowfall recorded in Alabama at .

==References==
==External links==
*Walnut Grove - entry in the &quot;Encyclopedia of Alabama&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q65928" start="0" end="12" title="Walnut Grove, Alabama" label="Walnut Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q493951" start="26" end="39" title="Etowah County, Alabama" label="Etowah County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="41" end="48" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q493951" start="83" end="120" title="Gadsden Metropolitan Statistical Area" label="Gadsden Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q67218" start="559" end="569" title="Ridgeville, Alabama" label="Ridgeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q111250" start="640" end="653" title="Blount County, Alabama" label="Blount County"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1181" end="1190" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="1690" end="1699" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="1834" end="1844" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q241814" start="1872" end="1892" title="Kingsport, Tennessee" label="Kingsport, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q444149" start="2030" end="2037" title="Altoona, Alabama" label="Altoona"/>
<link wikidata="Q111250" start="2057" end="2070" title="Blount County, Alabama" label="Blount County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248584" start="2072" end="2086" title="U.S. Route 278" label="U.S. Route 278"/>
<link wikidata="Q79389" start="2128" end="2135" title="Gadsden, Alabama" label="Gadsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q79484" start="2173" end="2180" title="Cullman, Alabama" label="Cullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2200" end="2218" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2314" end="2320" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2534" end="2539" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2547" end="2562" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2570" end="2575" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2640" end="2648" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2652" end="2658" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2781" end="2796" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3591" end="3608" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3702" end="3714" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="3919" end="3948" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="3976" end="4001" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104700" wikidata="Q66150" url="?curid=104700" title="Belk, Alabama">
<text>Belk is a town in Fayette County, Alabama, United States. Its citizens voted to incorporate in January 1969. At the 2020 census, the population was 186.

==Geography==
Belk is located in western Fayette County at (33.645856, -87.930934). It is on the east side of the valley of Luxapalilla Creek, a southwest-flowing tributary of the Tombigbee River. Alabama State Route 96 runs through the town, leading northeast to Fayette, the county seat, and southwest to Millport. Columbus, Mississippi, is to the southwest.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Belk has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 214 people, 97 households, and 70 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 111 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 97.20% White, 0.93% Black or African American, 1.40% from other races, and 0.47% from two or more races. 1.40% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 97 households, out of which 23.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.8% were married couples living together, 7.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.8% were non-families. 26.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 18.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.21 and the average family size was 2.64.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 20.1% under the age of 18, 2.8% from 18 to 24, 25.2% from 25 to 44, 32.7% from 45 to 64, and 19.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 47 years. For every 100 females, there were 87.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 81.9 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $32,188, and the median income for a family was $43,333. Males had a median income of $30,313 versus $18,500 for females. The per capita income for the town was $16,848. About 2.8% of families and 6.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.5% of those under the age of 18 and 10.7% of those 65 or over.

==Government==
Ronald Waldrop was mayor until his death in 2020.

==See also==
* List of cities and towns in Alabama

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66150" start="0" end="4" title="Belk, Alabama" label="Belk"/>
<link wikidata="Q493957" start="18" end="32" title="Fayette County, Alabama" label="Fayette County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="34" end="41" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="116" end="127" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="278" end="295" title="Luxapalilla Creek" label="Luxapalilla Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297877" start="334" end="349" title="Tombigbee River" label="Tombigbee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q873880" start="351" end="373" title="Alabama State Route 96" label="Alabama State Route 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q79370" start="418" end="425" title="Fayette, Alabama" label="Fayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="431" end="442" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q67440" start="461" end="469" title="Millport, Alabama" label="Millport"/>
<link wikidata="Q985648" start="471" end="492" title="Columbus, Mississippi" label="Columbus, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="533" end="551" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="618" end="624" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="836" end="841" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="849" end="854" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="858" end="874" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="887" end="898" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="963" end="971" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="975" end="981" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1103" end="1118" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1914" end="1931" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2023" end="2035" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q256352" start="2195" end="2230" title="List of cities and towns in Alabama" label="List of cities and towns in Alabama"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104701" wikidata="Q65961" url="?curid=104701" title="Berry, Alabama">
<text>Berry is a town in Fayette County, Alabama, United States. At the 2010 census the population was 1,148, down from 1,238 at the 2000 census.

==History==
The town was named for Thompson Berry, a local landowner. The town incorporated in 1883 as &quot;Berry Station&quot;. However, the first elections were not held until 1899 and the town did not appear on the U.S. Census until 1900. In the 1920s, it shortened its name to Berry. On April 27, 2011, the town was struck twice by tornadoes.

==Geography==
Berry is located in southeastern Fayette County at (33.657836, -87.606084). Alabama State Route 18 runs through the town, leading west to Fayette, the county seat, and east to Oakman.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which , or 0.05%, is water. The town lies between the North River and its tributary, Cedar Creek. It is part of the watershed of the Black Warrior River, the principal tributary of the Tombigbee River.

==Demographics==
At the 2000 census there were 1,238 people, 516 households, and 352 families living in the town. The population density was . There were 574 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 91.44% White, 6.38% Black or African American, 0.32% Native American, 1.05% from other races, and 0.81% from two or more races. 1.70% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 516 households 32.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.0% were married couples living together, 15.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.6% were non-families. 29.7% of households were one person and 13.0% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size was 2.96.

The age distribution was 26.9% under the age of 18, 9.5% from 18 to 24, 25.8% from 25 to 44, 24.7% from 45 to 64, and 13.0% 65 or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 81.7 males.

The median household income was $20,214 and the median family income was $26,083. Males had a median income of $28,500 versus $20,714 for females. The per capita income for the town was $12,635. About 31.4% of families and 32.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 44.1% of those under age 18 and 30.2% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census there were 1,148 people, 506 households, and 316 families living in the town. The population density was . There were 596 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 90.8% White, 7.4% Black or African American, 0.0% Native American, .6% from other races, and 1.2% from two or more races. .8% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 506 households 26.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.5% were married couples living together, 16.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.5% were non-families. 35.2% of households were one person and 14.6% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.27 and the average family size was 2.90.

The age distribution was 24.5% under the age of 18, 9.2% from 18 to 24, 22.5% from 25 to 44, 28.8% from 45 to 64, and 15.0% 65 or older. The median age was 40.1 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.6 males.

The median household income was $20,792 and the median family income was $32,350. Males had a median income of $26,346 versus $26,250 for females. The per capita income for the town was $12,960. About 20.8% of families and 27.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.9% of those under age 18 and 29.6% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
The town of Berry has one elementary school and one high school. Berry Elementary School has grades Pre-K-6. Berry High School includes grades 7–12. The mascot for both schools is the wildcat.

==Industry==
Berry has the headquarters of Stallion Trailers, Pittsburgh-Midway Chevron Mine, and Piggly Wiggly Grocers. Small businesses such as shops and restaurants also contribute to the town&#x27;s economy. The Bank of Berry, founded in 1911, was privately owned until 2002, when it was purchased by First National Bank of Hamilton.

==Notable people==
* Jamelle Folsom, former First Lady of Alabama (1948–1951, 1955–1959)
* Bettye Kimbrell, master folk artist for quilting
* Fuller Kimbrell, member of the Alabama State Senate from 1947 to 1955
* Hugh C. Bailey, president of Valdosta State University (Valdosta, Georgia) from 1978 to 2002

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q65961" start="0" end="5" title="Berry, Alabama" label="Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q493957" start="19" end="33" title="Fayette County, Alabama" label="Fayette County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="35" end="42" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741117" start="433" end="447" title="2011 Super Outbreak" label="April 27, 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q872867" start="580" end="602" title="Alabama State Route 18" label="Alabama State Route 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q79370" start="642" end="649" title="Fayette, Alabama" label="Fayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="655" end="666" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q68328" start="680" end="686" title="Oakman, Alabama" label="Oakman"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="706" end="724" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056500" start="814" end="825" title="North River (Alabama)" label="North River"/>
<link wikidata="Q727892" start="893" end="912" title="Black Warrior River" label="Black Warrior River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297877" start="945" end="960" title="Tombigbee River" label="Tombigbee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="987" end="998" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1166" end="1179" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2285" end="2297" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2398" end="2409" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2577" end="2590" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3690" end="3702" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388303" start="4084" end="4105" title="Piggly wiggly" label="Piggly Wiggly Grocers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127940" start="4346" end="4360" title="Jamelle Folsom" label="Jamelle Folsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q203184" start="4369" end="4379" title="First Lady" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899031" start="4416" end="4431" title="Bettye Kimbrell" label="Bettye Kimbrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993160" start="4467" end="4482" title="Fuller Kimbrell" label="Fuller Kimbrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494573" start="4498" end="4518" title="Alabama State Senate" label="Alabama State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508061" start="4568" end="4593" title="Valdosta State University" label="Valdosta State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010240" start="4595" end="4612" title="Valdosta, Georgia" label="Valdosta, Georgia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104703" wikidata="Q79370" url="?curid=104703" title="Fayette, Alabama">
<text>Fayette is a city and the county seat of Fayette County, Alabama, United States. The population was 4,619 at the 2010 census, down from 4,922 at the 2000 census.

==History==
Originally known as &quot;La Fayette&quot;, it incorporated on January 15, 1821. When Fayette County was created in 1824, the town&#x27;s name was officially changed to &quot;Fayette Court House&quot;, though it was also known as &quot;Fayetteville&quot;, which was the name shown on maps and on the U.S. Census in 1880 and 1890. It was officially shortened to &quot;Fayette&quot; in 1898.

In 1928, Victor and Lucy Patterson began manufacturing Golden Eagle Syrup in Fayette. The syrup is still produced locally in a manufacturing facility in downtown Fayette.

==Geography==
Fayette is located in west-central Fayette County at (33.692068, -87.832358).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and , or 0.95%, is water.

===Climate===
==Demographics==
===2000 census===
At the 2000 census there were 4,922 people, 2,092 households, and 1,303 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 2,336 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 75.34% White, 23.38% Black or African American, 0.12% Native American, 0.28% Asian, 0.30% from other races, and 0.57% from two or more races. One percent of the population was Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 2,092 households 26.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.2% were married couples living together, 14.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.7% were non-families. 35.5% of households were one person and 19.0% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.20 and the average family size was 2.85.

The age distribution was 21.4% under the age of 18, 9.0% from 18 to 24, 24.2% from 25 to 44, 23.9% from 45 to 64, and 21.6% 65 or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 81.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 75.7 males.

The median household income was $25,714 and the median family income was $36,589. Males had a median income of $29,857 versus $21,899 for females. The per capita income for the city was $15,553. About 12.5% of families and 18.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.2% of those under age 18 and 22.9% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census there were 4,619 people, 1,924 households, and 1,206 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 2,239 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 73.4% White, 24.3% Black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 0.3% Asian, 0.6% from other races, and 1.2% from two or more races. 1.4% of the population was Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 1,924 households 26.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.8% were married couples living together, 18.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.3% were non-families. 32.8% of households were one person and 14.0% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.27 and the average family size was 2.88.

The age distribution was 22.9% under the age of 18, 9.6% from 18 to 24, 23.0% from 25 to 44, 25.6% from 45 to 64, and 18.9% 65 or older. The median age was 40.2 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.6 males.

The median household income was $31,705 and the median family income was $41,905. Males had a median income of $34,271 versus $27,500 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,602. About 15.4% of families and 20.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 23.2% of those under age 18 and 15.9% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 4,285 people, 1,888 households, and 1,178 families residing in the city.

==Notable people==
* Mike Davis, Detroit Mercy Titans men&#x27;s basketball head coach
* Aaron Fultz, former pitcher for the San Francisco Giants.
* Ronnie McCollum, professional basketball player
* Devin Moore, convict who sparked a controversy over the video game &quot;Grand Theft Auto: Vice City&quot;, leading to the court case &quot;Strickland v. Sony&quot;
* Michael Moore, NFL player
* Charly &quot;Carlos&quot; Palmer, American fine artist
* Curt Porter, former offensive guard for the Denver Broncos
* Dexter Roberts, country singer; finished in seventh place on the thirteenth season of &quot;American Idol&quot;
* Jimmy Lee Sudduth, outsider artist and blues musician
* Martha Rosemore Morrow “Optometrist of the South 2009” was born and raised in Fayette.

==Local media==
&quot;The Times-Record&quot; is the local newspaper.

The local radio stations are WLDX Big Cat and WTXT.

==Activities==
*Fayette Aquatic Center
*Boy Scouts of America Troop 45

==Government==
Fayette is organized in a mayor-council form of city government, with a mayor elected citywide and five council members elected from districts.
==Education==
Bevill State Community College has a location in Fayette.

==Climate==
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Fayette has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==References==
==External links==
*City of Fayette official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79370" start="0" end="7" title="Fayette, Alabama" label="Fayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="26" end="37" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q493957" start="41" end="55" title="Fayette County, Alabama" label="Fayette County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="57" end="64" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="113" end="124" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q109975281" start="621" end="639" title="Golden Eagle Syrup" label="Golden Eagle Syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="848" end="866" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="999" end="1010" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1184" end="1197" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2324" end="2336" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2437" end="2448" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2622" end="2635" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3751" end="3763" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3868" end="3893" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193543" start="4001" end="4011" title="Mike Davis (basketball, born 1960)" label="Mike Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266031" start="4013" end="4055" title="Detroit Mercy Titans men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Detroit Mercy Titans men&amp;#x27;s basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820046" start="4069" end="4080" title="Aaron Fultz" label="Aaron Fultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="4105" end="4125" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365930" start="4129" end="4144" title="Ronnie McCollum" label="Ronnie McCollum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267509" start="4179" end="4190" title="Devin Moore (murderer)" label="Devin Moore"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4252" end="4279" title="Grand Theft Auto: Vice City" label="Grand Theft Auto: Vice City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623599" start="4319" end="4337" title="Strickland v. Sony" label="Strickland v. Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832892" start="4346" end="4359" title="Michael Moore (offensive lineman)" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193780" start="4374" end="4406" title="Charly &amp;quot;Carlos&amp;quot; Palmer" label="Charly &amp;quot;Carlos&amp;quot; Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219625" start="4417" end="4425" title="fine art" label="fine art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195418" start="4431" end="4442" title="Curt Porter" label="Curt Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113" start="4451" end="4466" title="guard (American football)" label="offensive guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q223507" start="4475" end="4489" title="Denver Broncos" label="Denver Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16226067" start="4492" end="4506" title="Dexter Roberts" label="Dexter Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="4508" end="4515" title="Country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q14554266" start="4557" end="4567" title="American Idol (season 13)" label="thirteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="4584" end="4597" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200621" start="4606" end="4623" title="Jimmy Lee Sudduth" label="Jimmy Lee Sudduth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769380" start="4772" end="4788" title="The Times-Record (Alabama)" label="The Times-Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7952174" start="4849" end="4853" title="WLDX" label="WLDX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7956512" start="4866" end="4870" title="WTXT" label="WTXT"/>
<link wikidata="Q608132" start="4913" end="4934" title="Boy Scouts of America" label="Boy Scouts of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899661" start="5118" end="5148" title="Bevill State Community College" label="Bevill State Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="5306" end="5335" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="5358" end="5383" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104704" wikidata="Q67099" url="?curid=104704" title="Glen Allen, Alabama">
<text>Glen Allen is a town located in Fayette and Marion counties in the U.S. state of Alabama. The town incorporated in May 1959. At the 2020 census, the population was 433, down from 510 at the 2010 census. Glen Allen is positioned along the BNSF railway and is near Interstate 22, providing access to multiple expanding industries.

==Geography==
Glen Allen is located on the border of Fayette and Marion counties at (33.899470, -87.730388). It is bordered to the west by the city of Winfield. Interstate 22 passes north of the town, with access from Exit 34.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which , or 0.21%, are water.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2010 there were 510 people, 377 households, and 327 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 215 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 83.03% White, 15.61% Black or African American, 0.68% Asian, 0.45% from other races, and 0.23% from two or more races. 1.36% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 377 households, out of which 32.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.1% were married couples living together, 5.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.7% were non-families. 27.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.50 and the average family size was 2.99.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 24.2% under the age of 18, 10.0% from 18 to 24, 27.1% from 25 to 44, 27.8% from 45 to 64, and 10.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.3 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $26,827, and the median income for a family was $36,875. Males had a median income of $24,531 versus $19,063 for females. The per capita income for the town was $17,877. About 12.6% of families and 19.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.5% of those under age 18 and 11.3% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Hubbertville School, a PK-12 unit school, is located in the southern portion of the town.

==Governance==
The town is governed by a mayor and city council. The corporate limits of Glen Allen include the communities of Hubbertville and Bazemore.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67099" start="0" end="10" title="Glen Allen, Alabama" label="Glen Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q493957" start="32" end="39" title="Fayette County, Alabama" label="Fayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q502739" start="44" end="50" title="Marion County, Alabama" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="67" end="77" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="81" end="88" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="132" end="143" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="238" end="242" title="BNSF" label="BNSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q876768" start="263" end="276" title="Interstate 22" label="Interstate 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q79349" start="481" end="489" title="Winfield, Alabama" label="Winfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q876768" start="491" end="504" title="Interstate 22" label="Interstate 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="575" end="593" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="686" end="692" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="905" end="910" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="919" end="924" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="928" end="944" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="952" end="957" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="970" end="981" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1046" end="1054" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1058" end="1064" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1187" end="1202" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1999" end="2016" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2110" end="2122" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q14679173" start="2212" end="2231" title="Hubbertville School" label="Hubbertville School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5926961" start="2430" end="2442" title="Hubbertville, Alabama" label="Hubbertville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875169" start="2447" end="2455" title="Bazemore, Alabama" label="Bazemore"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104705" wikidata="Q67319" url="?curid=104705" title="Gu-Win, Alabama">
<text>Gu-Win is a town in Fayette and Marion counties in the U.S. state of Alabama. It incorporated in 1956. At the 2020 census the population was 141, down from 176 at the 2010 census. Although a small portion of the town is within Fayette County, all of the population as of 2010 resided in Marion County.

The town&#x27;s unusual name is taken from the names of its two neighboring cities, Guin and Winfield. &quot;Gu-Win&quot; and &quot;Guin&quot; are not the same, though the pronunciation is virtually the same, leading to occasional confusion by visitors. Gu-Win - Goo-win and Guin - G-you-in

==History==
The area Gu-Win occupies is between Guin and Winfield. Until the 1950s, it was known as &quot;Ear Gap&quot;. Not wanting to be annexed into Guin or Winfield, it pursued incorporation for itself, and chose the name of the local drive-in theater, &quot;Gu-Win&quot;. As of 2019, the theater still operates, but has been renamed the Blue Moon.

==Geography==
Gu-Win is located in southern Marion County at (33.949505, -87.871921), with a small portion extending south into Fayette County. U.S. Route 43 passes through the town, leading northwest to Guin and southeast the same distance to Winfield.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town of Gu-Win has a total area of , all of it recorded as land. The town sits at a low gap between two subwatersheds that each lead to the Tombigbee River: the Buttahatchee River to the west, and Luxapallila Creek to the southeast. The local streams rising in the gap are Hughes Branch flowing to the west, and an unnamed tributary of Luxapallila Creek flowing to the southeast.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 204 people, 86 households, and 63 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 100 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 100.00% White. 2.94% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 86 households, out of which 31.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.8% were married couples living together, 8.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.6% were non-families. 25.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.37 and the average family size was 2.81.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 20.1% under the age of 18, 10.3% from 18 to 24, 29.9% from 25 to 44, 20.1% from 45 to 64, and 19.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 108.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.0 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $29,375, and the median income for a family was $42,500. Males had a median income of $39,375 versus $18,906 for females. The per capita income for the town was $16,868. About 11.3% of families and 9.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 5.3% of those under the age of eighteen and 6.8% of those 65 or over.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67319" start="0" end="6" title="Gu-Win, Alabama" label="Gu-Win"/>
<link wikidata="Q493957" start="20" end="27" title="Fayette County, Alabama" label="Fayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q502739" start="32" end="38" title="Marion County, Alabama" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="55" end="65" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="69" end="76" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79684" start="387" end="391" title="Guin, Alabama" label="Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79349" start="396" end="404" title="Winfield, Alabama" label="Winfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q409624" start="1093" end="1106" title="U.S. Route 43" label="U.S. Route 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q79684" start="1153" end="1157" title="Guin, Alabama" label="Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79349" start="1193" end="1201" title="Winfield, Alabama" label="Winfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1221" end="1239" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297877" start="1385" end="1400" title="Tombigbee River" label="Tombigbee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002775" start="1406" end="1424" title="Buttahatchee River" label="Buttahatchee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706189" start="1442" end="1459" title="Luxapallila Creek" label="Luxapallila Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1653" end="1659" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1872" end="1877" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1908" end="1916" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1920" end="1926" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2048" end="2063" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2861" end="2878" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2971" end="2983" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104706" wikidata="Q79349" url="?curid=104706" title="Winfield, Alabama">
<text>Winfield is a city in Marion and Fayette counties in the U.S. state of Alabama. The population was 4,845 at the 2020 census, the second largest city in Marion County.

==History==
Winfield is a small city situated in northwest Alabama, east of the Mississippi state line. It lies in the foothills of the Appalachian Mountain range which stretches from the deep South all the way to Canada. Long before the earliest settlers arrived, Native Americans hunted in the forest and fished in the streams of the region. This area was once the domain of the Chickasaw people. Although there were no known Native American settlements within the county, several sites were maintained as hunting camps.

The site was originally known simply as Luxapallila, after the adjacent creek. Later, when settlers began to arrive in greater force, they called their community &quot;Needmore&quot;. When it was incorporated in either 1887 or 1891, the name was changed to &quot;Winfield&quot; in honor of General Winfield Scott.

At the end of 2014, a secret meeting by the city council of Winfield, and by unanimous vote, symbolically declared God the owner of the city of Winfield.

==Geography and climate==

===Geography===
Winfield is located in southern Marion County at (33.928258, -87.807990), with a portion extending south into Fayette County. U.S. Route 43 passes through the city, leading northwest to Guin and south to Fayette. Hamilton, the Marion County seat, is northwest via US 43.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which , or 0.27%, are water. The East Branch of Luxapallila Creek curves past the center of town, flowing southwest toward the Tombigbee River at Columbus, Mississippi.

===Climate===
Winfield has a subtropical climate characterized by hot, humid summers, mild winters, and abundant rainfall during the late winter and spring. January sees average daily high temperatures of and lows of . In July, the average daily high is , and the low is . Snowfall is infrequent in the area, with a yearly average of . The average yearly rainfall in Winfield is about , with March being the wettest month and October the driest.

The spring and fall months are pleasant but variable, but cold fronts frequently bring strong to severe thunderstorms and occasional tornadoes to the region. The fall season features less rainfall and fewer storms, as well as lower humidity than the spring, but is also a secondary severe weather season.

===December 2021 tornado===
Late in the evening hours of December 29, 2021, a line of strong to severe storms entered Alabama from Mississippi. At 6:27 PM, a tornado warning was issued for an area that included Winfield, Guin, Brilliant, Glen Allen, Beaverton, Gu-Win, Crews, Tucker, Bazemore, and Texas. The storm caused damage on the outskirts of Winfield in the form of downed trees. At 6:46 PM, the tornado moved over downtown Winfield, causing a substantial amount of damage in the area. No injuries or fatalities were reported despite eight workers at a local pizza bar being trapped for about thirty minutes. The tornado was rated EF-1.

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
At the 2000 census there were 4,540 people. The population density was . There were 2,126 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 94.56% White, 4.21% Black or African American, 0.20% Native American, 0.22% Asian, 0.20% from other races, and 0.62% from two or more races. 1.19% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 1,849 households 30.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.4% were married couples living together, 10.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.1% were non-families. 27.7% of households were one person and 15.0% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 2.89.

The age distribution was 23.3% under the age of 18, 7.4% from 18 to 24, 26.7% from 25 to 44, 22.6% from 45 to 64, and 20.0% 65 or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 87.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 82.0 males.

The median household income was $31,317 and the median family income was $38,545. Males had a median income of $32,734 versus $21,184 for females. The per capita income for the city was $15,814. About 11.1% of families and 14.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.6% of those under age 18 and 11.5% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census there were 4,717 people. The population density was . There were 2,289 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 92.9% White, 4.5% Black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 0.3% Asian, 0.9% from other races, and 1.0% from two or more races. 2.0% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 1,984 households 26.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.0% were married couples living together, 13.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.8% were non-families. 30.6% of households were one person and 15.1% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.31 and the average family size was 2.86.

The age distribution was 21.3% under the age of 18, 7.8% from 18 to 24, 23.2% from 25 to 44, 27.5% from 45 to 64, and 20.2% 65 or older. The median age was 43.2 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.5 males.

The median household income was $34,617 and the median family income was $43,692. Males had a median income of $38,250 versus $32,250 for females. The per capita income for the city was $19,386. About 16.4% of families and 18.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.1% of those under age 18 and 24.4% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 4,845 people, 1,627 households, and 1,242 families residing in the city.

==Culture==

===Festivals===
Mule Day is hosted on the fourth Saturday in September each year, and has been termed &quot;One of the top 20 events in the Southeast&quot; by Travel and Tourism magazine. The keynote event is a horse parade through the downtown of the city, but there is also live entertainment, car shows and a diverse venue of homemade baked goods sold in a farmers market setting. One of the most popular events amongst most elementary and middle schoolers is the Mule Day carnival. The small carnival area is usually located along Kirkwood St. between U.S. Route 43 and Midway Dr., a distance of about 460 ft.). Others are small shops and games where food is sold (Vendor booths and food stands are set up throughout the town and are not part of the &quot;carnival&quot;). Celebrated since 1975, Mule Day has grown into a major event not only for the City of Winfield but also for the State of Alabama.

===The Pastime Theater===
The Pastime Theater is a historical theater built in 1937 and recently renovated for use as a performing arts center. This facility offers cultural events which benefit Winfield and outlying communities.

==Organizations==
The Traditional Confederate Knights are headquartered in Winfield. A division of the Ku Klux Klan, the organization was listed as a hate group in a 2016 document by the Southern Poverty Law Center.

==Notable people==
*W. Eugene Davis, judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
*Jimmy Miles, award-winning country musician
*Johnny Micheal Spann, an operative of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) and the first American killed in combat after the U.S. invasion of Afghanistan
*The Dirty Clergy, a national garage rock/pop band
*Trey Cunningham, hurdler

==References==
==External links==
*Best Small Towns in Alabama</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79349" start="0" end="8" title="Winfield, Alabama" label="Winfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q502739" start="22" end="28" title="Marion County, Alabama" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q493957" start="33" end="40" title="Fayette County, Alabama" label="Fayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="57" end="67" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="71" end="78" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="112" end="123" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="248" end="259" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="304" end="324" title="Appalachian Mountain" label="Appalachian Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="382" end="388" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="433" end="449" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q622728" start="549" end="558" title="Chickasaw" label="Chickasaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706189" start="732" end="743" title="Luxapallila Creek" label="Luxapallila"/>
<link wikidata="Q354759" start="990" end="1004" title="Winfield Scott" label="Winfield Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="1122" end="1125" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q409624" start="1331" end="1344" title="U.S. Route 43" label="U.S. Route 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q79684" start="1391" end="1395" title="Guin, Alabama" label="Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79370" start="1409" end="1416" title="Fayette, Alabama" label="Fayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q79462" start="1418" end="1426" title="Hamilton, Alabama" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1494" end="1512" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706189" start="1596" end="1613" title="Luxapallila Creek" label="Luxapallila Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297877" start="1675" end="1690" title="Tombigbee River" label="Tombigbee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q985648" start="1694" end="1715" title="Columbus, Mississippi" label="Columbus, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305538" start="1747" end="1766" title="subtropical climate" label="subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="2269" end="2281" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="2298" end="2305" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q79684" start="2692" end="2696" title="Guin, Alabama" label="Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q68058" start="2698" end="2707" title="Brilliant, Alabama" label="Brilliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q67099" start="2709" end="2719" title="Glen Allen, Alabama" label="Glen Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q66170" start="2721" end="2730" title="Beaverton, Alabama" label="Beaverton"/>
<link wikidata="Q67319" start="2732" end="2738" title="Gu-Win, Alabama" label="Gu-Win"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875169" start="2755" end="2763" title="Bazemore, Alabama" label="Bazemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196635" start="2769" end="2774" title="Texas, Alabama" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3158" end="3169" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3286" end="3299" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4420" end="4432" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="4533" end="4544" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4661" end="4674" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5790" end="5802" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="5907" end="5932" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q409624" start="6588" end="6601" title="U.S. Route 43" label="U.S. Route 43"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6970" end="6985" title="Pastime Theater" label="Pastime Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="7274" end="7286" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061914" start="7358" end="7385" title="Southern Poverty Law Center" label="Southern Poverty Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945506" start="7408" end="7423" title="W. Eugene Davis" label="W. Eugene Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q250456" start="7438" end="7490" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668435" start="7492" end="7503" title="Jimmy Miles" label="Jimmy Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3380008" start="7537" end="7557" title="Johnny Micheal Spann" label="Johnny Micheal Spann"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="7579" end="7606" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q326668" start="7663" end="7679" title="Operation Enduring Freedom" label="U.S. invasion of"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="7680" end="7691" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27817164" start="7693" end="7709" title="The Dirty Clergy" label="The Dirty Clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q95250732" start="7744" end="7759" title="Trey Cunningham" label="Trey Cunningham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104707" wikidata="Q67021" url="?curid=104707" title="Hodges, Alabama">
<text>Hodges is a town in Franklin County, Alabama, United States. At the 2020 census, the population was 265. Hodges was laid out in 1902. It was incorporated in 1913.

==History==

A community known as &quot;Reid Brake&quot; was established at what is now Hodges in the 1880s. The current town was established in 1907 as a stop along the Illinois Central Railroad and named for a prominent local family. The town incorporated in 1913, and reincorporated in 1919.

==Geography==
Hodges is located in southern Franklin County at (34.330242, -87.927394). The southern border of the town follows the Marion County line. Alabama State Route 172 passes through the town, leading northwest to Vina and southeast to Hackleburg. Alabama State Route 187 leads northeast from the center of Hodges to Belgreen.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which , or 0.15%, is water. The town sits on the Tennessee Valley Divide, with the east side draining to Bear Creek, a north-flowing tributary of the Tennessee River, and the west side draining via Skirum Branch to Bull Mountain Creek, a west-flowing tributary of the Tombigbee River. north of Hodges is Rock Bridge Canyon Park, on bluffs overlooking Bear Creek.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 261 people, 98 households, and 78 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 118 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 100.00% White.

There were 98 households, out of which 32.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.2% were married couples living together, 14.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 19.4% were non-families. 19.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.66 and the average family size was 3.05.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 23.0% under the age of 18, 10.0% from 18 to 24, 26.1% from 25 to 44, 23.8% from 45 to 64, and 17.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.1 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $33,750, and the median income for a family was $38,333. Males had a median income of $35,625 versus $17,500 for females. The per capita income for the town was $25,239. About 14.0% of families and 13.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.3% of those under the age of eighteen and 18.2% of those 65 or over.

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67021" start="0" end="6" title="Hodges, Alabama" label="Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q488892" start="20" end="35" title="Franklin County, Alabama" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="37" end="44" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="68" end="79" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093332" start="334" end="359" title="Illinois Central Railroad" label="Illinois Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q502739" start="592" end="605" title="Marion County, Alabama" label="Marion County"/>
<link wikidata="Q875627" start="612" end="635" title="Alabama State Route 172" label="Alabama State Route 172"/>
<link wikidata="Q67235" start="682" end="686" title="Vina, Alabama" label="Vina"/>
<link wikidata="Q65870" start="704" end="714" title="Hackleburg, Alabama" label="Hackleburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q875801" start="716" end="739" title="Alabama State Route 187" label="Alabama State Route 187"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275175" start="785" end="793" title="Belgreen, Alabama" label="Belgreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="813" end="831" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700226" start="916" end="939" title="Tennessee Valley Divide" label="Tennessee Valley Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="1017" end="1032" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297877" start="1135" end="1150" title="Tombigbee River" label="Tombigbee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1258" end="1264" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1477" end="1482" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1592" end="1607" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2405" end="2422" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2516" end="2528" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104708" wikidata="Q68115" url="?curid=104708" title="Phil Campbell, Alabama">
<text>Phil Campbell is a town in Franklin County, Alabama, United States. At the 2020 census, the population was 992. It is one of two towns in Alabama to have the first and last name of an individual; the other being Susan Moore. It is the largest city in southern Franklin County.

==Geography==
Phil Campbell is located in southeastern Franklin County at . Alabama State Route 13 passes through the town, leading north to Russellville and south to Haleyville.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town of Phil Campbell has a total area of , of which , or 0.37%, is water.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 1,091 people, 458 households, and 317 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 535 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 98.99% White, 0.27% Native American, 0.18% from other races, and 0.55% from two or more races. 0.82% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 458 households, out of which 30.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.4% were married couples living together, 15.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.6% were non-families. 28.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 2.94.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 24.1% under the age of 18, 8.6% from 18 to 24, 26.7% from 25 to 44, 23.2% from 45 to 64, and 17.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.0 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $24,598, and the median income for a family was $30,221. Males had a median income of $24,219 versus $17,316 for females. The per capita income for the town was $16,053. About 14.2% of families and 20.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 27.9% of those under age 18 and 19.2% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 1,148 people, 497 households, and 325 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 580 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 95.2% White, .2% African American, 0.4% Native American, 3.0% from other races, and 1.2% from two or more races. 4.0% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 497 households, out of which 23.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.3% were married couples living together, 14.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.6% were non-families. 30.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.31 and the average family size was 2.88.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 21.9% under the age of 18, 9.2% from 18 to 24, 22.4% from 25 to 44, 28.9% from 45 to 64, and 17.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42.8 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.4 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $24,886, and the median income for a family was $36,250. Males had a median income of $25,625 versus $34,583 for females. The per capita income for the town was $14,174. About 23.3% of families and 25.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 26.1% of those under age 18 and 10.5% of those age 65 or over.

==Town history==

In the 1880s, a railroad work crew leader and engineer by the name of Phillip Campbell (originally from England) established a work camp. Mel Allen, a prominent local businessman, told Campbell that if he would construct a railroad depot and add a side track to the stretch of railroad going through the area, Allen could develop a town, which he would name after Campbell. Campbell built both the depot and siding, and Allen followed through on his promise. Phil Campbell is one of only two towns in Alabama given both the first and last names of an individual - the other is Susan Moore.

In June 1995 the Brooklyn writer Phil Campbell organized a convention in this town for people with the name &quot;Phil Campbell&quot;. Twenty-two Phil Campbells and one Phyllis Campbell attended; they hailed from all over the United States. The article about the Phil Campbell convention was published in &quot;Might&quot; magazine, a San-Francisco-based publication founded by writer Dave Eggers. The essay was later included in &quot;Might&#x27;s&quot; anthology, &quot;Shiny Adidas Tracksuits and the Death of Camp&quot;, and the convention was mentioned by Ripley&#x27;s Believe it or Not! A second &quot;Phil Campbell Day&quot; was organized the following year, but it was not as well attended. Phil Campbell&#x27;s city hall maintains a file of all the Phil Campbells who visit and check in.

=== Tornado ===
On April 27, 2011, the town suffered extensive damage from a very large and swift-moving tornado. The tornado was rated EF5 with estimated winds of 210 mph. The tornado damaged many buildings in and around the main part of town. Twenty-seven people in Phil Campbell died in the event. A reporter stated that the town may never be able to recover from the tornado because the damage was so extensive.

Phil Campbell, an Ohio-born writer who settled in Brooklyn, New York, was planning another namesake convention for June 2011. After the tornado, he converted his organizing to a relief effort. He called on the Phil Campbells of the world and other supporters to unite under the slogan, &quot;I&#x27;m with Phil&quot;. He set up a website for people to donate money to help repair houses in two areas of the town, in addition to assisting in the repair of the high school and city hall. Attendees at the convention later traveled to the town to assist the local community in rebuilding. Andrew Reed, a resident of the town, directed a documentary about the Campbells&#x27; relief effort called &quot;I&#x27;m With Phil&quot;.

The town was also affected by an F2 tornado on April 3, 1974.

==Town council==
The members of the city council are Danny Brown, Lynn Landers, Roy Nagle, Eddie Barton, and Jim Cartee. The mayor of Phil Campbell is Steve Bell.

==Phil Campbell High School==

The first school in Phil Campbell was a two-story frame building constructed in 1910. It was located at the back of the Phil Campbell Methodist Church. The school was subsequently destroyed by fire.

The second school was constructed in 1915 and was located at the site of the present school on Alabama State Route 13 in Phil Campbell. This school was a small wooden building and was also destroyed by fire, on Christmas Day, 1924. During the next two years, classes were held in local church buildings, the town&#x27;s former bank building, and the U.S. Post Office building located near the railroad. Graduation services for the first accredited Phil Campbell High School class were conducted in 1926 in the Phil Campbell Methodist Church. The class had nine graduating members.

The third Phil Campbell school was completed in 1926. It had a main classroom building and a vocational school. After the main building was destroyed by fire in 1954, the present school buildings were constructed.

After the 2011 tornado, the damaged high school was torn down. A new school was completed and opened in September 2014.

Sports

The boys basketball team won the state title in 1947, defeating Scottsboro 23-21. It was the last year that the state of Alabama had a single classification for basketball.

The Bobcats defeated Bayside Academy 5-0 in Game 1 and 7-6 in Game 2 claiming their first baseball state title in school history. They finished the 2021 season with an impressive 41-6 record.

== Local features ==
The town was incorporated in 1911, 15 years after it was founded. The town has a total of three traffic lights.

Every summer Phil Campbell hosts an annual celebration, the Downtown Hoedown (formerly Phil Campbell Day). The celebration features carnival rides, car shows, and arts-and-crafts items for sale. Local bands and singers perform in the evening. Beginning in 2010, there was a 5k-road race called the Hoedown Hustle (in 2013 renamed the Judy James Memorial, a benefit for pancreatic cancer), and a 1-mile fun run.

The town is home to a campus of Northwest-Shoals Community College (the state&#x27;s first junior college). Before Christmas every year, students from NWSCC perform &quot;The Legend of Toyland&quot;. This is a live choreographed performance set to pre-recorded narration. It has been produced for more than 25 years. Schools from surrounding counties bring students to watch the performance. Lanny McAlister (music director at NWSCC) is credited with the creating the production and directing it since then.

Phil Campbell is also home to Dismals Canyon, a privately owned, natural conservatory that has been designated a National Natural Landmark by the National Park Service. Dismals Canyon features a natural swimming pool, natural shelters used by various Native American tribes for more than 10,000 years, nature trails, rare luminous insects, and natural rock formations.

==Notable people==
*Tonto Coleman, former head coach of the Abilene Christian University football team and commissioner of the Southeastern Conference
*Billy Sherrill, record producer and arranger
*Johnny Mack Morrow, member of the Alabama House of Representatives 1990-2018

==See also==

Other American cities with a personal name and surname as the municipal name:
*Albert Lea, Minnesota
*Carol Stream, Illinois
*George West, Texas
*Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania
*Maxbass, North Dakota

== References ==
==External links==
*Town of Phil Campbell official website
*Phil Campbell Police Department
*Franklin County website
*Dismals Canyon</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q68115" start="0" end="13" title="Phil Campbell, Alabama" label="Phil Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q488892" start="27" end="42" title="Franklin County, Alabama" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="44" end="51" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="75" end="86" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q68354" start="212" end="223" title="Susan Moore, Alabama" label="Susan Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q872838" start="354" end="376" title="Alabama State Route 13" label="Alabama State Route 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q79929" start="419" end="431" title="Russellville, Alabama" label="Russellville"/>
<link wikidata="Q79255" start="445" end="455" title="Haleyville, Alabama" label="Haleyville"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="475" end="493" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="602" end="608" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="824" end="829" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="837" end="852" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="865" end="876" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="941" end="949" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="953" end="959" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1082" end="1097" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1894" end="1911" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2005" end="2017" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2121" end="2127" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2342" end="2347" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2353" end="2369" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2376" end="2391" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2403" end="2414" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2477" end="2485" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2489" end="2495" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2618" end="2633" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3432" end="3449" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3543" end="3555" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q68354" start="4226" end="4237" title="Susan Moore, Alabama" label="Susan Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181755" start="4273" end="4286" title="Phil Campbell (writer)" label="Phil Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844083" start="4545" end="4571" title="Might (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Might&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q589497" start="4625" end="4636" title="Dave Eggers" label="Dave Eggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203684" start="4801" end="4833" title="Ripley&amp;#x27;s Believe it or Not!" label="Ripley&amp;#x27;s Believe it or Not!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741117" start="5058" end="5072" title="2011 Super Outbreak" label="April 27, 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="5144" end="5151" title="tornado" label="tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q429050" start="5175" end="5178" title="Enhanced Fujita scale" label="EF5"/>
<link wikidata="Q428362" start="6229" end="6242" title="1974 Super Outbreak" label="April 3, 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q872838" start="6735" end="6757" title="Alabama State Route 13" label="Alabama State Route 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060428" start="8511" end="8545" title="Northwest-Shoals Community College" label="Northwest-Shoals Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282356" start="9018" end="9032" title="Dismals Canyon" label="Dismals Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967511" start="9101" end="9126" title="National Natural Landmark" label="National Natural Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="9134" end="9155" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821711" start="9378" end="9391" title="Tonto Coleman" label="Tonto Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805145" start="9418" end="9446" title="Abilene Christian University" label="Abilene Christian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q963227" start="9485" end="9508" title="Southeastern Conference" label="Southeastern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q323499" start="9510" end="9524" title="Billy Sherrill" label="Billy Sherrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q913476" start="9727" end="9748" title="Albert Lea, Minnesota" label="Albert Lea, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q195144" start="9750" end="9772" title="Carol Stream, Illinois" label="Carol Stream, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q979419" start="9774" end="9792" title="George West, Texas" label="George West, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025791" start="9794" end="9818" title="Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania" label="Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062101" start="9820" end="9841" title="Maxbass, North Dakota" label="Maxbass, North Dakota"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104709" wikidata="Q80035" url="?curid=104709" title="Red Bay, Alabama">
<text>Red Bay is a city in Franklin County, Alabama, United States. It was founded in 1907; its western boundary line is integral with the state line between Mississippi and Alabama. The population was 3,232 at the 2020 census. The town&#x27;s name comes from the area&#x27;s red clay soil and the many redbay trees (&quot;Persea borbonia&quot;) in this area of north Alabama.

==History==

What is now Red Bay was originally known as &quot;Vinson&#x27;s Crossroads,&quot; and was initially located further to the southwest along Gum Creek. A branch of the Illinois Central Railroad was constructed through the area in 1907, and Red Bay developed into an important lumber and shipping center. The city incorporated during this same period.

===Oak trees===
One of the city&#x27;s most well known and admired features are the redbay trees. The trees, planted by the Red Bay Garden Club in the 1930s, cast a canopy over Main Street.

===Red Bay High School===

The first school in Red Bay was located where the First United Methodist Church stands today. In 1903, this school had one faculty member who was responsible for teaching, as well as most of the custodial duties. After crops were harvested, students attended school through the remainder of the fall and winter months until the spring planting season.

The second school was constructed in the early 1900s. It was located on the site that is now the location of the Red Bay City Park. It was a small building with few amenities. The school continued dismissals timed with the local harvests.

In 1927, a new school site was selected, and a new school built for $45,000. Since this construction, the location of the school has not changed. The building constructed in 1927 was a brick &quot;U&quot;, one of the most popular school designs in Alabama at the time. Facing the school, the right wing of the &quot;U&quot; housed the elementary classes while the left wing held the high school. Once inside the school, after going under the stone entryway, the office of the principal was on your immediate left. A small room on the right served as the library. A large auditorium with double wooden seats that could be folded and stored was centrally located between the two wings. The building housing the home economics and agriculture departments was located on the left of the main school building. At a later date, classrooms were added to the left wing of the main building. Due to the slope of the site, a ground-level lunchroom was included in this addition. With steps leading from the hallway, the first cafeteria available to Red Bay students became operational.

Due to increased enrollment, a new high school section was completed in 1962. In 1967, the auditorium and elementary wing of the 1927 building was destroyed by fire. The disaster occurred while school was in session, but no injuries occurred. Plans began immediately to rebuild the school. A new auditorium and elementary classroom section first welcomed students during the 1968–69 school year.

In 1976, Red Bay celebrated both the nation&#x27;s bicentennial and the opening of a new gymnasium. Eight years later, in 1984, a new cafeteria was ready for use in time for the school&#x27;s annual football banquet. The former cafeteria was renovated providing five additional classrooms, a photography lab, and a yearbook staff workroom.

====School athletics====
Football games were first played in a pasture where the present Sunshine Homes plant is located. Later, the games were played at the American Legion Field which is the current location of Tiffin Motor Homes. Red Bay finished runner-up in football in 1974 and 1976. Following the 1976 runner-up game, there was a scandal involving Red Bay football team and coaches on alcohol abuse before the game. The football teams in the following seasons struggled to win a game, until the 1986-87 team which won the first game in years. There were players who, prior to this time, granted scholarships at Alabama and Auburn. One notable player was Van Tiffin, who went on to the University of Alabama and made his mark there by kicking a 52-yard game-winning field goal against Alabama&#x27;s arch rival Auburn that is now known in Alabama&#x27;s hall of fame as &quot;The Kick&quot;. The Red Bay football teams reached state semifinals in 1990, 1997, and 2007.

Red Bay girls basketball has five state championships. Red Bay boys basketball made the final eight teams in 1995 with a 26–5 record. Red Bay&#x27;s highest finish in tennis was 2008, in fifth place. Red Bay baseball was class 2A State runner-up in 1987.
===City Hall fire===
In the summer of 2006, the Red Bay City Hall caught fire after a transformer exploded. Construction on a new city hall building began shortly afterward. The contractor bid for the new city hall by Burton Construction of Belmont, Mississippi, was supposedly $750,000. Bids were also set for a new police department building with the lowest bid being placed at $500,000.

==Geography==
Red Bay is located in western Franklin County at (34.439898, -88.138208). The western border of the city is the Mississippi state line. It is situated on the Tennessee Valley Divide, with the northern half of the city draining north to Bear Creek, a tributary of the Tennessee River, and the southern half draining south to Gum Creek, a tributary of the Tombigbee River.

Alabama State Route 24 is a four-lane highway that passes south of the city center, leading east to Russellville and west to the Mississippi line. Tremont, Mississippi, is to the southwest.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and , or 1.01%, is water.

==Demographics==
===1990===
As of the census of 1990 the racial makeup of the city was 95.06% White, 3.25% Black or African American, 0.25% Native American, 0.62% from other races, and 0.91% from two or more races. 0.9% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

===2000===
As of the census of 2000, there were 3,374 people, 1,429 households, and 987 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 1,594 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 96.86% White, 1.45% Black or African American, 0.21% Native American, 0.62% from other races, and 0.86% from two or more races. 0.80% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 1,429 households, out of which 27.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.0% were married couples living together, 12.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.9% were non-families. 29.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.30 and the average family size was 2.82.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 21.7% under the age of 18, 8.0% from 18 to 24, 25.2% from 25 to 44, 26.2% from 45 to 64, and 18.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females, there were 83.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 80.3 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $27,596, and the median income for a family was $32,177. Males had a median income of $28,524 versus $20,169 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,653. About 17.7% of families and 20.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 24.6% of those under age 18 and 20.2% of those age 65 or over.

===2010===
As of the census of 2010, there were 3,158 people, 1,362 households, and 898 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 1,508 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 92.5% White, 1.2% African American, 0.3% Native American, 3.9% from other races, and 1.9% from two or more races. 5.1% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 1,362 households, out of which 25.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.8% were married couples living together, 14.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.1% were non-families. 31.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.32 and the average family size was 2.87.

In the town the population was spread out, with 26.2% under the age of 18, 5.9% from 18 to 24, 24.8% from 25 to 44, 24.8% from 45 to 64, and 18.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.9 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $27,303, and the median income for a family was $41,696. Males had a median income of $38,328 versus $24,211 for females. The per capita income for the town was $18,133. About 23.5% of families and 29.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 47.4% of those under age 18 and 17.2% of those age 65 or over.

===2020===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 3,232 people, 1,220 households, and 640 families residing in the city.

==Climate==
Climate is characterized by relatively high temperatures and evenly distributed precipitation throughout the year. The Köppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is &quot;Cfa&quot; (Humid Subtropical Climate).
==Notable people==
*Tammy Wynette, the &quot;First Lady of Country Music&quot;, born across the border near Tremont, Mississippi, spent time in Red Bay.
*Lindell Cooley, pastor, Christian singer and worship leader of the Brownsville Revival in Pensacola, Florida
*Tonya Suzanne Holly, television and film producer
*Mac McAnally, country music singer-songwriter, session musician and record producer
*Eric Powell, member of the Mississippi Senate from the 4th District
*Van Tiffin, former American football placekicker; graduated from Red Bay High School
*Zadoc L. Weatherford, former congressman
* Johnny Mack Morrow who served in the Alabama Legislature from 1990 to 2018 graduated from Red Bay High School.
*Tiffany McWilliams Dudley, former professional track and field athlete who ran for Mississippi State and for Adidas. 2003 USA Outdoor Track and Field Championships

==References==
==External links==

*City of Red Bay official website
*Bay Tree Council for the Performing Arts
*Franklin County Chamber of Commerce
*The Red Bay News</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80035" start="0" end="7" title="Red Bay, Alabama" label="Red Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q488892" start="21" end="36" title="Franklin County, Alabama" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="38" end="45" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="209" end="220" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093332" start="551" end="576" title="Illinois Central Railroad" label="Illinois Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351742" start="819" end="825" title="Persea borbonia" label="redbay"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="4053" end="4074" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276225" start="4833" end="4853" title="Belmont, Mississippi" label="Belmont, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="5109" end="5120" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700226" start="5155" end="5178" title="Tennessee Valley Divide" label="Tennessee Valley Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="5264" end="5279" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297877" start="5351" end="5366" title="Tombigbee River" label="Tombigbee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q873018" start="5369" end="5391" title="Alabama State Route 24" label="Alabama State Route 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q79929" start="5469" end="5481" title="Russellville, Alabama" label="Russellville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113767" start="5516" end="5536" title="Tremont, Mississippi" label="Tremont, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="5577" end="5595" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="5710" end="5716" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5766" end="5771" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5779" end="5784" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5788" end="5804" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5812" end="5827" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5840" end="5851" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5915" end="5923" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5927" end="5933" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="5969" end="5975" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6195" end="6200" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6208" end="6213" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6217" end="6233" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6241" end="6256" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6269" end="6280" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6345" end="6353" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6357" end="6363" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="6488" end="6503" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="7300" end="7317" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="7411" end="7423" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="7520" end="7526" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7745" end="7750" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7757" end="7773" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7780" end="7795" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7807" end="7818" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7881" end="7889" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7893" end="7899" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="8024" end="8039" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="8835" end="8852" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8946" end="8958" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="9056" end="9081" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="9297" end="9326" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="9361" end="9364" title="Humid subtropical climate" label="Cfa"/>
<link wikidata="Q234017" start="9420" end="9433" title="Tammy Wynette" label="Tammy Wynette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2113767" start="9508" end="9528" title="Tremont, Mississippi" label="Tremont, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16195012" start="9554" end="9568" title="Lindell Cooley" label="Lindell Cooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452410" start="9578" end="9587" title="Christian music" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4613441" start="9599" end="9613" title="worship leader" label="worship leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976795" start="9621" end="9640" title="Brownsville Revival" label="Brownsville Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q486306" start="9644" end="9662" title="Pensacola, Florida" label="Pensacola, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823757" start="9664" end="9683" title="Tonya Suzanne Holly" label="Tonya Suzanne Holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722317" start="9715" end="9727" title="Mac McAnally" label="Mac McAnally"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="9729" end="9742" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196654" start="9800" end="9811" title="Eric Powell (politician)" label="Eric Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525928" start="9827" end="9845" title="Mississippi Senate" label="Mississippi Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196297" start="9869" end="9879" title="Van Tiffin" label="Van Tiffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="9888" end="9905" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638113" start="9906" end="9917" title="placekicker" label="placekicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q140078" start="9955" end="9975" title="Zadoc L. Weatherford" label="Zadoc L. Weatherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="9984" end="9995" title="United States House of Representatives" label="congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19981249" start="9998" end="10016" title="Johnny Mack Morrow" label="Johnny Mack Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10110" end="10135" title="Tiffany McWilliams Dudley" label="Tiffany McWilliams Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q20805881" start="10227" end="10273" title="2003 USA Outdoor Track and Field Championships" label="2003 USA Outdoor Track and Field Championships"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104710" wikidata="Q79929" url="?curid=104710" title="Russellville, Alabama">
<text>Russellville is a city in Franklin County in the U.S. state of Alabama. At the 2020 census, the population of the city was 10,855, up from 9,830 at the 2010 census. The city is the county seat of Franklin County.

==History==
After the War of 1812, the U.S. government appropriated money to improve a route from Nashville to New Orleans. It was named Jackson&#x27;s Military Road after Andrew Jackson, and it passed through what became Russellville. (Present-day Jackson Avenue and Jackson Highway, U.S. Route 43, follow portions of the original road.)

Russellville is named after Major William Russell, an early settler in the area who helped in the construction of Jackson&#x27;s Military Road. The town grew at this road&#x27;s intersection with the Gaines Trace.

Russellville was incorporated on November 27, 1819.

Russellville served as the first county seat from 1818-1849 before it was removed to Frankfort (which served from 1849-1879). After the fire at the courthouse in the third county seat of Belgreen in 1890, the seat was returned to Russellville in 1891.

==Geography==
Russellville is located in northeastern Franklin County. U.S. Route 43 passes through the eastern side of the city, leading north to Muscle Shoals on the Tennessee River and southwest to Hamilton. Alabama State Route 24 passes through the south side of the city, leading east to Decatur on the Tennessee River and west to Red Bay at the Mississippi border.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Russellville has a total area of , of which is land and , or 0.79%, is water.

===Climate===
==Demographics==
===2010 census===
At the 2010 census, there were 9,830 people and 3,556 households. The population density was . There were 3,882 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 73.68% White, 11.25% Black or African American, 0.35% Native American, 0.12% Asian, 0.27% Pacific Islander, 7.54% from other races, and 1.17% from two or more races. 12.64% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 3,556 households, of which 30.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.9% were married couples living together, 12.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.5% were non-families. 30.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 16.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 3.03.

Age distribution was 24.2% under the age of 18, 9.8% from 18 to 24, 26.5% from 25 to 44, 21.6% from 45 to 64, and 17.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there are 89.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.3 males.

The median household income was $25,333, and the median family income was $35,799. Males had a median income of $27,238 versus $18,551 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,871. About 16.7% of families and 22.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 29.2% of those under age 18 and 24.9% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 10,855 people, 3,238 households, and 2,244 families residing in the city.

==Local features==
Watermelon Festival - The annual &quot;Watermelon Festival&quot; is held each August in downtown Russellville, and includes music and entertainment, car and tractor shows, and arts and crafts.

Roxy Theater - Built in 1949, the theater originally served primarily as a movie cinema, but saw a major decline in the early 1980s. It now has been revitalized as an entertainment venue due to the efforts of The Franklin County Arts and Humanities Council and the support of local citizens.

King Drive-In - (Now closed as of 2024) The King Drive-In is located just north of Russellville on Highway 43. One of the few drive-in movie theaters still operating in Alabama, it plays currently released films throughout the spring and summer on Friday, Saturday and Sunday nights. The theater features old-style speakers that hang on car windows, but also offers the soundtrack of films through FM radio broadcasts, as well.

The Strip - From the 1960s until approximately 2000, &quot;The Downtown Strip&quot; had been a source of entertainment for local teenagers throughout Franklin County. This strip is best described as having the atmosphere of George Lucas&#x27; iconic film, &quot;American Graffiti&quot;. Cruising the strip ended near the end of 2004 due to an increased local police presence in the area.

RHS stadium - Russellville High School Stadium is a place where local residents watch the high school football team play. Russellville&#x27;s football team ranks as one of the most successful teams in Alabama in terms of all-time playoff wins.

==Local media==
WMTY-TV features area events about the Russellville area including news and weather, though most programming is religious. Its translator station is W46DF-D. Radio stations include WKAX AM 1500, WGOL AM 920, and WPMR-LP 99.7 FM. Russellville&#x27;s newspapers are &quot;The Franklin Free Press&quot; and the &quot;Franklin County Times&quot;.

==Transportation==
There is no fixed-route transit service in Russellville. However, the Northwest Alabama Council of Local Governments operates a dial-a-ride transit service known as NACOLG Transit.

==Notable people==
* Lee Clayton, rock and country musician and composer
* Luther Duncan, pioneer of 4-H youth development, a director of the Alabama Extension Service (now Alabama Cooperative Extension System) and president of the Alabama Polytechnic Institute (now Auburn University). Born near Russellville.
* Althea Brown Edmiston, Presbyterian missionary in the Belgian Congo
* Junius Foy Guin Jr., federal judge
* Gustav Hasford, writer and screenwriter. His semi-autobiographical novel &quot;The Short-Timers&quot; (1979) was the basis of the film &quot;Full Metal Jacket&quot; (1987)
* Joey Manley, webcomic publisher and author
* Sonequa Martin-Green, television actress
* Bryson Mitchell, racing driver
* Madeline Mitchell, Miss Alabama USA 2011
* Chucky Mullins, collegiate football player
* T. Ray Richeson, former professional football player and head coach of Livingston State College (now the University of West Alabama) from 1953 to 1956
* Thomas William Sadler, U.S. congressman from 1885 to 1887. Born near Russellville.
* Arron Sears, professional football player

==References==
==External links==

*City of Russellville official website
*Russellville Police Department
*Russellville page of Franklin County Chamber of Commerce 
*Downtown Russellville Strip (unofficial &quot;fan&quot; site)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79929" start="0" end="12" title="Russellville, Alabama" label="Russellville"/>
<link wikidata="Q488892" start="26" end="41" title="Franklin County, Alabama" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="63" end="70" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="181" end="192" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="236" end="247" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="312" end="321" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="325" end="336" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116879" start="351" end="379" title="Jackson&amp;#x27;s Military Road" label="Jackson&amp;#x27;s Military Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="386" end="400" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q409624" start="499" end="512" title="U.S. Route 43" label="U.S. Route 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517233" start="754" end="766" title="Gaines Trace" label="Gaines Trace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="786" end="798" title="municipal corporation" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q96378411" start="907" end="916" title="Frankfort, Alabama" label="Frankfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275175" start="1009" end="1017" title="Belgreen, Alabama" label="Belgreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q409624" start="1146" end="1159" title="U.S. Route 43" label="U.S. Route 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q79245" start="1222" end="1235" title="Muscle Shoals, Alabama" label="Muscle Shoals"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="1243" end="1258" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q79462" start="1276" end="1284" title="Hamilton, Alabama" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q873018" start="1286" end="1308" title="Alabama State Route 24" label="Alabama State Route 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q79750" start="1368" end="1375" title="Decatur, Alabama" label="Decatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q80035" start="1411" end="1418" title="Red Bay, Alabama" label="Red Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="1426" end="1437" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1624" end="1630" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1806" end="1811" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1820" end="1825" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1829" end="1845" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1853" end="1868" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1876" end="1881" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1889" end="1905" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1918" end="1929" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1995" end="2003" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2007" end="2013" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2134" end="2149" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="2745" end="2768" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2893" end="2910" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3004" end="3016" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3121" end="3146" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411447" start="3740" end="3753" title="King Drive-In" label="King Drive-In"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="4393" end="4405" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q375855" start="4431" end="4448" title="American Graffiti" label="American Graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q357742" start="4946" end="4964" title="Broadcast relay station" label="translator station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951513" start="5000" end="5004" title="WKAX" label="WKAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949881" start="5014" end="5018" title="WGOL" label="WGOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954383" start="5031" end="5038" title="WPMR-LP" label="WPMR-LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q293849" start="5310" end="5321" title="dial-a-ride" label="dial-a-ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149668" start="5385" end="5396" title="Lee Clayton (musician)" label="Lee Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="5398" end="5402" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="5407" end="5414" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q15455034" start="5439" end="5452" title="Luther Duncan" label="Luther Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q238139" start="5465" end="5468" title="4-H" label="4-H"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705210" start="5537" end="5573" title="Alabama Cooperative Extension System" label="Alabama Cooperative Extension System"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="5631" end="5648" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q61477110" start="5677" end="5698" title="Althea Brown Edmiston" label="Althea Brown Edmiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6313714" start="5747" end="5766" title="Junius Foy Guin Jr." label="Junius Foy Guin Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1555931" start="5784" end="5798" title="Gustav Hasford" label="Gustav Hasford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873258" start="5863" end="5879" title="The Short-Timers" label="The Short-Timers"/>
<link wikidata="Q243439" start="5925" end="5942" title="Full Metal Jacket" label="Full Metal Jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993250" start="5958" end="5969" title="Joey Manley" label="Joey Manley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560935" start="6003" end="6023" title="Sonequa Martin-Green" label="Sonequa Martin-Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q112669253" start="6046" end="6061" title="Bryson Mitchell" label="Bryson Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727035" start="6079" end="6096" title="Madeline Mitchell" label="Madeline Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316366" start="6098" end="6114" title="Miss Alabama USA" label="Miss Alabama USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115890" start="6122" end="6136" title="Chucky Mullins" label="Chucky Mullins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668640" start="6167" end="6182" title="T. Ray Richeson" label="T. Ray Richeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q637346" start="6272" end="6298" title="University of West Alabama" label="University of West Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428179" start="6320" end="6341" title="Thomas William Sadler" label="Thomas William Sadler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="6343" end="6359" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4796065" start="6405" end="6416" title="Arron Sears" label="Arron Sears"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104711" wikidata="Q67235" url="?curid=104711" title="Vina, Alabama">
<text>Vina is a town in Franklin County, Alabama, United States. At the 2010 census the population was 358, down from 400 in 2000.

Carl Elliott, the representative of Alabama&#x27;s 7th congressional district from 1949 to 1965, graduated in 1929 from Vina High School.

Johnny Mack Morrow, who served in the Alabama Legislature from 1990 to 2018 was born in Vina.

Vina was incorporated in 1909.

==History==

Vina was originally known as &quot;Jones Crossroads,&quot; and later as &quot;New Burleson.&quot; When a branch of the Illinois Central Railroad was constructed through the area in the early 1900s, the community was renamed &quot;Vina&quot; after the wife of a railroad engineer.

==Geography==
Vina is located in southwestern Franklin County at (34.374874, -88.053498). Alabama State Route 19 passes through the town, leading northwest to Red Bay and south to Hamilton.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land. The town sits on the Tennessee Valley Divide, with the north side draining via several creeks to Bear Creek, a north-flowing tributary of the Tennessee River; the south side of town drains to Hurricane Creek, a southwest-flowing part of the Tombigbee River watershed.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 400 people, 155 households, and 110 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 188 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 97.50% White, 0.50% Black or African American, 0.25% from other races, and 1.75% from two or more races. 1.75% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 155 households, out of which 31.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.9% were married couples living together, 21.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.0% were non-families. 26.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.58 and the average family size was 3.11.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 31.8% under the age of 18, 5.3% from 18 to 24, 27.3% from 25 to 44, 22.3% from 45 to 64, and 13.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 99.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.9 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $18,594, and the median income for a family was $20,625. Males had a median income of $23,000 versus $19,444 for females. The per capita income for the town was $10,662. About 46.1% of families and 47.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 69.3% of those under age 18 and 52.9% of those age 65 or over.

== References ==
==External links==
*Town of Vina official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67235" start="0" end="4" title="Vina, Alabama" label="Vina"/>
<link wikidata="Q488892" start="18" end="33" title="Franklin County, Alabama" label="Franklin County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="35" end="42" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q579660" start="126" end="138" title="Carl Elliott" label="Carl Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705162" start="162" end="203" title="Alabama&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district" label="Alabama&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093332" start="524" end="549" title="Illinois Central Railroad" label="Illinois Central Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q428669" start="776" end="798" title="Alabama State Route 19" label="Alabama State Route 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q80035" start="845" end="852" title="Red Bay, Alabama" label="Red Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q79462" start="866" end="874" title="Hamilton, Alabama" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="894" end="912" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700226" start="976" end="999" title="Tennessee Valley Divide" label="Tennessee Valley Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="1097" end="1112" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297877" start="1196" end="1211" title="Tombigbee River" label="Tombigbee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1251" end="1257" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1471" end="1476" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1484" end="1489" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1493" end="1509" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1522" end="1533" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1598" end="1606" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1610" end="1616" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1739" end="1754" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2551" end="2568" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2662" end="2674" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104712" wikidata="Q66825" url="?curid=104712" title="Black, Alabama">
<text>Black is a town in Geneva County, Alabama, United States. It incorporated in 1905. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2020 census, the population was 221, an increase over the figure of 207 tabulated in 2010.

==Geography==
Black is located at (31.011112, -85.744365).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 202 people, 85 households, and 57 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 102 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 94.06% Caucasian, 5.45% African American, and 0.50% Native American.

There were 85 households, out of which 29.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.9% were married couples living together, 9.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.8% were non-families. 28.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 16.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 2.93.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 23.8% under the age of 18, 11.4% from 18 to 24, 24.8% from 25 to 44, 22.3% from 45 to 64, and 17.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 72.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 79.1 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $31,250, and the median income for a family was $36,250. Males had a median income of $27,857 versus $15,924 for females. The per capita income for the town was $12,628. About 13.2% of families and 19.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 32.4% of those under the age of eighteen and 8.0% of those 65 or over.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66825" start="0" end="5" title="Black, Alabama" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q494620" start="19" end="32" title="Geneva County, Alabama" label="Geneva County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="34" end="41" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="101" end="116" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="117" end="146" title="Dothan metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="155" end="166" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="324" end="342" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="413" end="419" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="631" end="640" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="648" end="664" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="676" end="691" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="801" end="816" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1613" end="1630" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1724" end="1736" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104713" wikidata="Q65905" url="?curid=104713" title="Coffee Springs, Alabama">
<text>Coffee Springs is a town in Geneva County, Alabama, United States. It was incorporated in 1900, and it is considered to be a part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2010 census the population was 228, down from 251.

==Geography==
Coffee Springs is located at (31.166736, -85.910634).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and 1.25% is water.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 251 people, 108 households, and 74 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 128 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 93.23% White, 3.98% Black or African American, and 2.79% from two or more races.

There were 108 households, out of which 17.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.4% were married couples living together, 12.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.6% were non-families. 24.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.32 and the average family size was 2.77.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 16.7% under the age of 18, 8.0% from 18 to 24, 18.3% from 25 to 44, 36.3% from 45 to 64, and 20.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 50 years. For every 100 females, there were 78.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 77.1 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $26,477, and the median income for a family was $30,000. Males had a median income of $28,750 versus $15,833 for females. The per capita income for the town was $12,393. About 13.8% of families and 17.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.4% of those under the age of eighteen and 25.3% of those 65 or over.

==Climate==
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Coffee Springs has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps. 

==Notable person==
* Jim Bowdoin, professional American football player who played guard for seven seasons for the Green Bay Packers, Brooklyn Dodgers, New York Giants, and Portsmouth Spartans

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q65905" start="0" end="14" title="Coffee Springs, Alabama" label="Coffee Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q494620" start="28" end="41" title="Geneva County, Alabama" label="Geneva County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="43" end="50" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="137" end="152" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="153" end="182" title="Dothan metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="329" end="347" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="446" end="452" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="665" end="670" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="678" end="683" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="687" end="703" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="848" end="863" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1660" end="1677" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1771" end="1783" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="1997" end="2026" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="2056" end="2081" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689044" start="2151" end="2162" title="Jim Bowdoin" label="Jim Bowdoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="2177" end="2194" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q25113" start="2213" end="2218" title="Guard (American football)" label="guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="2245" end="2262" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q929532" start="2264" end="2280" title="Brooklyn Dodgers (NFL)" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="2282" end="2297" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709553" start="2303" end="2322" title="Portsmouth Spartans" label="Portsmouth Spartans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104714" wikidata="Q918908" url="?curid=104714" title="Eunola, Alabama">
<text>Eunola is a census-designated place and former town in Geneva County, Alabama, United States. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2020 census, the population was 284. The town was disincorporated in 2007.

==History==

Eunola was initially listed on the 1900 U.S. Census as an incorporated community. It did not appear again on the census rolls until 1940. It was disincorporated by judicial order in 2007 due to its not having held elections in a half-century and that it lacked a minimum of 300 residents required to reincorporate under Alabama state law. It was reclassified as a census-designated place in 2010.

==Geography==
Eunola is located at (31.038766, -85.845415).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (0.76%) is water.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 182 people, 87 households, and 56 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 97 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 89.56% White, 8.79% Black or African American, 0.55% Native American, and 1.10% from two or more races. 0.55% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 87 households, out of which 28.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.8% were married couples living together, 12.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.6% were non-families. 34.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.09 and the average family size was 2.66.

In the town the population was spread out, with 20.9% under the age of 18, 9.9% from 18 to 24, 24.2% from 25 to 44, 30.8% from 45 to 64, and 14.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 43 years. For every 100 females, there were 109.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.3 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $26,250, and the median income for a family was $32,188. Males had a median income of $25,000 versus $16,250 for females. The per capita income for the town was $15,120. About 10.2% of families and 14.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.0% of those under the age of eighteen and 15.8% of those 65 or over.

==Loss of Charter ==

The Town of Eunola lost its charter when a judge ruled in August 2007 that because it had not held elections since regaining its charter in 1957, it was not functioning as a town. Several days later, many Eunola residents signed a petition in hopes of reincorporating, and papers were filed in Geneva County Probate Court to start the process. Probate Judge Fred Hamic then asked for an Attorney General&#x27;s opinion on whether the town could reincorporate.

In January 2008 the Attorney General ruled that Alabama law precludes a community with a population of less than 300 from being incorporated.

Attorneys for the town argued that Alabama law allowed a town that had become dormant to become reinstated by a petition of the majority of the taxpayers in that town. However, the AG opinion stated that Eunola had not become dormant, but had been dissolved. That means, in essence, the Town of Eunola never existed and would have to incorporate through the requirements of Alabama law, including the population provision. For almost 50 years, the mayor and town council positions were changed by word of mouth instead of elections. Longtime residents said they don&#x27;t recall anyone questioning the fact that elections were never held.

The fact that Eunola had never held elections came to light after the Eunola Town Council attempted to enforce a 1988 zoning ordinance that would have kept a couple from placing mobile homes on their property for rent.

Attorney Jeffery D. Hatcher of Geneva, Alabama challenged the validity of the ordinance on the grounds that it was not properly adopted, and also that it was moot because the town had never held elections since being granted a charter in 1957. Eunola sued the property owners in an effort to enforce the ordinance. Another lawsuit arose from that action, resulting in the town losing its charter after it was proven no elections were held.

By law, all of Eunola&#x27;s assets — some land and what is believed to be more than $100,000 — became the property of Geneva County.

It was later made into a Census Designated area at some point between 2007 and 2010 as it appeared on the 2010 census as a &quot;CDP&quot;.

==Education==
Eunola is in the Geneva City School District.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q918908" start="0" end="6" title="Eunola, Alabama" label="Eunola"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="12" end="35" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q494620" start="55" end="68" title="Geneva County, Alabama" label="Geneva County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="70" end="77" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="112" end="127" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="128" end="157" title="Dothan metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="166" end="177" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="731" end="749" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="849" end="855" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1066" end="1071" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1079" end="1084" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1088" end="1104" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1112" end="1127" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1192" end="1200" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1204" end="1210" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1332" end="1347" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2143" end="2160" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2254" end="2266" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3847" end="3865" title="Jeffery D. Hatcher" label="Jeffery D. Hatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q80045" start="3869" end="3884" title="Geneva, Alabama" label="Geneva, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532985" start="4586" end="4613" title="Geneva City School District" label="Geneva City School District"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104715" wikidata="Q80045" url="?curid=104715" title="Geneva, Alabama">
<text>Geneva is a city in and the county seat of Geneva County, Alabama, United States. It was incorporated in 1875. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. Since 1940, it has been the largest city of Geneva County, and had a population of 4,292 as of the 2020 census.

== History ==
In late December 1862, the stern-wheel steamship &quot;Bloomer&quot; was in port on the Choctawhatchee River in Geneva. She was captured by a group of Union troops from the 91st New York Volunteers led by Lieutenant James H. Stewart. The &quot;Bloomer&quot; was then taken to Pensacola, Florida.

On March 10, 2009, in the Alabama towns of Kinston, Samson and Geneva, Michael McLendon went on a shooting rampage, killing ten people and wounding six more before committing suicide.

==Geography==
Geneva is located south of the center of Geneva County at (31.038181, -85.876677), at the confluence of the Pea River with the Choctawhatchee River. Alabama State Route 52 passes through the city north of downtown, leading northeast to Hartford and northwest to Samson. Dothan is to the northeast via Route 52. Alabama State Route 27 passes through the center of Geneva, leading north to Enterprise and southwest to the Florida border.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and , or 1.17%, is water. The Choctawhatchee River forms the eastern border of the city, flowing south to Choctawhatchee Bay in Florida, which enters the Gulf of Mexico at Destin.

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
At the 2000 census there were 4,388 people, 1,801 households, and 1,197 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 2,097 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 84.12% White, 14.18% Black or African American, 0.32% Native American, 0.05% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.46% from other races, and 0.87% from two or more races. 1.09% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 1,801 households 29.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.7% were married couples living together, 14.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.5% were non-families. 31.4% of households were one person and 15.2% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 2.94.

The age distribution was 24.0% under the age of 18, 8.0% from 18 to 24, 24.3% from 25 to 44, 25.0% from 45 to 64, and 18.6% 65 or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 82.3 males.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census there were 4,452 people, 1,826 households, and 1,204 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 2,090 housing units at an average density of 141 per square mile (54/km). The racial makeup of the city was 83.2% White, 14.0% Black or African American, 0.4% Native American, 0.4% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 0.5% from other races, and 1.5% from two or more races. 1.8% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 1,826 households 23.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.2% were married couples living together, 15.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.1% were non-families. 31.5% of households were one person and 15.5% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.36 and the average family size was 2.94.

The age distribution was 21.4% under the age of 18, 8.0% from 18 to 24, 22.1% from 25 to 44, 28.1% from 45 to 64, and 20.3 who were 65 or older. The median age was 43.6 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.1 males.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 4,245 people, 1,800 households, and 1,007 families residing in the city.

== Landscape ==

Geneva is settled on the junction of the Choctawhatchee River and Pea River. The Choctawhatchee River runs all the way to the Choctawhatchee Bay at Freeport, Florida, which flows into the Gulf of Mexico. Because of this, Geneva was a busy trading center for steam-powered riverboats in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

== Culture ==
Every year in April, Geneva holds a River Festival, which brings in hundreds of people from all over the country to the small town. The River Festival is held on the junction of the two rivers, at Robert Fowler Park, and has many competitive events, such as a road race, greasy pole climb, canoe race, and tug-of-war.

==Media==

* &quot;Geneva County Reaper&quot; (1901-2024)

== Education ==
Geneva has the James A. Mulkey Elementary School, Geneva Middle School, and Geneva High School located within its city limits.

==Notable people==
*Elizabeth B. Andrews, former U.S. Representative, wife of congressman George William Andrews, and the first woman to represent Alabama in the United States House of Representatives
*Siran Stacy, former NFL running back

==Climate==
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Geneva has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps. The hottest temperature recorded in Geneva was on July 15, 1980, and July 22, 2015, while the coldest temperature recorded was on January 21, 1985.

==References==

==External links==
*City of Geneva official website
*Official Records of the Union and Confederate Navies in the War of the Rebellion</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80045" start="0" end="6" title="Geneva, Alabama" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="28" end="39" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q494620" start="43" end="56" title="Geneva County, Alabama" label="Geneva County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="58" end="65" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="129" end="144" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="145" end="174" title="Dothan, Alabama metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="275" end="286" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867746" start="358" end="365" title="USS Bloomer (1856)" label="Bloomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272077" start="391" end="411" title="Choctawhatchee River" label="Choctawhatchee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q214102" start="454" end="459" title="Union (American Civil War)" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645757" start="476" end="500" title="91st New York Volunteers" label="91st New York Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q486306" start="579" end="597" title="Pensacola, Florida" label="Pensacola, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q68435" start="643" end="650" title="Kinston, Alabama" label="Kinston"/>
<link wikidata="Q79319" start="652" end="658" title="Samson, Alabama" label="Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q105474696" start="696" end="714" title="Geneva County shootings" label="a shooting rampage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157190" start="907" end="916" title="Pea River" label="Pea River"/>
<link wikidata="Q873381" start="948" end="970" title="Alabama State Route 52" label="Alabama State Route 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q79238" start="1035" end="1043" title="Hartford, Alabama" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q79319" start="1061" end="1067" title="Samson, Alabama" label="Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="1069" end="1075" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q517150" start="1110" end="1132" title="Alabama State Route 27" label="Alabama State Route 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q79260" start="1187" end="1197" title="Enterprise, Alabama" label="Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="1219" end="1226" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1253" end="1271" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103736" start="1427" end="1445" title="Choctawhatchee Bay" label="Choctawhatchee Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="1475" end="1489" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156427" start="1493" end="1499" title="Destin, Florida" label="Destin"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="1544" end="1555" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1729" end="1742" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2651" end="2662" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2863" end="2876" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3791" end="3816" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272077" start="3961" end="3981" title="Choctawhatchee River" label="Choctawhatchee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157190" start="3986" end="3995" title="Pea River" label="Pea River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5103736" start="4046" end="4064" title="Choctawhatchee Bay" label="Choctawhatchee Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907019" start="4068" end="4085" title="Freeport, Florida" label="Freeport, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="4108" end="4122" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q60741149" start="4599" end="4619" title="Geneva County Reaper" label="Geneva County Reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533012" start="4731" end="4749" title="Geneva High School (Alabama)" label="Geneva High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q519699" start="4803" end="4823" title="Elizabeth B. Andrews" label="Elizabeth B. Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="4832" end="4851" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298685" start="4873" end="4895" title="George William Andrews" label="George William Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="4945" end="4983" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529953" start="4985" end="4996" title="Siran Stacy" label="Siran Stacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q912985" start="5009" end="5021" title="running back" label="running back"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="5152" end="5181" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="5203" end="5228" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104716" wikidata="Q79238" url="?curid=104716" title="Hartford, Alabama">
<text>Hartford is a city in Geneva County, Alabama, United States. It incorporated in 1896. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2020 census, the population was 2,651, an increase over the figure of 2,624 tabulated in 2010.

==Geography==
Hartford is located at (31.103664, -85.694544).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and 0.16% is water.

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
At the 2000 census there were 2,369 people, 966 households, and 647 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 1,121 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 79.11% White, 19.63% Black or African American, 0.42% Native American, 0.30% from other races, and 0.55% from two or more races. 1.69% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 966 households 27.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.0% were married couples living together, 13.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.0% were non-families. 31.1% of households were one person and 15.0% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 2.90.

The age distribution was 22.9% under the age of 18, 6.4% from 18 to 24, 24.1% from 25 to 44, 24.5% from 45 to 64, and 22.1% 65 or older. The median age was 43 years. For every 100 females, there were 84.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 77.5 males.

The median household income was $23,324 and the median family income was $30,919. Males had a median income of $25,843 versus $21,838 for females. The per capita income for the city was $13,290. About 19.9% of families and 19.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 29.0% of those under age 18 and 19.1% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census there were 2,624 people, 1,059 households, and 677 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 1,196 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 77.9% White, 17.9% Black or African American, 0.6% Native American, 1.8% from other races, and 1.8% from two or more races. 3.1% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 1,059 households 23.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.3% were married couples living together, 15.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.1% were non-families. 32.5% of households were one person and 16.2% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size was 3.02.

The age distribution was 21.8% under the age of 18, 9.5% from 18 to 24, 20.9% from 25 to 44, 26.1% from 45 to 64, and 21.6% 65 or older. The median age was 42.9 years. For every 100 females, there were 87.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.0 males.

The median household income was $26,086 and the median family income was $36,900. Males had a median income of $31,505 versus $17,369 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,507. About 14.9% of families and 21.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.0% of those under age 18 and 20.6% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,651 people, 934 households, and 565 families residing in the city.

==Notable people==
* Ralph Brown Draughon, president of Auburn University from 1947 to 1965
* Dixie Howell, member of the College Football Hall of Fame. He played for the University of Alabama
* Scott Peacock, award-winning chef of American Southern cuisine
* Early Wynn, born in Hartford, member of the Baseball Hall of Fame

==See also==
* List of municipalities in Alabama

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79238" start="0" end="8" title="Hartford, Alabama" label="Hartford"/>
<link wikidata="Q494620" start="22" end="35" title="Geneva County, Alabama" label="Geneva County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="37" end="44" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="104" end="119" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="120" end="149" title="Dothan, Alabama metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="158" end="169" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="334" end="352" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="465" end="476" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="646" end="659" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1766" end="1778" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="1879" end="1890" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2062" end="2075" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3180" end="3192" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3297" end="3322" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287281" start="3426" end="3446" title="Ralph Brown Draughon" label="Ralph Brown Draughon"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="3461" end="3478" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284862" start="3499" end="3511" title="Dixie Howell" label="Dixie Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q747833" start="3527" end="3556" title="College Football Hall of Fame" label="College Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="3576" end="3597" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437022" start="3600" end="3613" title="Scott Peacock" label="Scott Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499072" start="3629" end="3633" title="chef" label="chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q381416" start="3637" end="3662" title="American Southern cuisine" label="American Southern cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q713760" start="3665" end="3675" title="Early Wynn" label="Early Wynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="3709" end="3730" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q256352" start="3747" end="3780" title="List of municipalities in Alabama" label="List of municipalities in Alabama"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104717" wikidata="Q66630" url="?curid=104717" title="Malvern, Alabama">
<text>Malvern is a town in Geneva County, Alabama, United States. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2010 census the population was 1,448, up from 1,215 in 2000.

==Geography==
Malvern is located at (31.143981, -85.523382).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

According to the 1910 U.S. Census, Malvern was incorporated in 1904.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 1,215 people, 485 households, and 370 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 547 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 94.57% White, 2.22% Black or African American, 1.15% Native American, 0.25% Asian, 1.07% from other races, and 0.74% from two or more races. 1.32% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 485 households, out of which 36.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.2% were married couples living together, 11.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 23.7% were non-families. 21.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.51 and the average family size was 2.89.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 26.1% under the age of 18, 6.7% from 18 to 24, 31.4% from 25 to 44, 24.6% from 45 to 64, and 11.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.1 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $31,850, and the median income for a family was $37,813. Males had a median income of $29,701 versus $19,500 for females. The per capita income for the town was $15,283. About 12.1% of families and 14.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.8% of those under age 18 and 23.3% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 1,448 people, 582 households, and 428 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 647 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 91.2% White, 4.8% Black or African American, .7% Native American, 0.1% Asian, 1.7% from other races, and 1.5% from two or more races. 4.8% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 485 households, out of which 29.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.2% were married couples living together, 11.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.5% were non-families. 22.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.49 and the average family size was 2.92.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 22.8% under the age of 18, 8.8% from 18 to 24, 24.9% from 25 to 44, 29.1% from 45 to 64, and 14.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40.3 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.8 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $42,930, and the median income for a family was $41,793. Males had a median income of $40,875 versus $35,486 for females. The per capita income for the town was $21,417. About 9.6% of families and 11.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.8% of those under age 18 and 6.9% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,536 people, 614 households, and 407 families residing in the town.

== References ==
==External links==
*WiregrassNews.com - Local Internet News Site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66630" start="0" end="7" title="Malvern, Alabama" label="Malvern"/>
<link wikidata="Q494620" start="21" end="34" title="Geneva County, Alabama" label="Geneva County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="36" end="43" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="78" end="93" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="94" end="123" title="Dothan metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="273" end="291" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="451" end="457" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="673" end="678" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="686" end="691" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="695" end="711" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="719" end="734" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="742" end="747" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="760" end="771" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="836" end="844" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="848" end="854" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="977" end="992" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1788" end="1805" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1899" end="1911" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2015" end="2021" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2236" end="2241" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2248" end="2253" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2257" end="2273" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2279" end="2294" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2301" end="2306" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2318" end="2329" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2392" end="2400" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2404" end="2410" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2533" end="2548" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3347" end="3364" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3457" end="3469" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3573" end="3598" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104718" wikidata="Q779239" url="?curid=104718" title="International broadcasting">
<text>International broadcasting consists of radio and television transmissions that purposefully cross international boundaries, often with then intent of allowing expatriates to remain in touch with their countries of origin as well as educate, inform, and influence residents of foreign countries. Content can range from overt propaganda and counterpropaganda to cultural content to news reports that reflect the point of view and concerns of the originating country or that seek to provide alternative information to that otherwise available as well as promote tourism and trade. In the first half of the twentieth century, international broadcasting was used by colonial empires as a means of connecting 
colonies with the metropole (for example the BBC Empire Service as well as France&#x27;s Poste Colonial and the Dutch overseas radio services, PCJJ and PHOHI). When operated by governments or entities close to a government, international broadcasting can be a form of soft power. Less frequently, international broadcasting has been undertaken for commercial purposes by private broadcasters.

International broadcasting, in a limited extent, began during World War I, when German and British stations broadcast press communiqués using Morse code. With the severing of Germany&#x27;s undersea cables, the wireless telegraph station in Nauen was the country&#x27;s sole means of long-distance communication. The US Navy Radio Service radio station in New Brunswick, Canada, transmitted the &#x27;Fourteen Points&#x27; by wireless to Nauen in 1917. In turn, Nauen station broadcast the news of the abdication of Kaiser Wilhelm II on November 10, 1918.

== History ==

=== Origins ===

Guglielmo Marconi pioneered the use of short wave radio for long-distance transmissions in the early 1920s. Using a system of parabolic reflector antennae, Marconi&#x27;s assistant, Charles Samuel Franklin, rigged up a large antenna at Poldhu Wireless Station, Cornwall, running on 25 kW of power. In June and July 1923, wireless transmissions were completed during nights on 97 meters from Poldhu to Marconi&#x27;s yacht &quot;Elettra&quot; in the Cape Verde Islands. High speed shortwave telegraphy circuits were then installed from London to Australia, India, South Africa and Canada as the main element of the Imperial Wireless Chain from 1926.

The Dutch began conducting experiments in the shortwave frequencies in 1925 from Eindhoven. The radio station PCJJ began the first international broadcasting on March 11, 1927, with programmes in Dutch for colonies in the Dutch West Indies and Dutch East Indies and in German, Spanish and English for the rest of the world. The popular &quot;Happy Station&quot; show was inaugurated in 1928 and became the world&#x27;s longest-running shortwave programme, continuing until 1995, transferring to Radio Netherlands after World War II.

In 1927, Marconi also turned his attention toward long distance broadcasting on shortwave. His first such broadcasts took place to commemorate Armistice Day in the same year. He continued running a regular international broadcast that was picked up around the world, with programming from the 2LO station, then run by the BBC. The success of this operation caught the BBC&#x27;s attention who rented out a shortwave transmitting station in Chelmsford, with the callsign G5SW, to Marconi. The BBC Empire Service was finally inaugurated on December 19, 1932, with transmissions aimed towards Australia and New Zealand.

=== Expansion ===
Other notable early international broadcasters included Vatican Radio (February 12, 1931), Radio Moscow, the official service of the Soviet Union (renamed the Voice of Russia, following the collapse of the Soviet Union). Clarence W. Jones started transmitting on Christmas Day, 1931 from Christian missionary radio station HCJB in Quito, Ecuador. Broadcasting in South Asia was launched in 1925 in Ceylon – Radio Ceylon, now the Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation is the oldest in the region.
Shortwave broadcasting from Nauen in Germany to the US, Central and South America, and the Far East began in 1926. A second station, Zeesen, was added in 1931. In January 1932, the German Reichspost assumed control of the Nauen station and added to its shortwave and longwave capacity. Once Adolf Hitler assumed power in 1933, shortwave, under the &quot;Auslandsrundfunk&quot; (Foreign Radio Section), was regarded as a vital element of Nazi propaganda.

German shortwave hours were increased from two hours a day to 18 per day, and eventually twelve languages were broadcast on a 24-hour basis, including English. A 100 kilowatt transmitter and antenna complex was built at Zeesen, near Berlin. Specialty target programming to the United States began in 1933, to South Africa, South America, and East Asia in 1934, and South Asia and Central America in 1938. German propaganda was organized under Joseph Goebbels, and played a key role in the German annexation of Austria and the Munich Crisis of 1938.

In 1936, the International Radio Union recognized Vatican Radio as a &quot;special case&quot; and authorized its broadcasting without any geographical limits. On December 25, 1937, a Telefunken 25-kW transmitter and two directional antennas were added. Vatican Radio broadcast over 10 frequencies.

During the Spanish Civil War, the Nationalist forces received a powerful Telefunken transmitter as a gift of Nazi Germany to aid their propaganda efforts, and until 1943 Radio Nacional de España collaborated with the Axis powers to retransmit in Spanish news from the official radio stations of Germany and Italy.

=== World War II ===
During the Second World War, Russian, German, British, and Italian international broadcasting services expanded. In 1938 the British BBC launched international services in German, French and Italian. In 1942, the United States initiated its international broadcasting service, the Voice of America. In the Pacific theater, General Douglas MacArthur used shortwave radio to keep in touch with the citizens of the Japanese-occupied Philippine Islands.

Several announcers who became well known in their countries included British Union of Fascists member William Joyce, who was one of the two &quot;Lord Haw-Haw&quot;s; Frenchmen Paul Ferdonnet and André Olbrecht, called &quot;the traitors of [Radio] Stuttgart&quot;; and Americans Frederick William Kaltenbach, &quot;Lord Hee-Haw&quot;, and Mildred Gillars, one of the two announcers called &quot;Axis Sally&quot;. Listeners to German programs often tuned in for curiosity&#x27;s sake—at one time, German radio had half a million listeners in the U.S.--but most of them soon lost interest. Japan had &quot;Tokyo Rose&quot;, who broadcast Japanese propaganda in English, along with American music to help ensure listeners.

During World War II, Vatican Radio&#x27;s news broadcasts were banned in Germany. During the war, the radio service operated in four languages.

The British launched Radio SEAC from Colombo, Ceylon (Sri Lanka) during World War II. The station broadcast radio programs to the allied armed forces across the region from their headquarters in Ceylon.

Following the war and German partition, each Germany developed its own international broadcasting station: Deutsche Welle, using studios in Cologne, West Germany, and Radio Berlin International (RBI) in East Germany. RBI&#x27;s broadcasts ceased shortly before the reunification of Germany on October 3, 1990, and Deutsche Welle took over its transmitters and frequencies.

=== Cold War era ===
The Cold War led to increased international broadcasting (and jamming), as Communist and non-Communist states attempted to influence each other&#x27;s domestic population. Some of the most prominent Western broadcasters were the Voice of America, the BBC World Service, and the Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. The Soviet Union&#x27;s most prominent service was Radio Moscow and China used Radio Peking (then Radio Beijing, now China Radio International). In addition to the U.S.-Soviet cold war, the Chinese-Russian border dispute led to an increase of the numbers of transmitters aimed at the two nations, and the development of new techniques such as playing tapes backwards for reel-to-reel recorders.

West Germany resumed regular shortwave broadcasts using Deutsche Welle on May 3, 1953. Its Julich transmitter site began operation in 1956, with eleven 100-kW Telefunken transmitters. The Wertachtal site was authorized in 1972 and began with four 500-kW transmitters. By 1989, there were 15 transmitters, four of which relayed the Voice of America. Meanwhile, in East Germany, the Nauen site began transmitting Radio DDR, later Radio Berlin International, on October 15, 1959.
In addition to these states, international broadcast services grew in Europe and the Middle East. Under the presidency of Gamal Nasser, Egyptian transmitters covered the Arab world; Israel&#x27;s service, Kol Yisrael, served both to present the Israeli point of view to the world and to serve the Jewish diaspora, particularly behind the Iron Curtain.

Radio RSA, as part of the South African Broadcasting Corporation, was established in 1966 to promote the image of South Africa internationally and reduce criticism of apartheid. It continued in 1992, when the post-apartheid government renamed it Channel Africa.

Ironically, the isolationist Albania under Enver Hoxha, virtually a hermit kingdom, became one of the most prolific international broadcasters during the latter decades of the Cold War, with Radio Tirana one of the top five broadcasters in terms of hours of programming produced.

Estimated total programme hours per week of some external broadcasters
=== Today ===
At the end of the Cold War, many international broadcasters cut back on hours and foreign languages broadcast, or reemphasized other language services. For example, in 1984, Radio Canada International broadcast in English, French, German, Spanish, Czech/Slovak, Hungarian, Polish, Russian, and Ukrainian. In 2005, RCI broadcast in English, Chinese, Arabic, Russian, and Spanish. There is a bigger trend towards TV (e.g. BBC World News, NHK World, CCTV-9) and news websites. 

Some services, such as Swiss Radio International, left shortwave altogether and exist in Internet form, Swissinfo. Radio Canada International ceased shortwave broadcasting in 2012 becoming a purely online service producing podcasts and maintaining a website in several languages. Radio Netherlands ceased broadcasting in 2012 and was transformed into RNW Media, an NGO that trains youth in developing countries to use digital media for social change. Radio Moscow&#x27;s successor, Voice of Russia, was disbanded in 2014 and replaced by Sputnik, a multimedia news platform, which does not broadcast on shortwave. Other shortwave broadcasters have ceased operations entirely since the 1990s.

In addition, new standards, such as Digital Radio Mondiale, are being introduced, as well as sending programs over the Web to be played back later, as &quot;podcasts&quot;.

International broadcasting using the traditional audio-only method will not cease any time soon due to its cost efficiencies. However, international broadcasting via television is considered more strategically important at least since the early 2000s.

The BBC World Service was the first broadcaster to consider setting up a satellite television news and information channel as far back as 1976, but ceded being the first to CNN (that had primary access to Canada soon after launch). The defunct BBC World Service Antigua Relay Station was built in 1976, but its setup costs were not known to have been part of the BBCWS decision processes at the time.

In the early 1990s, many international (as well as domestic) 24-hour news and information channels launched as part of the post-Cold War prosperity bubble. There was another burst of global news channels launching in the late 2000s as part the developing world trying to catch up with the developed world in this area.

== Reasons for international broadcasting ==

Broadcasters in one country have several reasons to reach out to an audience in other countries. Commercial broadcasters may simply see a business opportunity to sell advertising or subscriptions to a broader audience. This is more efficient than broadcasting to a single country, because domestic entertainment programs and information gathered by domestic news staff can be cheaply repackaged for non-domestic audiences.

Governments typically have different motivations for funding international broadcasting. One clear reason is for ideological, or propaganda reasons. Many government-owned stations portray their nation in a positive, non-threatening way. This could be to encourage business investment in or tourism to the nation. Another reason is to combat a negative image produced by other nations or internal dissidents, or insurgents. Radio RSA, the broadcasting arm of the apartheid South African government, is an example of this. A third reason is to promote the ideology of the broadcaster. For example, a program on Radio Moscow from the 1960s to the 1980s was &quot;What is Communism?&quot;

A second reason is to advance a nation&#x27;s foreign policy interests and agenda by disseminating its views on international affairs or on the events in particular parts of the world. During the Cold War the American Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty and Indian Radio AIR were founded to broadcast news from &quot;behind the Iron Curtain&quot; that was otherwise being censored and promote dissent and occasionally, to disseminate disinformation. Currently, the US operates similar services aimed at Cuba (Radio y Televisión Martí) and the People&#x27;s Republic of China, Vietnam, Laos and North Korea (Radio Free Asia).

The BBC World Service, the Voice of America, All India Radio and other western broadcasters have emphasized news broadcasts, particularly to countries that are experiencing repression or civil unrest and whose populations are unable to obtain news from non-government sources. In the case of emergencies, a nation may broadcast special programs overseas to inform listeners what is occurring. During Iraqi missile strikes on Israel during the 1991 Gulf War, Kol Israel relayed its domestic service on its shortwave service.

Besides ideological reasons, many stations are run by religious broadcasters and are used to provide religious education, religious music, or worship service programs. For example, Vatican Radio, established in 1931, broadcasts such programs. Another station, such as HCJB or Trans World Radio will carry brokered programming from evangelists. In the case of the Broadcasting Services of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, both governmental and religious programming is provided.

Stations also broadcast to international audiences for cultural reasons. Often a station has an official mandate to keep expatriates in touch with their home country. Many broadcasters often relay their national domestic service on shortwave for that reason. Other reasons include teaching a foreign language, such as Radio Exterior de España&#x27;s Spanish class, &quot;Un idioma sin fronteras&quot;, or the Voice of America&#x27;s broadcasts in Special English. In the case of major broadcasters such as the BBC World Service or Radio Australia, there is also an educational outreach.

An additional reason for international broadcasting is to maintain contact with a country&#x27;s citizens travelling abroad or expatriates who have emigrated and share news from home as well as cultural programming. This role of external shortwave broadcasting has declined as advances in communications have allowed expatriates to read news from home and listen and watch to domestic broadcasts in their own language via the internet and satellite. A number of international services such as the original BBC Empire Service, Radio Netherlands, France&#x27;s Poste Colonial (now Radio France International) and others were founded in part with the goal of helping draw overseas empires closer to the mother country and provide closer cultural and communication connections between the home country and its colonies, a role that became largely obsolete due to decolonization.

=== Notable networks ===

* TV1 (Malaysian Malays and Malaysian English)
* Berita RTM (Malaysian Malays and Malaysian English)
* RTM ASEAN (Malaysian English)
* CNN International (English)
* BBC News (Arabic, English, Persian)
* BBC World Service (Arabic, Azeri, Bengali, Burmese, Cantonese, English, French for Africa, Hausa, Hindi, Indonesian, Kinyarwanda, Kirundi, Kyrgyz, Nepali, Pashto, Persian, Portuguese for Brazil, Russian, Sinhala, Somali, Spanish for Latin America, Swahili, Tamil, Turkish, Ukrainian, Urdu, Uzbek, Vietnamese)
* DD News (Hindi, English, Sanskrit, Punjabi, Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Malawi, Urdu, Bangla, Marathi, Malayalam, Thai, Baloch, Arabic, Fiji Hindi, Bhojpuri, Assami, Nagapure)
* Asian News International (Hindi, English, Tamil, Telghu, Bangla)
* Sky News (English, Arabic)
* France 24 (French, English, Arabic, Spanish)
* Al Jazeera (English, Arabic)
* Telesur (Spanish, English)
* Deutsche Welle (German, English, Spanish, Hindi, Tamil, Russian, Arabic, Persian, Dari, Pashto, Urdu, Albanian, Amharic, Bengali, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Mandarin Chinese, French, Greek, Hausa, Indonesian, Kiswahili, Turkish, Macedonian, Portuguese, Romanian, Serbian, Ukrainian)
* EBC (Portuguese, English, Spanish)
* TRT World (English, Arabic, Turkish)
* Voice of Turkey (English, Arabic, Armenian, Azerbaijani, Bulgarian, Chinese, Dari, French, Georgian, German, Hausa, Italian, Japanese, Kazakh, Malay, Pashto, Kurdish, Russian, Spanish, Swahili, Turkmen, Turkish, Urdu, Uyghur, Uzbek)
* Press Trust of India (Hindi and 98 other languages)
* Press TV (English, French)
* TV5Monde (French)
* CNA (English)
* Singapore International Television (Singaporean Standard English (Singapore English)/Singaporean Colloquial English (Singlish), Singaporean Mandarin/Standard Singaporean Mandarin/Colloquial Singaporean Mandarin (Singdarin) and Singaporean Malays)
* Zee News (Hindi)
* RT (Russian, English, French, German, Arabic, Spanish)
* Zee Entertainment (Hindi, Thai, English, Tamil, Telghu, and 126 other local languages)
* Voice of Indonesia (English, French, Spanish, German, Indonesian, Japanese, Arabic, Chinese, Dutch)
* ABC Australia (English)
* RNZ International (English, French, Samoan, Tongan, Niuean, Cook Islands Maori, Solomon Islands Pidgin)
* i24NEWS (English, French, Spanish, Arabic)
* Sun TV (Tamil)
* NHK World-Japan (English, Japanese)
* CGTN (English, French, Spanish, Russian, Arabic)
* China Radio International (Albanian, Arabic, Armenian, Belarusian, Bengali, Bulgarian, Burmese, Croatian, Cambodian, Czech, Dutch, English, Esperanto, Estonian, Filipino, French, German, Greek, Hausa, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Italian, Japanese, Laotian, Malaysian, Nepali, Persian, Polish, Portuguese, Pashto, Romanian, Russian, Serbian, Sinhala, Spanish, Swahili, Swedish, Tamil, Turkish, Ukrainian, Urdu, Vietnamese, Hakka, Cantonese, Hokkien, Teochew, Hakka, Wenzhouese, Uyghur, Kazakh, Mongolian, Korean)
* Arirang (English, Korean, Chinese, Spanish, Arabic, Russian, Vietnamese, Indonesian)
* WION (English)
* The Filipino Channel (English, Filipino)
* GMA Pinoy TV (English, Filipino)
* Kapatid Channel (English, Filipino)
* RAE (Spanish, German, French, English, Italian, Portuguese, Chinese, Japanese)
* SVT1 (Swedish)
* SVT2 (Swedish)

== Means to reach an audience ==

Because of this many broadcasters are discovering they can reach a wider audience through other methods (particularly the internet and satellite television) and are cutting back on (or even entirely dropping) shortwave.

An international broadcaster has several options for reaching a foreign audience:
* If the foreign audience is near the broadcaster, high-power longwave and mediumwave stations can provide reliable coverage.
* If the foreign audience is more than 1,000 kilometers away from the broadcaster, shortwave radio is reliable, but subject to interruption by adverse solar/geomagnetic conditions.
* An international broadcaster may use a local mediumwave or FM radio or television relay station in the target country or countries.
* An international broadcaster may use a local shortwave broadcaster as a relay station.
* Neighboring states, such as Israel and Jordan, may broadcast television programs to each other&#x27;s viewing public.

An international broadcaster such as the BBC, Radio France International or Germany&#x27;s Deutsche Welle, may use all the above methods. Several international broadcasters, such as Swiss Radio International, have abandoned shortwave broadcasting altogether, relying on Internet transmissions only. Others, such as the BBC World Service, have abandoned shortwave transmissions to North America, relying on local relays, the Internet, and satellite transmissions.

=== Mediumwave and longwave broadcasts ===
Most radio receivers in the world receive the mediumwave band (530 kHz to 1710 kHz), which at night is capable of reliable reception from 150 to 2,500 km distance from a transmitter. Mediumwave is used heavily all over the world for international broadcasting on a formal and informal basis.

In addition, many receivers used in Europe and Russia can receive the longwave broadcast band (150 to 280 kHz), which provides reliable long-distance communications over continental distances.

=== Shortwave broadcast ===
Shortwave receivers are capable of receiving shortwave transmissions (2,000 to 30,000 kHz or 2 to 30 MHz). Depending on time of day, season of year, solar weather and Earth&#x27;s geomagnetic field, a signal might reach around the world.

In previous decades shortwave (and sometimes high-powered mediumwave) transmission was regarded as the main (and often the &quot;only&quot;) way in which broadcasters could reach an international audience. In recent years the proliferation of technologies such as satellite broadcasting, the Internet, and rebroadcasts of programming on AM and FM within target nations has meant that this is no longer necessarily the case.

Transmitter output power has increased since 1920. Higher transmitter powers do guarantee better reception in the target area. Higher transmitter power in most cases counteracts the lesser effects of jamming.
* 1950s : 100 kW
* 1960s : 200 kW, early 1960s (2 × 100 kW &#x27;twinned&#x27;)
* 1970s : 300 kW, but many 250 kW transmitters sold
* 1980s : 500 kW sometimes transmitters were &quot;doubled up&quot; to produce 1000 kW output
* 1980s-present: 600 kW single, 1200 kW from twinned transmitters.

International stations generally use special directional antennas to aim the signal toward the intended audience and increase the effective power in that direction. Use of such antennas for international broadcasting began in the mid-1930s and became prominent by the 1950s. By using antennas which focus most of their energy in one direction, a modern station may achieve the equivalent, in that direction, of tens of millions of watts of radio power.

=== Digital audio broadcasting ===
Some international broadcasters have become available via digital audio broadcasting (DAB) in Europe in the 1990s, and in a similar limited way in the Americas via in-band FM (IBOC) DAB systems in the US in the 2000s. This is a popular method to reach listeners in cars that would otherwise not be accessible during that part of the day. However, in terms of the global international broadcasting audience the DAB listener base is very small—one can assume that it is less than 2% of the listener base globally.

=== Television ===
International broadcasting via 24 hour TV news channels has its origins in North America in the early 1980s. CNN technically was the first 24-hour international news channel as it was made available in Canada soon after launch. The BBC World Service considered setting up a global TV news channel as far back as 1975, but abandoned the idea for internal reasons.

Notwithstanding a large number of international 24-hour television news and information broadcasters, the television percentage of viewers is still fairly small when compared to global radio listener numbers.

The rural populations of Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia (as well as East Asia) have radio listener bases that are far larger than the largest international TV broadcaster could hope for, yet they could be considered underserved since the end of the Cold War (when these regions had more radio broadcasts targeted at them).

==== Streaming video sites ====
Many international television broadcasters (as well as domestic television broadcasters) have set up accounts on streaming video sites like YouTube to allow their news and information broadcasts to be globally distributed. The viewer numbers for these sites may seem huge. Cable, TVRO and terrestrial television broadcasters probably have 100 to 1,000 times larger audiences for their international broadcasting content.

International broadcasters known to maintain their own streaming video sites:

* TV1
* RTM ASEAN
* ABC Australia
* Al Jazeera
* BBC World News
* CNA
* CNN International
* DD News
* Deutsche Welle
* France 24
* i24NEWS
* RT
* Singapore International Television
* Sky News
* WION

=== RSS feeds and email ===
Many international broadcasters (television or radio) can reach &quot;unreachable&quot; audiences via email and RSS feeds. This is not at all unusual, as the first commonly agreed international broadcast was a Morse Code telegram transmitted from US President Wilson to the German Kaiser (mid-1918) via a high powered longwave transmitter on the US East Coast (this important event in international broadcasting history was described in depth in the IEEE &quot;The History of International Broadcasting&quot; first volume). As Morse Code is considered to be a data format, with email and RSS merely being refinements of the technology it can be said that international broadcasting has a deep relationship with modern-day datacasting.

The reach of RSS and email for international broadcasters is not really known that well, especially considering that emails get forwarded. The numbers for active RSS and email audiences are probably 5 to 20 times larger than for streaming video. It may take into the 2010s to get meaningful numbers with respect to the size of these audiences for assorted technical reasons related to the RSS and email technologies.

Email and RSS feeds can traverse telecommunications barriers that streaming video cannot, thus the larger expected audience numbers. The global economic downturn of 2008-2009 will probably increase the email and RSS audience sizes as fewer people will be able to afford high speed internet connections in North America, Western Europe and the Asia-Pacific regions.

== Listeners ==

An international broadcaster may have the technical means of reaching a foreign audience, but unless the foreign audience has a reason to listen, the effectiveness of the broadcaster is in question.

One of the most common foreign audiences consists of expatriates, who cannot listen to radio or watch television programs from home. Another common audience is radio hobbyists, who attempt to listen to as many countries as possible and obtain verification cards or letters (&quot;QSLs&quot;). These audiences send letters and in response few radio stations write them back. These kind of Listeners often take part in weekly and monthly quizzes and contests started by many radio stations. A third audience consists of journalists, government officials, and key businesspersons, who exert a disproportionate influence on a state&#x27;s foreign or economic policy.

A fourth, but less publicized audience, consists of intelligence officers and agents who monitor broadcasts for both open-source intelligence clues to the broadcasting state&#x27;s policies and for hidden messages to foreign agents operating in the receiving country. The BBC started its monitoring service in Caversham, Reading in 1936 (now BBC Monitoring). In the United States, the DNI Open Source Center (formerly the Central Intelligence Agency&#x27;s Foreign Broadcast Information Service) provides the same service. Copies of OSC/FBIS reports can be found in many U.S. libraries that serve as government depositories. In addition, a number of hobbyists listen and report &quot;spook&quot; transmissions.

Without these four audiences, international broadcasters face difficulty in getting funding. In 2001, for example, the BBC World Service stopped transmitting shortwave broadcasts to North America, and other international broadcasters, such as YLE Radio Finland, stopped certain foreign-language programs.

However, international broadcasting has been successful when a country does not provide programming wanted by a wide segment of the population. In the 1960s, when there was no BBC service playing rock and roll, Radio Television Luxembourg (RTL) broadcast rock and roll, including bands such as the Beatles, into the United Kingdom. Similar programming came from an unlicensed, or &quot;pirate&quot; station, Radio Caroline, which broadcast from a ship in the international waters of the North Sea.

== Restricting reception ==
In many cases, governments do not want their citizens listening to international broadcasters. In Nazi Germany, a major propaganda campaign, backed by law and prison sentences, attempted to discourage Germans from listening to such stations. The practice was made illegal in 1939. In addition, the German government sold a cheap, &quot;People&#x27;s Receiver&quot;, as well as an even cheaper receiver, that could not pick up distant signals well.

The idea was copied by Stalin&#x27;s Soviet Union, which had a nearly identical copy manufactured in the Tesla factory in Czechoslovakia.
In North Korea, all receivers are sold with fixed frequencies, tuned to local stations.

The most common method of preventing reception is jamming, or broadcasting a signal on the same frequencies as the international broadcaster. Germany jammed the BBC European service during the Second World War. Russian and Eastern European jammers were aimed against Radio Free Europe, other Western broadcasters, and against Chinese broadcasters during the nadir of Sino-Soviet relations. In 2002, the Cuban government jammed the Voice of America&#x27;s Radio Martí program and the Chinese government jammed Radio Free Asia, Voice of America, Radio Taiwan International as well broadcasts made by adherents of Falun Gong.

North Korea restricts most people to a single fixed frequency mediumwave receiver; those who met political requirements and whose work absolutely required familiarity with events abroad were allowed shortwave receivers. Another method of reaching people with government radio programming, but not foreign programming, is the use of radio broadcasting by direct broadcasting to loudspeakers.
David Jackson, director of the Voice of America, noted &quot;The North Korean government doesn&#x27;t jam us, but they try to keep people from listening through intimidation or worse. But people figure out ways to listen despite the odds. They&#x27;re very resourceful.&quot;

Yet another method of preventing reception involves moving a domestic station to the frequency used by the international broadcaster. During the Batista government of Cuba, and during the Castro years, Cuban medium-wave stations broadcast on the frequencies of popular South Florida stations. In October 2002, Iraq changed frequencies of two stations to block the Voice of America&#x27;s Radio Sawa program.

Jamming can be defeated by using very efficient transmitting antennas, carefully choosing the transmitted frequency, changing transmitted frequency often, using single sideband, and properly aiming the receiving antenna.

== See also ==
* List of international broadcasters
* List of shortwave radio broadcasters
* Shortwave
* Shortwave bands
* Shortwave listening
* FTA receiver
* Medium wave – MW broadcasts generally don&#x27;t travel as far as shortwave broadcasts, but MW is still used for international broadcasting, particularly to neighboring countries
* MW DX (mediumwave DXing)
* State media

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===

* Graef 2005Graef, Robert. &quot;Bicycling to Amersfoort: A World War II Memoir&quot;. 2005, iUniverse. 
* Horwitz 2001Horwitz, Robert Britt. &quot;Communication and Democratic Reform in South Africa&quot;. 2001, Cambridge University Press .
* Hughes and Mann 2002Hughes, Matthew, and Chris Mann. &quot;Inside Hitler&#x27;s Germany: Life Under the Third Reich&quot;. 2002, Brassey&#x27;s. 
* Levillain 2002Levillain, Philippe. &quot;The Papacy: An Encyclopedia&quot;. Translated by John O&#x27;Malley. Routledge, 2002. 
* Martin 2006Martin, Bradley K. &quot;Under the Loving Care of the Fatherly Leader: North Korea and the Kim Dynasty&quot;. 2006, Macmillan. 
* Wood 2000Wood, James. &quot;History of International Broadcasting&quot;. 2000, IET. 
== External links ==
* Hard-Core-DX – serious information about shortwave/AM radio stations
* American Radio Relay League (ARRL), Newington, Connecticut.
* englishradio.co.uk Cataloguing and reviewing every English-language radio station
* Easy-to-construct &quot;interference-reducing&quot; antennas for shortwave portables: U.S. International Broadcasting Bureau and K3MT (the &quot;Villard antenna&quot;)
* &quot;World Radio TV Handbook&quot; The bible of international broadcasting
* &quot;RCI Action Committee&quot; Union group created to protect Radio Canada International&#x27;s international broadcasting mandate and funding.
* &quot;AIB | Association for International Broadcasting&quot; The non-governmental, not-for-profit industry association for international TV and radio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q779239" start="0" end="26" title="International broadcasting" label="International broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="324" end="334" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177021" start="339" end="356" title="counterpropaganda" label="counterpropaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q21855250" start="722" end="731" title="metropole" label="metropole"/>
<link wikidata="" start="793" end="807" title=":fr:Le Poste colonial" label="Poste Colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118604" start="847" end="851" title="PCJJ" label="PCJJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143951" start="972" end="982" title="soft power" label="soft power"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1160" end="1171" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q79897" start="1240" end="1250" title="Morse code" label="Morse code"/>
<link wikidata="Q581994" start="1339" end="1344" title="Nauen" label="Nauen"/>
<link wikidata="Q157648" start="1499" end="1514" title="Fourteen Points" label="Fourteen Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="1614" end="1631" title="Kaiser Wilhelm II" label="Kaiser Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q36488" start="1687" end="1704" title="Guglielmo Marconi" label="Guglielmo Marconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="1726" end="1736" title="short wave" label="short wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q27369" start="1869" end="1892" title="Charles Samuel Franklin" label="Charles Samuel Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129610" start="1923" end="1946" title="Poldhu" label="Poldhu Wireless Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="1948" end="1956" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="2136" end="2154" title="Cape Verde" label="Cape Verde Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846886" start="2301" end="2324" title="Imperial Wireless Chain" label="Imperial Wireless Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9832" start="2418" end="2427" title="Eindhoven" label="Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118604" start="2447" end="2451" title="PCJJ" label="PCJJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317255" start="2559" end="2576" title="Dutch West Indies" label="Dutch West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="2581" end="2598" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10750370" start="2679" end="2692" title="Happy Station Show" label="Happy Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q664996" start="2832" end="2849" title="Radio Netherlands" label="Radio Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6597183" start="3014" end="3027" title="Armistice Day" label="Armistice Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633139" start="3164" end="3167" title="2LO" label="2LO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3193" end="3196" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q210985" start="3311" end="3321" title="Chelmsford" label="Chelmsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="3363" end="3381" title="BBC Empire Service" label="BBC Empire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q680634" start="3563" end="3576" title="Vatican Radio" label="Vatican Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q212196" start="3598" end="3610" title="Voice of Russia" label="Radio Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q212196" start="3666" end="3681" title="Voice of Russia" label="Voice of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126161" start="3830" end="3834" title="HCJB" label="HCJB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900" start="3838" end="3843" title="Quito" label="Quito"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="3845" end="3852" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="3905" end="3911" title="Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532066" start="3914" end="3926" title="Radio Ceylon" label="Radio Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274071" start="3936" end="3970" title="Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation" label="Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q581994" start="4028" end="4033" title="Nauen" label="Nauen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719455" start="4133" end="4139" title="Zeesen short-wave transmitter (1931)" label="Zeesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q321586" start="4188" end="4198" title="Reichspost" label="Reichspost"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="4291" end="4303" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="4437" end="4452" title="Nazi propaganda" label="Nazi propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="4621" end="4629" title="kilowatt" label="kilowatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q184414" start="4675" end="4681" title="Zeesen" label="Zeesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="4898" end="4913" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="4944" end="4972" title="German annexation of Austria" label="German annexation of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="4981" end="4994" title="Munich Crisis" label="Munich Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="5018" end="5043" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Radio Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="5315" end="5332" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q325635" start="5377" end="5387" title="Telefunken" label="Telefunken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302267" start="5474" end="5498" title="Radio Nacional de España" label="Radio Nacional de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5651" end="5667" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="5773" end="5776" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q117352171" start="5812" end="5818" title="BBC German Service" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="5921" end="5937" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="5971" end="5988" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="Douglas MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q920343" start="6160" end="6185" title="British Union of Fascists" label="British Union of Fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q76532" start="6193" end="6206" title="William Joyce" label="William Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q543009" start="6237" end="6249" title="Lord Haw-Haw" label="Lord Haw-Haw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371205" start="6268" end="6282" title="Paul Ferdonnet" label="Paul Ferdonnet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6287" end="6301" title="André Olbrecht" label="André Olbrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452386" start="6371" end="6399" title="Frederick William Kaltenbach" label="Frederick William Kaltenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q432768" start="6431" end="6446" title="Mildred Gillars" label="Mildred Gillars"/>
<link wikidata="Q106956821" start="6487" end="6497" title="Axis Sally" label="Axis Sally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910347" start="6696" end="6706" title="Tokyo Rose" label="Tokyo Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281018" start="6979" end="6989" title="Radio SEAC" label="Radio SEAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="7004" end="7010" title="Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q153770" start="7269" end="7283" title="Deutsche Welle" label="Deutsche Welle"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="7302" end="7309" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q675403" start="7329" end="7355" title="Radio Berlin International" label="Radio Berlin International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128361" start="7619" end="7626" title="radio jamming" label="jamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="7786" end="7802" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="7808" end="7825" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q485500" start="7835" end="7866" title="Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty" label="Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18555670" start="7919" end="7931" title="Radio Moscow" label="Radio Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q375117" start="7947" end="7959" title="Radio Peking" label="Radio Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q375117" start="7966" end="7979" title="Radio Beijing" label="Radio Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q375117" start="7985" end="8010" title="China Radio International" label="China Radio International"/>
<link wikidata="Q153770" start="8320" end="8334" title="Deutsche Welle" label="Deutsche Welle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454025" start="8355" end="8378" title="Jülich radio transmitter" label="Julich transmitter site"/>
<link wikidata="Q325635" start="8423" end="8433" title="Telefunken" label="Telefunken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794496" start="8452" end="8467" title="Wertachtal transmitter site" label="Wertachtal site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355683" start="8645" end="8655" title="Nauen Transmitter Station" label="Nauen site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="8826" end="8837" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q39524" start="8863" end="8875" title="Gamal Nasser" label="Gamal Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="8877" end="8882" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714952" start="8946" end="8957" title="Kol Yisrael" label="Kol Yisrael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="9038" end="9053" title="Jewish diaspora" label="Jewish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q124425" start="9079" end="9091" title="Iron Curtain" label="Iron Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126245" start="9094" end="9103" title="Radio RSA" label="Radio RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q950992" start="9340" end="9354" title="Channel Africa" label="Channel Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="9386" end="9393" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q53783" start="9400" end="9411" title="Enver Hoxha" label="Enver Hoxha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309121" start="9425" end="9439" title="hermit kingdom" label="hermit kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334457" start="9548" end="9560" title="Radio Tirana" label="Radio Tirana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="9741" end="9749" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q568173" start="10303" end="10312" title="Swissinfo" label="Swissinfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23703833" start="10550" end="10559" title="RNW Media" label="RNW Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="10564" end="10567" title="NGO" label="NGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076968" start="10617" end="10630" title="digital media" label="digital media"/>
<link wikidata="Q212196" start="10681" end="10696" title="Voice of Russia" label="Voice of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18572033" start="10736" end="10743" title="Sputnik (news agency)" label="Sputnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067958" start="10846" end="10872" title="List of shortwave radio broadcasters" label="ceased operations entirely"/>
<link wikidata="Q946584" start="10927" end="10949" title="Digital Radio Mondiale" label="Digital Radio Mondiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="11048" end="11055" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="11322" end="11339" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="11491" end="11494" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="11523" end="11529" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q316390" start="11580" end="11587" title="Antigua" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="11848" end="11856" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="12639" end="12649" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126245" start="12933" end="12942" title="Radio RSA" label="Radio RSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q212196" start="13119" end="13131" title="Voice of Russia" label="Radio Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="13392" end="13400" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q485500" start="13414" end="13431" title="Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty" label="Radio Free Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q485500" start="13436" end="13449" title="Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty" label="Radio Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321122" start="13467" end="13470" title="All India Radio" label="AIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q124425" start="13524" end="13536" title="Iron Curtain" label="Iron Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q189656" start="13630" end="13644" title="disinformation" label="disinformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="13699" end="13703" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621355" start="13705" end="13729" title="Radio y Televisión Martí" label="Radio y Televisión Martí"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="13739" end="13770" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="13772" end="13779" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="13781" end="13785" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="13790" end="13801" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q40322" start="13803" end="13818" title="Radio Free Asia" label="Radio Free Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="13826" end="13843" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="13849" end="13865" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321122" start="13867" end="13882" title="All India Radio" label="All India Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714952" start="14280" end="14290" title="Kol Israel" label="Kol Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q680634" start="14528" end="14541" title="Vatican Radio" label="Vatican Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126161" start="14615" end="14619" title="HCJB" label="HCJB"/>
<link wikidata="Q702641" start="14623" end="14640" title="Trans World Radio" label="Trans World Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120440" start="14710" end="14762" title="Broadcasting Services of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia" label="Broadcasting Services of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126117" start="15140" end="15164" title="Radio Exterior de España" label="Radio Exterior de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731224" start="15269" end="15284" title="Special English" label="Special English"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="15332" end="15349" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q164921" start="15353" end="15368" title="Radio Australia" label="Radio Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="15916" end="15934" title="BBC Empire Service" label="BBC Empire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q664996" start="15936" end="15953" title="Radio Netherlands" label="Radio Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q19912" start="15989" end="16015" title="Radio France International" label="Radio France International"/>
<link wikidata="Q16513600" start="16110" end="16124" title="mother country" label="mother country"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="16269" end="16283" title="decolonization" label="decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014866" start="16314" end="16317" title="TV1 (Malaysian TV network)" label="TV1"/>
<link wikidata="Q96679596" start="16361" end="16371" title="Berita RTM" label="Berita RTM"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16415" end="16424" title=":ms:RTM Asean" label="RTM ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282786" start="16447" end="16464" title="CNN International" label="CNN International"/>
<link wikidata="Q787216" start="16477" end="16485" title="BBC News (TV Channel)" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q973341" start="16487" end="16493" title="BBC Arabic Television" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876754" start="16504" end="16511" title="BBC Persian Television" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="16515" end="16532" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q349806" start="16826" end="16833" title="DD News" label="DD News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613165" start="17000" end="17024" title="Asian News International" label="Asian News International"/>
<link wikidata="Q217228" start="17067" end="17075" title="Sky News" label="Sky News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201035" start="17086" end="17092" title="Sky News Arabia" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166180" start="17096" end="17105" title="France 24" label="France 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q13477" start="17143" end="17153" title="Al Jazeera Arabic" label="Al Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296040" start="17155" end="17162" title="Al Jazeera English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q310659" start="17174" end="17181" title="telesur (TV channel)" label="Telesur"/>
<link wikidata="Q153770" start="17203" end="17217" title="Deutsche Welle" label="Deutsche Welle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10272499" start="17481" end="17484" title="Brazil Communication Company" label="EBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063045" start="17518" end="17527" title="TRT World" label="TRT World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571990" start="17538" end="17544" title="TRT Arabi" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q262070" start="17546" end="17553" title="TRT Türk" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194217" start="17557" end="17572" title="Voice of Turkey" label="Voice of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q268897" start="17792" end="17812" title="Press Trust of India" label="Press Trust of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q912429" start="17846" end="17854" title="Press TV" label="Press TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138163" start="17875" end="17883" title="TV5Monde" label="TV5Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q40238" start="17895" end="17898" title="CNA (TV network)" label="CNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q123038473" start="17911" end="17945" title="Singapore International Television" label="Singapore International Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287969" start="18160" end="18168" title="Zee News" label="Zee News"/>
<link wikidata="Q22868" start="18179" end="18181" title="RT (TV network)" label="RT"/>
<link wikidata="Q12428554" start="18236" end="18253" title="Zee Entertainment Enterprises" label="Zee Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063351" start="18325" end="18343" title="Voice of Indonesia" label="Voice of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231014" start="18427" end="18440" title="ABC Australia (Asia-Pacific Television)" label="ABC Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q939581" start="18453" end="18470" title="RNZ International" label="RNZ International"/>
<link wikidata="Q13612085" start="18559" end="18566" title="i24NEWS" label="i24NEWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536337" start="18604" end="18610" title="Sun TV (India)" label="Sun TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191688" start="18621" end="18636" title="NHK World-Japan" label="NHK World-Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28089296" start="18659" end="18663" title="China Global Television Network" label="CGTN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378607" start="18665" end="18672" title="CGTN (TV channel)" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442151" start="18674" end="18680" title="CGTN French" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442139" start="18682" end="18689" title="CGTN Spanish" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944607" start="18691" end="18698" title="CGTN Russian" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276811" start="18700" end="18706" title="CGTN Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q375117" start="18710" end="18735" title="China Radio International" label="China Radio International"/>
<link wikidata="Q167618" start="19234" end="19241" title="Arirang TV" label="Arirang"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058781" start="19321" end="19325" title="WION (TV channel)" label="WION"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987033" start="19338" end="19358" title="The Filipino Channel" label="The Filipino Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513727" start="19381" end="19393" title="GMA Pinoy TV" label="GMA Pinoy TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q15614118" start="19416" end="19431" title="Kapatid Channel" label="Kapatid Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q517896" start="19454" end="19457" title="Radiodifusión Argentina al Exterior" label="RAE"/>
<link wikidata="Q292996" start="19535" end="19539" title="SVT1" label="SVT1"/>
<link wikidata="Q741376" start="19552" end="19556" title="SVT2" label="SVT2"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="20465" end="20471" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="20476" end="20482" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q568173" start="20738" end="20763" title="Swiss Radio International" label="Swiss Radio International"/>
<link wikidata="Q466814" start="21109" end="21119" title="mediumwave" label="mediumwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082861" start="21426" end="21434" title="longwave" label="longwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558173" start="21578" end="21596" title="Shortwave receiver" label="Shortwave receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="21623" end="21632" title="shortwave" label="shortwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128361" start="22442" end="22449" title="radio jamming" label="jamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534042" start="22790" end="22810" title="HRS type antennas" label="directional antennas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295986" start="22875" end="22890" title="Effective radiated power" label="effective power"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="23176" end="23180" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257510" start="23292" end="23318" title="digital audio broadcasting" label="digital audio broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149586" start="23410" end="23414" title="IBOC" label="IBOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="24839" end="24846" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014866" start="25202" end="25205" title="TV1 (Malaysian TV network)" label="TV1"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25208" end="25217" title=":ms:RTM Asean" label="RTM ASEAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231014" start="25220" end="25233" title="ABC Australia (Southeast Asian TV channel)" label="ABC Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13477" start="25236" end="25246" title="Al Jazeera Arabic" label="Al Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q208491" start="25249" end="25263" title="BBC World News" label="BBC World News"/>
<link wikidata="Q40238" start="25266" end="25269" title="CNA (TV network)" label="CNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282786" start="25272" end="25289" title="CNN International" label="CNN International"/>
<link wikidata="Q349806" start="25292" end="25299" title="DD News" label="DD News"/>
<link wikidata="Q153770" start="25302" end="25316" title="Deutsche Welle" label="Deutsche Welle"/>
<link wikidata="Q166180" start="25319" end="25328" title="France 24" label="France 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q13612085" start="25331" end="25338" title="i24NEWS" label="i24NEWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q22868" start="25341" end="25343" title="RT (TV network)" label="RT"/>
<link wikidata="Q123038473" start="25346" end="25380" title="Singapore International Television" label="Singapore International Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q217228" start="25383" end="25391" title="Sky News" label="Sky News"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058781" start="25394" end="25398" title="WION (TV channel)" label="WION"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073309" start="27325" end="27340" title="Shortwave listening" label="radio hobbyists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059178" start="27946" end="27970" title="open-source intelligence" label="open-source intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q766382" start="28171" end="28185" title="BBC Monitoring" label="BBC Monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154057" start="28214" end="28217" title="United States Director of National Intelligence" label="DNI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974653" start="28218" end="28236" title="Open Source Center" label="Open Source Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="28251" end="28278" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q493183" start="28286" end="28323" title="Foreign Broadcast Information Service" label="Foreign Broadcast Information Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q921159" start="29087" end="29090" title="RTL Group" label="RTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="29141" end="29152" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936592" start="29255" end="29269" title="Radio Caroline" label="Radio Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q163889" start="29704" end="29738" title="Volksempfänger" label="&amp;quot;People&amp;#x27;s Receiver&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008707" start="30033" end="30047" title="List of radio stations in North Korea" label="local stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128361" start="30100" end="30107" title="radio jamming" label="jamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q485500" start="30317" end="30334" title="Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty" label="Radio Free Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="30481" end="30497" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621355" start="30505" end="30516" title="Radio y Televisión Martí" label="Radio Martí"/>
<link wikidata="Q40322" start="30559" end="30574" title="Radio Free Asia" label="Radio Free Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="30576" end="30592" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q698884" start="30594" end="30620" title="Radio Taiwan International" label="Radio Taiwan International"/>
<link wikidata="Q185802" start="30661" end="30671" title="Falun Gong" label="Falun Gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126332" start="31730" end="31740" title="Radio Sawa" label="Radio Sawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q560348" start="31912" end="31927" title="Single-sideband modulation" label="single sideband"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434678" start="31990" end="32024" title="List of international broadcasters" label="List of international broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067958" start="32027" end="32063" title="List of shortwave radio broadcasters" label="List of shortwave radio broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="32066" end="32075" title="Shortwave" label="Shortwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152721" start="32078" end="32093" title="Shortwave bands" label="Shortwave bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073309" start="32096" end="32115" title="Shortwave listening" label="Shortwave listening"/>
<link wikidata="Q366516" start="32118" end="32130" title="FTA receiver" label="FTA receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q466814" start="32133" end="32144" title="Medium wave" label="Medium wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720247" start="32314" end="32319" title="MW DX" label="MW DX"/>
<link wikidata="Q844865" start="32332" end="32337" title="DXing" label="DXing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324556" start="32341" end="32352" title="State media" label="State media"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104719" wikidata="Q79319" url="?curid=104719" title="Samson, Alabama">
<text>Samson is a city in Geneva County, Alabama, United States. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2020 census, the population was 1,874, a decline from the figure of 1,940 tabulated in 2010. Samson incorporated in 1905 (according to the 1910 U.S. Census), although other sources cited 1906.

During the Great Depression, the T.S. Faulk and Company Store in downtown Samson purchased a large shipment of snuff, which remained stationary at the town&#x27;s depot for an extended period of time. This led to Samson being nicknamed &quot;Snuff City, U.S.A.&quot; The nickname is commemorated today with a New Year&#x27;s drop of a Rooster snuff can.

In an attempt to shed this moniker, several community groups decided to plant extensive beds of red roses along all the roads leading into Samson. With this planting, they hoped the new slogan &quot;City of a Million Roses&quot; would take root. However, as the roses gradually disappeared, the old slogan resurfaced.

The town&#x27;s current motto is &quot;Samson...We Grow Friendly People.&quot; A Samson High School student devised the slogan during a high school contest. This contest received more than 50 entries, and the student emerged as the winner, earning $100. The contest committee deemed his slogan, &quot;Samson-we grow friendly people,&quot; as a representation of the agricultural aspect and the amicability of the town.

==Geography==
Samson is located at (31.112574, -86.047865).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and 0.28% is water.

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
At the 2000 census there were 2,071 people, 894 households, and 575 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 1,016 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 77.11% White, 20.42% Black or African American, 0.97% Native American, 0.63% from other races, and 0.87% from two or more races. 2.46% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 894 households 28.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.4% were married couples living together, 16.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.6% were non-families. 33.3% of households were one person and 16.1% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.32 and the average family size was 2.92.

The age distribution was 25.5% under the age of 18, 7.5% from 18 to 24, 24.8% from 25 to 44, 24.3% from 45 to 64, and 17.9% 65 or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 86.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 80.5 males.

The median household income was $18,594 and the median family income was $25,188. Males had a median income of $25,767 versus $16,719 for females. The per capita income for the city was $12,834. About 29.2% of families and 33.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 51.1% of those under age 18 and 32.0% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census there were 1,940 people, 814 households, and 513 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 968 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 73.3% White, 17.9% Black or African American, 1.1% Native American, 5.2% from other races, and 2.1% from two or more races. 8.3% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 814 households 25.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 36.2% were married couples living together, 20.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.0% were non-families. 32.3% of households were one person and 13.6% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 3.05.

The age distribution was 24.6% under the age of 18, 8.6% from 18 to 24, 24.8% from 25 to 44, 25.6% from 45 to 64, and 16.4% 65 or older. The median age was 38.1 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.7 males.

The median household income was $18,768 and the median family income was $25,060. Males had a median income of $29,167 versus $19,682 for females. The per capita income for the city was $11,606. About 31.6% of families and 32.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 44.7% of those under age 18 and 19.4% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,874 people, 763 households, and 434 families residing in the city.

==Notable people==
*Roy Brooks — guitarist, lived in Samson from 1971 to 1983
* Terry Owens — football player, San Diego Chargers; graduated from Samson High School in 1962
*James &quot;J.T.&quot; Thomas, Jr. — winner of 
*Bill Yates — cartoonist, born in Samson

==2009 shooting==

On March 10, 2009, in the Alabama towns of Kinston, Samson and Geneva, the deadliest mass shooting in the state’s history took place in Geneva County. Twenty-eight-year-old Michael McLendon began this massacre by killing his mother and burning down her house in Kinston. He then headed east about 10 miles on Highway 52 and went on an hour-long shooting spree with two high-powered weapons in downtown Samson and a few of its neighborhoods. McLendon then headed to Geneva. McLendon killed ten people and wounded six others in the shooting rampage before committing suicide.
In response, troops from nearby Fort Rucker were deployed to the streets of Samson, where they manned barricades and guarded a makeshift morgue. This was later determined to be in violation of the Posse Comitatus Act, which prohibits federal troops from performing law enforcement actions.

Reportedly, McLendon had talked to a confidant about being depressed and frustrated with his inability to become a Marine or a police officer.

Authorities also said McLendon admitted in a two-page, handwritten letter that he had killed his mother and planned to commit suicide. He mentioned a family dispute over a legal issue but did not reveal plans to kill anyone else. Investigators said they found the letter in a mailbox. They would not disclose its intended recipient.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79319" start="0" end="6" title="Samson, Alabama" label="Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q494620" start="20" end="42" title="Geneva County, Alabama" label="Geneva County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="77" end="92" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="131" end="142" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="336" end="352" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631543" start="634" end="654" title="List of objects dropped on New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1497" end="1515" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="1628" end="1639" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1809" end="1822" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2929" end="2941" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="3042" end="3053" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3221" end="3234" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4337" end="4349" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="4454" end="4479" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q356908" start="4582" end="4592" title="Roy Brooks" label="Roy Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704887" start="4642" end="4653" title="Terry Owens (American football)" label="Terry Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015216" start="4673" end="4691" title="San Diego Chargers" label="San Diego Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923927" start="4736" end="4770" title="James Thomas Jr." label="James &amp;quot;J.T.&amp;quot; Thomas, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4911444" start="4785" end="4795" title="Bill Yates" label="Bill Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q68435" start="4888" end="4895" title="Kinston, Alabama" label="Kinston"/>
<link wikidata="Q80045" start="4908" end="4914" title="Geneva, Alabama" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292067" start="5451" end="5462" title="Fort Rucker" label="Fort Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q931267" start="5616" end="5635" title="Posse Comitatus Act" label="Posse Comitatus Act"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104720" wikidata="Q79456" url="?curid=104720" title="Slocomb, Alabama">
<text>Slocomb is a city in Geneva County, Alabama, United States. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2020 census, the population was 2,082. The community is named after postmaster Frank W. Slocomb.

Slocomb incorporated in 1901. Slocomb calls itself the &quot;home of the tomato.&quot; Slocomb High School mascot is the &quot;Redtop&quot;.

==Geography==
Slocomb is located at .

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,082 people, 844 households, and 525 families residing in the city.

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 1,980 people, 816 households, and 554 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 955 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 72.2% White, 22.6% Black or African American, 0.8% Native American, 0.1% Asian, 2.6% from other races, and 1.7% from two or more races. 4.7% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 816 households, out of which 25.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.2% were married couples living together, 19.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.1% were non-families. 28.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.43 and the average family size was 2.94.

The median income for a household in the city was $32,212, and the median income for a family was $39,496. Males had a median income of $25,962 versus $21,250 for females. The per capita income for the city was $12,772. About 20.6% of families and 23.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 32.1% of those under age 18 and 29.5% of those age 65 or over.

==Notable people==
* Brad Baxter, former National Football League running back. Graduated from Slocomb High School.
* Tony Bowick, former NFL player for the Atlanta Falcons. Graduated from Slocomb High School.
*Clay Holmes, an American professional baseball pitcher for Major League Baseball&#x27;s New York Yankees, graduated from Slocomb High School. He made his MLB debut with the Pirates in 2018.

==References==
==External links==
* Slocomb webpage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79456" start="0" end="7" title="Slocomb, Alabama" label="Slocomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q494620" start="21" end="34" title="Geneva County, Alabama" label="Geneva County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="36" end="43" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="78" end="93" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="94" end="123" title="Dothan metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="132" end="143" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="428" end="446" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="536" end="561" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="672" end="678" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="893" end="898" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="906" end="911" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="915" end="931" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="938" end="953" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="960" end="965" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="977" end="988" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1051" end="1059" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1063" end="1069" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1192" end="1207" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1683" end="1700" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1794" end="1806" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953795" start="1903" end="1914" title="Brad Baxter" label="Brad Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="1923" end="1947" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q912985" start="1948" end="1960" title="running back" label="running back"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821938" start="2000" end="2011" title="Tony Bowick" label="Tony Bowick"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="2039" end="2054" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q30039215" start="2093" end="2104" title="Clay Holmes" label="Clay Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="2131" end="2139" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="2140" end="2147" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="2152" end="2173" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="2181" end="2197" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="2266" end="2273" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pirates"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104721" wikidata="Q68361" url="?curid=104721" title="Taylor, Alabama">
<text>Taylor is a town in Geneva and Houston counties in the U.S. state of Alabama. Taylor was first settled in the 1870s, named after an early family that helped secure the first post office. It was not incorporated until almost a century later in June 1967. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2010 census the population was 2,375, up from 1,898 in 2000.

==Geography==
Taylor is located in western Houston County at (31.168331, -85.468016). A rural portion of the town extends west into Geneva County. Taylor is bordered to the northeast by Dothan, to the southeast by Rehobeth, and to the southwest by Malvern. Alabama State Route 52 (Hartford Highway) passes through the northern part of Taylor, leading northeast to the center of Dothan and southwest to Slocomb.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Taylor has a total area of , of which is land and , or 1.09%, is water.

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
At the 2000 census there were 1,898 people, 699 households, and 552 families living in the town. The population density was . There were 751 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 93.05% White, 3.79% Black or African American, 0.79% Native American, 0.26% Asian, 0.74% from other races, and 1.37% from two or more races. 1.11% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 699 households 47.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 61.9% were married couples living together, 12.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 21.0% were non-families. 18.3% of households were one person and 4.6% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.72 and the average family size was 3.09.

The age distribution was 31.7% under the age of 18, 7.6% from 18 to 24, 35.6% from 25 to 44, 17.9% from 45 to 64, and 7.2% 65 or older. The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.0 males.

The median household income was $40,664 and the median family income was $44,181. Males had a median income of $32,401 versus $22,321 for females. The per capita income for the town was $16,327. About 8.7% of families and 9.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.8% of those under age 18 and 10.6% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census there were 2,375 people, 835 households, and 639 families living in the town. The population density was . There were 966 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 87.5% White, 7.2% Black or African American, 0.8% Native American, 0.1% Asian, 2.4% from other races, and 2.1% from two or more races. 5.2% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 835 households 43.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.8% were married couples living together, 18.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 23.5% were non-families. 19.3% of households were one person and 6.1% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.84 and the average family size was 3.22.

The age distribution was 31.6% under the age of 18, 8.2% from 18 to 24, 30.4% from 25 to 44, 22.1% from 45 to 64, and 7.8% 65 or older. The median age was 31.5 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.5 males.

The median household income was $43,603 and the median family income was $49,500. Males had a median income of $31,795 versus $29,276 for females. The per capita income for the town was $16,833. About 16.9% of families and 21.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 32.3% of those under age 18 and 10.5% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,262 people, 752 households, and 534 families residing in the town.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q68361" start="0" end="6" title="Taylor, Alabama" label="Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q494620" start="20" end="26" title="Geneva County, Alabama" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="31" end="38" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="55" end="65" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="69" end="76" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="272" end="287" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="288" end="317" title="Dothan, Alabama metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q67090" start="602" end="610" title="Rehobeth, Alabama" label="Rehobeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q66630" start="636" end="643" title="Malvern, Alabama" label="Malvern"/>
<link wikidata="Q873381" start="645" end="667" title="Alabama State Route 52" label="Alabama State Route 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q79456" start="790" end="797" title="Slocomb, Alabama" label="Slocomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="817" end="835" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="952" end="963" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1131" end="1144" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2259" end="2271" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2372" end="2383" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2551" end="2564" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3676" end="3688" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3793" end="3818" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104722" wikidata="Q68009" url="?curid=104722" title="Boligee, Alabama">
<text>Boligee is a town in Greene County, Alabama, United States. Per the 2020 census, the population was 301. Although Boligee appeared on the 1880 U.S. Census, according to the 1930 U.S. Census it did not incorporate until 1926, though another source cited 1927.
Boligee has one site listed on the National Register of Historic Places, Boligee Hill.

==Geography==
Boligee is located at (32.763768, -88.025968).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
===2000 Census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 369 people, 150 households, and 105 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 179 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 10.57% White, 88.89% Black or African American, and 0.54% from two or more races. 1.90% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 150 households, out of which 44.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 26.0% were married couples living together, 41.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.0% were non-families. 27.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.46 and the average family size was 2.99.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 35.2% under the age of 18, 14.6% from 18 to 24, 19.8% from 25 to 44, 18.7% from 45 to 64, and 11.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 25 years. For every 100 females, there were 69.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 60.4 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $15,000, and the median income for a family was $16,146. Males had a median income of $23,750 versus $21,000 for females. The per capita income for the town was $7,909. About 41.4% of families and 44.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 63.3% of those under age 18 and 10.3% of those age 65 or over.

==Notable people==
*Emma Didlake, United States veteran
*William P. G. Harding, American banker and managing director of the War Finance Corporation
*Charles Hays, Confederate major who became a Republican Congressman.
*Brad Hubbert, American football player, played in the 1967 American Football League All-Star game.

==Gallery==
Below are photographs taken in Boligee as part of the Historic American Buildings Survey:
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q68009" start="0" end="7" title="Boligee, Alabama" label="Boligee"/>
<link wikidata="Q493709" start="21" end="34" title="Greene County, Alabama" label="Greene County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="36" end="43" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="68" end="79" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="294" end="330" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939436" start="332" end="344" title="Boligee Hill" label="Boligee Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="426" end="444" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="551" end="557" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="771" end="776" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="785" end="790" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="794" end="810" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="875" end="883" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="887" end="893" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1016" end="1031" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1829" end="1846" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1939" end="1951" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q20981530" start="2047" end="2059" title="Emma Didlake" label="Emma Didlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016460" start="2084" end="2105" title="William P. G. Harding" label="William P. G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968438" start="2152" end="2175" title="War Finance Corporation" label="War Finance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064770" start="2177" end="2189" title="Charles Hays" label="Charles Hays"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954015" start="2247" end="2259" title="Brad Hubbert" label="Brad Hubbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743813" start="2306" end="2344" title="American Football League All-Star game" label="American Football League All-Star game"/>
<link wikidata="Q913956" start="2413" end="2447" title="Historic American Buildings Survey" label="Historic American Buildings Survey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104723" wikidata="Q79214" url="?curid=104723" title="Eutaw, Alabama">
<text>Eutaw ( ) is a city in and the county seat of Greene County, Alabama, United States. At the 2020 census, the population was 2,937. The city was named in honor of the Battle of Eutaw Springs, the last engagement of the American Revolutionary War in the Carolinas.

== History ==

Eutaw was laid out in December 1838 at the time that Greene County voters chose to relocate the county seat from Erie, which was located on the Black Warrior River. It was incorporated by an act of the state legislature on January 2, 1841.

As the county seat, Eutaw also developed as the trading center for the county, which developed an economy based on cultivation and processing of cotton, the chief commodity crop in the antebellum years. The crop was lucrative for major planters, who depended on the labor of enslaved African Americans and built fine homes in the city. Many have been preserved. Eutaw has twenty-seven antebellum structures on the National Register of Historic Places. Twenty-three of these are included in the Antebellum Homes in Eutaw multiple property submission. The Coleman-Banks House, Old Greene County Courthouse, First Presbyterian Church, and Kirkwood are listed individually. Additionally, the Greene County Courthouse Square District is a listed historic district in the heart of downtown. A nearby property, Everhope Plantation, is also listed in the register.

During the Reconstruction Era, Eutaw was the site of a number of Klan murders and acts by insurgents. The county courthouse was burned in 1868; the prevailing theory for the burning of the courthouse is that it was intended to destroy the records of some 1,800 suits by freedmen against planters, which were about to be prosecuted. On March 31, 1870, the Republican county solicitor, Alexander Boyd, was shot and killed at his hotel when resisting being taken by a masked group of armed Klan members. (An early-20th century historian of the Klan claimed the group was from Mississippi.) That same night, James Martin, a black Republican leader, was killed near his home in Union, Alabama, also in Greene County.

In the fall of 1870, in the run-up to the gubernatorial election, two more black Republican politicians were killed in Greene County. On October 25, 1870, whites attacked a Republican rally in the courthouse square that had attracted 2,000 black Republicans. The Eutaw massacre resulted in four black deaths and some 54 wounded outside the county courthouse. Most blacks did not vote in the fall&#x27;s election, which helped the Democratic candidate for governor.

The use of violence and intimidation of blacks continued across Alabama in the Post-Reconstruction era. Lynchings took place in the state, but none were documented in Greene County during this period, according to a 2015 report by the Equal Justice Initiative. This may be attributable to local officials enforcing the rule of law. On May 16, 1892, Sheriff Cullen and Deputy Sheriff E. C. Meredith of Greene County, with aid of a posse, distinguished themselves by going into Pickens County after a lynch mob of about 50 men. The mob had taken African-American suspect Jim Jones from the Greene County jail, saying they were going to hang him in Carrollton for an alleged crime there. Cullen and his posse confronted the mob at gunpoint, and took Jones back to Greene County.

===20th century to present===
Agriculture continues to dominate the county&#x27;s economy. Now conducted on an industrial scale, it has reduced the need for farm workers. Unemployment is high in the rural county.

James Bevel, the main strategist and architect of the Civil Rights Movement, was buried in Ancestors Village Cemetery in Eutaw on December 29, 2008. In addition to his early work in the Nashville Student Movement and Mississippi movement, Bevel initiated, planned, and directed the strategies for the 1963 Birmingham Children&#x27;s Crusade, the 1965 Selma to Montgomery march, and the 1966 Chicago Open Housing Movement.

Eutaw is home to the Roman Catholic Convent of Our Lady of Consolata, the Consolata Sisters, a small monastery for nuns in West Alabama. They are known throughout Greene County for their humanitarian efforts.

==Geography==
Eutaw is located east of the center of Greene County. U.S. Routes 11 and 43 pass through the center of town. The highways enter together from the northeast as Tuscaloosa Street; US 11 exits the city to the west as Boligee Street, while US 43 leaves to the south as Demopolis Highway. Alabama State Route 14 passes through the city as Greensboro Street to the southeast and Mesopotamia Street to the northwest. Interstates 20 and 59 run through the northwest corner of the city, with access from Exit 40 (Highway 14), northwest of the center of town. Tuscaloosa is to the northeast via Interstate 20/59, and Meridian, Mississippi, is to the southwest. Demopolis is south via US 43, Greensboro is to the southeast via Highway 14, and Aliceville is to the northwest via Highway 14.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Eutaw has a total area of , of which is land and , or 0.63%, is water. The center of town is west of the Black Warrior River, accessible to boats at Finches Ferry Public Use Area.

===Climate===
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Eutaw has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,937 people, 1,041 households, and 551 families residing in the town.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census there were 2,934 people in 1,203 households, including 760 families, in the city. The population density was . There were 1,355 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 80.2% Black or African American, 18.1% White, 0.1% Native American, 0.4% Asian, and 0.6% from two or more races. 1.3% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 1,203 households 25.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 30.8% were married couples living together, 28.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.8% were non-families. 34.2% of households were one person and 15.5% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size was 3.10.

The age distribution was 25.8% under the age of 18, 9.2% from 18 to 24, 19.8% from 25 to 44, 28.4% from 45 to 64, and 16.8% 65 or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 82.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 77.5 males.

The median household income was $29,196 and the median family income was $39,722. Males had a median income of $43,125 versus $28,077 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,126. About 27.4% of families and 28.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 38.7% of those under age 18 and 17.0% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
At the 2000 census there were 1,878 people in 778 households, including 504 families, in the city. The population density was . There were 899 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 33.01% White, 66.03% Black or African American, 0.27% Native American, 0.21% Asian, and 0.48% from two or more races. 0.37% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 778 households 24.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 39.5% were married couples living together, 21.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.1% were non-families. 33.5% of households were one person and 15.4% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.31 and the average family size was 2.95.

The age distribution was 22.4% under the age of 18, 8.0% from 18 to 24, 22.6% from 25 to 44, 24.4% from 45 to 64, and 22.5% 65 or older. The median age was 43 years. For every 100 females, there were 84.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 75.9 males.

The median household income was $23,056 and the median family income was $32,946. Males had a median income of $30,284 versus $18,869 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,573. About 24.7% of families and 28.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 39.4% of those under age 18 and 22.5% of those age 65 or over.

==Notable people==
*Benjamin F. Alexander, state representative during the Reconstruction era
* Oliver H. Cross, U.S. Representative from Texas
* Edward deGraffenried, U.S. Representative from Alabama&#x27;s 6th congressional district
* Cob Jarvis, basketball player and head basketball coach for the University of Mississippi
* Bill Lee, professional football player
* Matthew Leonard, Sergeant First Class who posthumously received the Medal of Honor and Purple Heart for his actions in the Vietnam War
* James McQueen, president of Sloss-Sheffield Steel &amp; Iron Company
* Willie Powell, baseball pitcher in the Negro leagues
* Bo Scarbrough, professional football player

==In popular culture==
Eutaw is the home town of the protagonist in the 2004 Old Crow Medicine Show song &quot;Big Time in the Jungle&quot; . The band also released a 2001 album entitled &quot;Eutaw&quot;. In addition, the town&#x27;s name is referenced in the song &quot;Don&#x27;t Ride That Horse,&quot; among the other cities of Winnipeg, Joliet, Saskatoon, and Wawa.

The 1981 horror film &quot;Jaws of Satan&quot; takes place in Eutaw.

==See also==
*National Register of Historic Places listings in Greene County, Alabama

== References ==
==External links==
*Davis, Stephen Duane II, and Alfred L. Brophy, &quot;The Most Esteemed Act of My Life: Family, Property, Will, and Trust in the Antebellum South&quot;, an empirical study of probate in Greene County, Alabama</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79214" start="0" end="5" title="Eutaw, Alabama" label="Eutaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="31" end="42" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q493709" start="46" end="68" title="Greene County, Alabama" label="Greene County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="92" end="103" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888486" start="166" end="189" title="Battle of Eutaw Springs" label="Battle of Eutaw Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="218" end="244" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747220" start="252" end="261" title="Carolinas" label="Carolinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q24260879" start="392" end="396" title="Erie, Alabama" label="Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q727892" start="423" end="442" title="Black Warrior River" label="Black Warrior River"/>
<link wikidata="Q571648" start="905" end="915" title="Antebellum architecture" label="antebellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="934" end="970" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771110" start="1014" end="1039" title="Antebellum Homes in Eutaw Thematic Resource" label="Antebellum Homes in Eutaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="1040" end="1068" title="Multiple Property Submission" label="multiple property submission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142976" start="1074" end="1093" title="Coleman-Banks House" label="Coleman-Banks House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084139" start="1095" end="1123" title="Old Greene County Courthouse" label="Old Greene County Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453568" start="1125" end="1150" title="First Presbyterian Church (Eutaw, Alabama)" label="First Presbyterian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415882" start="1156" end="1164" title="Kirkwood (Eutaw, Alabama)" label="Kirkwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603848" start="1208" end="1248" title="Greene County Courthouse Square District" label="Greene County Courthouse Square District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620797" start="1261" end="1278" title="Historic district (United States)" label="historic district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267486" start="1324" end="1343" title="Everhope Plantation" label="Everhope Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="1389" end="1407" title="Reconstruction Era" label="Reconstruction Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="1443" end="1447" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="1648" end="1656" title="freedmen" label="freedmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28024859" start="1762" end="1776" title="Alexander Boyd (county solicitor)" label="Alexander Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q67077" start="2051" end="2065" title="Union, Alabama" label="Union, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221368" start="2133" end="2155" title="1870 Alabama gubernatorial election" label="gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406347" start="2354" end="2368" title="Eutaw massacre" label="Eutaw massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163519" start="2636" end="2655" title="Post-Reconstruction" label="Post-Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="2661" end="2669" title="Lynching" label="Lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867897" start="2792" end="2816" title="Equal Justice Initiative" label="Equal Justice Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q949766" start="3033" end="3047" title="Pickens County, Alabama" label="Pickens County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920456" start="3548" end="3559" title="James Bevel" label="James Bevel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="3602" end="3623" title="Civil Rights Movement" label="Civil Rights Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q79214" start="3639" end="3665" title="Ancestors Village Cemetery" label="Ancestors Village Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q25004512" start="3734" end="3760" title="Nashville Student Movement" label="Nashville Student Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098063" start="3854" end="3888" title="Birmingham Children&amp;#x27;s Crusade" label="Birmingham Children&amp;#x27;s Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061891" start="3899" end="3924" title="Selma to Montgomery march" label="Selma to Montgomery march"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963310" start="3939" end="3968" title="Chicago Open Housing Movement" label="Chicago Open Housing Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3992" end="4006" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q407534" start="4261" end="4263" title="U.S. Route 11" label="11"/>
<link wikidata="Q409624" start="4268" end="4270" title="U.S. Route 43" label="43"/>
<link wikidata="Q872848" start="4479" end="4501" title="Alabama State Route 14" label="Alabama State Route 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q93686" start="4617" end="4619" title="Interstate 20" label="20"/>
<link wikidata="Q94378" start="4624" end="4626" title="Interstate 59" label="59"/>
<link wikidata="Q79580" start="4745" end="4755" title="Tuscaloosa, Alabama" label="Tuscaloosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q118152" start="4802" end="4823" title="Meridian, Mississippi" label="Meridian, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q79391" start="4846" end="4855" title="Demopolis, Alabama" label="Demopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q79254" start="4876" end="4886" title="Greensboro, Alabama" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q79666" start="4927" end="4937" title="Aliceville, Alabama" label="Aliceville"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="4992" end="5010" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q727892" start="5117" end="5136" title="Black Warrior River" label="Black Warrior River"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="5324" end="5353" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="5374" end="5399" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="5493" end="5518" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="5628" end="5639" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5813" end="5826" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6918" end="6930" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="7031" end="7042" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7212" end="7225" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8321" end="8333" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q104821161" start="8429" end="8450" title="Benjamin F. Alexander" label="Benjamin F. Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="8484" end="8502" title="Reconstruction era" label="Reconstruction era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335316" start="8505" end="8520" title="Oliver H. Cross" label="Oliver H. Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="8522" end="8541" title="U.S. Representative" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="8547" end="8552" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294190" start="8555" end="8575" title="Edward deGraffenried" label="Edward deGraffenried"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705160" start="8602" end="8643" title="Alabama&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district" label="Alabama&amp;#x27;s 6th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019717" start="8646" end="8656" title="Cob Jarvis" label="Cob Jarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="8710" end="8735" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q862258" start="8738" end="8746" title="Bill Lee (American football)" label="Bill Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790856" start="8779" end="8794" title="Matthew Leonard" label="Matthew Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278692" start="8796" end="8816" title="Sergeant First Class" label="Sergeant First Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="8847" end="8861" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q145752" start="8866" end="8878" title="Purple Heart" label="Purple Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="8902" end="8913" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16031059" start="8916" end="8929" title="James McQueen (businessman)" label="James McQueen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021773" start="8987" end="9000" title="Willie Powell" label="Willie Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="9026" end="9039" title="Negro league baseball" label="Negro leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q28094370" start="9042" end="9055" title="Bo Scarbrough" label="Bo Scarbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083804" start="9164" end="9186" title="Old Crow Medicine Show" label="Old Crow Medicine Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q65552667" start="9486" end="9499" title="Jaws of Satan" label="Jaws of Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1838682" start="9543" end="9614" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Greene County, Alabama" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Greene County, Alabama"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104724" wikidata="Q66362" url="?curid=104724" title="Forkland, Alabama">
<text>Forkland is a town in Greene County, Alabama, United States. At the 2020 census, the population was 445. It was incorporated around 1974.

==History==
Forkland has one site on the National Register of Historic Places, St. John&#x27;s-In-The-Prairie, built in 1859, and two sites nearby, Rosemount and Thornhill.

==Geography==
Forkland is located in southern Greene County at (32.647702, -87.867236), between the Black Warrior River to the east and the Tombigbee River to the west. The Black Warrior joins the Tombigbee to the south of Forkland, just north of Demopolis. U.S. Route 43 passes through Forkland, leading north to Eutaw, the county seat, and south to Demopolis.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Forkland has a total area of , of which , or 0.32%, is water.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
===2000 Census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 629 people, 245 households, and 161 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 309 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 10.65% White, 89.19% Black or African American, and 0.16% from two or more races.

There were 245 households, out of which 36.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 35.5% were married couples living together, 27.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.9% were non-families. 32.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.57 and the average family size was 3.32.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 31.8% under the age of 18, 6.8% from 18 to 24, 26.1% from 25 to 44, 24.5% from 45 to 64, and 10.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 77.3 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $18,698, and the median income for a family was $22,115. Males had a median income of $24,375 versus $16,544 for females. The per capita income for the town was $9,314. About 29.5% of families and 31.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 38.2% of those under age 18 and 31.0% of those age 65 or over.

==Notable people==
*Maxie Baughan, former NFL player
*Charlotte Durante, first African American female city commissioner in Delray Beach, Florida
*Bobo Jenkins, born in Forkland, electric blues guitarist and songwriter, who later owned his own recording studio and record label in Detroit
*Lloyd Leftwich, state senator during the Reconstruction era

==Gallery==
Photographs of Forkland structures were taken for the Historic American Buildings Survey in 1933:
==References==
==External links==
* Forkland.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66362" start="0" end="8" title="Forkland, Alabama" label="Forkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q493709" start="22" end="35" title="Greene County, Alabama" label="Greene County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="37" end="44" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="68" end="79" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="180" end="216" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588569" start="218" end="248" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s-In-The-Prairie" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s-In-The-Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368493" start="287" end="296" title="Rosemount (Forkland, Alabama)" label="Rosemount"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796435" start="301" end="310" title="Thornhill (Forkland, Alabama)" label="Thornhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q727892" start="413" end="432" title="Black Warrior River" label="Black Warrior River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297877" start="453" end="468" title="Tombigbee River" label="Tombigbee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q79391" start="560" end="569" title="Demopolis, Alabama" label="Demopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q409624" start="571" end="584" title="U.S. Route 43" label="U.S. Route 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q79214" start="627" end="632" title="Eutaw, Alabama" label="Eutaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="638" end="649" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="693" end="711" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="839" end="845" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1059" end="1064" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1073" end="1078" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1082" end="1098" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1243" end="1258" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2055" end="2072" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2165" end="2177" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104819" start="2273" end="2286" title="Maxie Baughan" label="Maxie Baughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085923" start="2307" end="2324" title="Charlotte Durante" label="Charlotte Durante"/>
<link wikidata="Q824100" start="2377" end="2398" title="Delray Beach, Florida" label="Delray Beach, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q4935856" start="2400" end="2412" title="Bobo Jenkins" label="Bobo Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q640097" start="2432" end="2446" title="electric blues" label="electric blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q746369" start="2497" end="2513" title="recording studio" label="recording studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="2518" end="2530" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q104602863" start="2543" end="2557" title="Lloyd Leftwich" label="Lloyd Leftwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q913956" start="2670" end="2704" title="Historic American Buildings Survey" label="Historic American Buildings Survey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104725" wikidata="Q67077" url="?curid=104725" title="Union, Alabama">
<text>Union is a town in rural Greene County, Alabama, United States. Per the 2020 census, the population was 180. According to the 1980 U.S. Census, it was incorporated in the 1970s.

==Geography==
Union is located in northern Greene County at (32.994164, -87.905313). It is north of Eutaw, the county seat, via U.S. Route 11/43 and Martin Luther King Highway.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
===2000 Census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 227 people, 85 households, and 53 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 103 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 7.93% White and 92.07% Black or African American.

There were 85 households, out of which 32.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.2% were married couples living together, 18.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.6% were non-families. 35.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.67 and the average family size was 3.58.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 27.8% under the age of 18, 11.5% from 18 to 24, 27.3% from 25 to 44, 21.6% from 45 to 64, and 11.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 106.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.9 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $22,031, and the median income for a family was $28,125. Males had a median income of $30,625 versus $17,083 for females. The per capita income for the town was $10,842. About 36.4% of families and 32.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 42.5% of those under the age of eighteen and 60.0% of those 65 or over.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67077" start="0" end="5" title="Union, Alabama" label="Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q493709" start="25" end="38" title="Greene County, Alabama" label="Greene County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="40" end="47" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="72" end="83" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q79214" start="279" end="284" title="Eutaw, Alabama" label="Eutaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="290" end="301" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q407534" start="307" end="320" title="U.S. Route 11" label="U.S. Route 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q409624" start="321" end="323" title="U.S. Route 43" label="43"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="374" end="392" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="499" end="505" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="716" end="721" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="733" end="738" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="742" end="758" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="868" end="883" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1682" end="1699" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1793" end="1805" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104726" wikidata="Q66210" url="?curid=104726" title="Akron, Alabama">
<text>Akron () is a town in Hale County, Alabama, United States. On January 18, 1906, landowners Charles E. Waller, Charles Lightman and M.H. Murphy sold at public auction a great number of individual business and residential lots which would be developed into the town of Akron, Alabama. Akron became the fastest growing town in Hale County, and in a few years had grown to include a modern post office, railroad depot, various retail businesses, barber shop, hotel, drug store, concrete and block factory, wheel spoke factory, lumber mills, and attractive residences. The town was incorporated in March 1918. At the 2010 census the population was 356, down from 521 at the 2000 census. Akron has one site on the National Register of Historic Places, the Greek Revival cottage known as Tanglewood.

==Geography==
Akron is located in northwestern Hale County at (32.876425, -87.740978), southeast of the Black Warrior River and northwest of Alabama State Route 60. Greensboro, the Hale County seat, is to the southeast. Eutaw is by road to the southwest, and Moundville is the same distance to the northeast.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town of Akron has a total area of , of which , or 0.77%, is water.

==Demographics==

Akron first appeared on the 1920 U.S. Census as an incorporated town. It was also the same name as its precinct/census division, which preceded it in reporting on the census since 1900 (See Akron Precinct below).

===2020 census===
As of the 2010 Census Akron had a population of 356. The racial and ethnic composition of the population was 86.5% black or African American, 13.2% white, 0.3% reporting two or more races and 0.3% Hispanic or Latino of any race.

As of the census of 2000, there were 521 people, 207 households, and 142 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 239 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 17.85% White, 81.00% Black or African American, and 1.15% from two or more races. 1.54% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 207 households, out of which 36.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 34.8% were married couples living together, 30.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.4% were non-families. 28.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 3.15.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 29.4% under the age of 18, 9.8% from 18 to 24, 25.3% from 25 to 44, 20.9% from 45 to 64, and 14.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females, there were 81.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 68.8 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $19,875, and the median income for a family was $21,250. Males had a median income of $22,396 versus $18,500 for females. The per capita income for the town was $10,929. About 37.1% of families and 40.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 60.2% of those under age 18 and 32.7% of those age 65 or over.

==Akron Precinct (1900-50)/Stewart-Akron Division (1960-)==

Akron first appeared as the 2nd precinct of Hale County in 1900. Prior to this, from 1870 to 1890, the beat/precinct was previously known as New Prospect. In 1910, the 2nd precinct name was changed to &quot;Evans&quot;, but reverted to Akron in 1920 and continued to report until 1950. In 1960, as part of a general reorganization of counties, Akron precinct was consolidated with others, including precinct 16, Stewart&#x27;s Station, and was renamed the Stewart-Akron Census Division. Although the town of Akron has a heavily Black population, as did the former Akron precinct when it reported racial demographics in 1930–40, and in the Stewart-Akron division from 1960 to 1980, in 1990 it reported only a Black plurality. In 2000, it transitioned to a White plurality and in 2010, became a White majority for the first time.

==Notable person==

*Riggs Stephenson, (1898–1985) was a left fielder in Major League Baseball for Chicago Cubs, Nicknamed Old Hoss.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66210" start="0" end="5" title="Akron, Alabama" label="Akron"/>
<link wikidata="Q501147" start="22" end="33" title="Hale County, Alabama" label="Hale County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="35" end="42" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="44" end="57" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="612" end="623" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="669" end="680" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="708" end="744" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="750" end="763" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683033" start="781" end="791" title="Tanglewood (Akron, Alabama)" label="Tanglewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q727892" start="898" end="917" title="Black Warrior River" label="Black Warrior River"/>
<link wikidata="Q873453" start="935" end="957" title="Alabama State Route 60" label="Alabama State Route 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q79254" start="959" end="969" title="Greensboro, Alabama" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q79214" start="1014" end="1019" title="Eutaw, Alabama" label="Eutaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q984454" start="1053" end="1063" title="Moundville, Alabama" label="Moundville"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1121" end="1148" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1712" end="1718" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1932" end="1937" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1946" end="1951" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1955" end="1971" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2036" end="2044" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2048" end="2054" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2177" end="2192" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2989" end="3006" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3100" end="3112" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333434" start="4099" end="4115" title="Riggs Stephenson" label="Riggs Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="4177" end="4189" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104727" wikidata="Q79254" url="?curid=104727" title="Greensboro, Alabama">
<text>Greensboro is a city in Hale County, Alabama, United States. At the 2010 census the population was 2,497, down from 2,731 at the 2000 census. The city is the county seat of Hale County, Alabama, which was not organized until 1867. It is part of the Tuscaloosa, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area.

==History==
Greensboro was incorporated as a town in December 1823 as &quot;Greensborough&quot;. It was named in honor of American Revolutionary War general Nathanael Greene. The name was soon simplified to &quot;Greensboro&quot;. The community was known as &quot;Troy&quot; prior to incorporation.

Reflecting the history of the antebellum years and a culture built on cotton plantations to produce the commodity crop, several sites on the National Register of Historic Places in or near Greensboro are connected to this past. These include Glencairn, the Greensboro Historic District, Magnolia Grove, the McGehee-Stringfellow House, Millwood, and the Payne House.

One hundred years later, African Americans in Greensboro were among those in the state continuing to work to regain their civil rights after years of second-class status under Jim Crow.

Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., leader of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, visited Greensboro in the course of his civil rights projects in the state. In 1968, after speaking in Greensboro, he hid from Ku Klux Klan members in what is now operated as the Safe House Black History Museum, then a private home owned by the Burroughs family, local activists and longtime family friends.

On May 27, 1973, a violent tornado struck the city, causing major damage across the area.

The southern part of the city was heavily damaged by a low-end EF2 tornado on January 12, 2023.

==Geography==
Greensboro is slightly southeast of the center of Hale County and is crossed by Alabama State Routes 14, 25, and 69. SR 14 leads northwest to Eutaw and east to Marion. SR 25 leads northeast through Talladega National Forest to Brent and south to Thomaston. SR 69 leads north to Tuscaloosa and southwest to Linden. Demopolis is to the southwest via SR 69 and U.S. Route 80.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Greensboro has a total area of , of which , or 0.40%, are water.

===Climate===
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Greensboro has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 2,731 people, 1,026 households, and 688 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 1,142 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 38.30% White, 60.89% Black or African American, 0.04% Native American, and 0.77% from two or more races. 0.88% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 1,026 households, of which 32.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 35.1% were married couples living together, 27.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.9% were non-families. 31.2% of households were one person and 14.6% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.56 and the average family size was 3.21.

The age distribution was 28.6% under the age of 18, 10.5% from 18 to 24, 20.9% from 25 to 44, 20.5% from 45 to 64, and 19.4% 65 or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 86.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 74.6 males.

The median household income was $22,930 and the median family income was $28,990. Males had a median income of $36,071 versus $23,224 for females. The per capita income for the city was $13,271. About 27.2% of families and 35.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 47.1% of those under age 18 and 26.2% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 2,497 people, 1,045 households, and 629 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 1,195 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 66.5% Black or African American, 32.0% White, 0.2% Native American, and 0.6% from two or more races. 0.5% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 1,045 households, of which 25.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 30.4% were married couples living together, 25.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 39.8% were non-families. 37.0% of households were one person and 15.9% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.31 and the average family size was 3.07.

The age distribution was 24.9% under the age of 18, 7.9% from 18 to 24, 20.5% from 25 to 44, 26.8% from 45 to 64, and 19.9% 65 or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 81.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.3 males.

The median household income was $30,082 and the median family income was $36,379. Males had a median income of $28,869 versus $22,528 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,277. About 19.0% of families and 23.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 34.9% of those under age 18 and 23.7% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,218 people, 1,214 households, and 648 families residing in the city.

==Government and infrastructure==
The city of Greensboro has a mayor-council form of government. There is a full-time police force with approximately 13 officers. The city has a volunteer fire department.

Greensboro is served by one public K-12 public school, Greensboro Public School, with two campuses. There is one private K-12 school, Southern Academy.

== Notable people ==
*Anthony Bryant, defensive tackle in the NFL
*Scott Burton, sculptor and performance artist
*Theresa Burroughs, civil rights activist and founder of Greensboro&#x27;s Safe House Museum
*Alfred Chapman, Los Angeles real estate attorney and investor, and one of the founders of Orange, California
*John Gayle, seventh governor of the U.S. state of Alabama (1831–1835)
*Amelia Gayle Gorgas, former librarian for the University of Alabama and mother of Surgeon General William C. Gorgas
*Richmond Pearson Hobson (1870–1937), member of the United States House of Representatives and Medal of Honor recipient
*Grady Jackson, professional football player
*Pete Jarman (1892–1955), member of the United States House of Representatives and former United States Ambassador to Australia
*Herb Jones (1998-), New Orleans Pelicans basketball player, former Alabama Crimson Tide Basketball player.
*Andrew Killgore (1919–2016), United States Foreign Service Officer and ambassador to Qatar
*Thomas E. Knight, 13th Lieutenant Governor of Alabama and 19th Attorney General of Alabama 
*Hedgemon Lewis, boxer, former world title contender
*Sydenham Moore, (1817-1862), lawyer, judge, officer Mexican-American War &amp; Confederate Army, Brig General of Alabama State militia, US Congressman elected to represent Alabama, 1857 to 1861. Colonel and commander of the 11th Alabama Infantry of the Confederate States Army, shot Battle of Seven Pines, Virginia, on May 31, 1862, dying August 1862. “Greenwood” was built by him.
*William Burns Paterson, teacher, founder of Tullibody Academy and Alabama State University
*Israel Pickens, third governor of Alabama (1821–1825)
*Eugene Sawyer, 53rd mayor of Chicago (1987-1989)
*Thomas Seay, 27th governor of Alabama (1886–1890)
*Armistead I. Selden, Jr. (1921–1985), member of the United States House of Representatives and former United States Ambassador to New Zealand, Fiji, the Kingdom of Tonga, and Western Samoa
*Little Sonny, electric blues musician and songwriter
*Barry Wagner, former wide receiver/linebacker in the Arena Football League
*Bob Wiggins, outfielder in the Negro American League
*Henry Williams, former NFL defensive back
*Lamanzer Williams, former NFL defensive end
*Cedric Harris, Educator, Innovator, Youth Mentor

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79254" start="0" end="10" title="Greensboro, Alabama" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q501147" start="24" end="35" title="Hale County, Alabama" label="Hale County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="37" end="44" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="68" end="79" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="158" end="169" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q501147" start="173" end="193" title="Hale County, Alabama" label="Hale County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79580" start="249" end="268" title="Tuscaloosa, Alabama" label="Tuscaloosa, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856658" start="269" end="298" title="Tuscaloosa, Alabama metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="423" end="449" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q366113" start="458" end="474" title="Nathanael Greene" label="Nathanael Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="742" end="778" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568224" start="843" end="852" title="Glencairn (Greensboro, Alabama)" label="Glencairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14679121" start="858" end="886" title="Greensboro Historic District (Greensboro, Alabama)" label="Greensboro Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731898" start="888" end="902" title="Magnolia Grove (Greensboro, Alabama)" label="Magnolia Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801248" start="908" end="934" title="McGehee-Stringfellow House" label="McGehee-Stringfellow House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6860147" start="936" end="944" title="Millwood (Greensboro, Alabama)" label="Millwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156823" start="954" end="965" title="Payne House (Greensboro, Alabama)" label="Payne House"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="1144" end="1152" title="Jim Crow" label="Jim Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="1160" end="1182" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q605130" start="1198" end="1238" title="Southern Christian Leadership Conference" label="Southern Christian Leadership Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="1367" end="1379" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124413407" start="1419" end="1450" title="Safe House Black History Museum" label="Safe House Black History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q64031665" start="1485" end="1494" title="Theresa Burroughs" label="Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q122227119" start="1566" end="1583" title="1973 Central Alabama tornado" label="a violent tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q116198432" start="1718" end="1734" title="Tornado outbreak of January 12, 2023" label="January 12, 2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q872848" start="1852" end="1854" title="Alabama State Route 14" label="14"/>
<link wikidata="Q873030" start="1856" end="1858" title="Alabama State Route 25" label="25"/>
<link wikidata="Q873640" start="1864" end="1866" title="Alabama State Route 69" label="69"/>
<link wikidata="Q79214" start="1893" end="1898" title="Eutaw, Alabama" label="Eutaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q79706" start="1911" end="1917" title="Marion, Alabama" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079157" start="1949" end="1974" title="Talladega National Forest" label="Talladega National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q79770" start="1978" end="1983" title="Brent, Alabama" label="Brent"/>
<link wikidata="Q66905" start="1997" end="2006" title="Thomaston, Alabama" label="Thomaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q79580" start="2029" end="2039" title="Tuscaloosa, Alabama" label="Tuscaloosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q79247" start="2057" end="2063" title="Linden, Alabama" label="Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q79391" start="2065" end="2074" title="Demopolis, Alabama" label="Demopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q410457" start="2109" end="2122" title="U.S. Route 80" label="U.S. Route 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2142" end="2160" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2359" end="2388" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="2414" end="2439" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2720" end="2733" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4137" end="4150" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="5362" end="5387" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772168" start="5853" end="5867" title="Anthony Bryant (American football)" label="Anthony Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550304" start="5869" end="5885" title="defensive tackle" label="defensive tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="5893" end="5896" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436079" start="5898" end="5910" title="Scott Burton" label="Scott Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q64031665" start="5945" end="5962" title="Theresa Burroughs" label="Theresa Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q124413407" start="6019" end="6036" title="Safe House Black History Museum" label="Safe House Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722434" start="6038" end="6052" title="Alfred Chapman" label="Alfred Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q491350" start="6128" end="6146" title="Orange, California" label="Orange, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q878736" start="6148" end="6158" title="John Gayle (Alabama politician)" label="John Gayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613948" start="6219" end="6238" title="Amelia Gayle Gorgas" label="Amelia Gayle Gorgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="6265" end="6286" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434880" start="6301" end="6316" title="Surgeon General of the United States" label="Surgeon General"/>
<link wikidata="Q257279" start="6317" end="6334" title="William C. Gorgas" label="William C. Gorgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151219" start="6336" end="6359" title="Richmond Pearson Hobson" label="Richmond Pearson Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="6387" end="6425" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="6430" end="6444" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592131" start="6456" end="6469" title="Grady Jackson" label="Grady Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073263" start="6501" end="6512" title="Pete Jarman" label="Pete Jarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="6540" end="6578" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q29972541" start="6590" end="6627" title="United States Ambassador to Australia" label="United States Ambassador to Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q100983694" start="6629" end="6639" title="Herbert Jones (basketball)" label="Herb Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757611" start="6737" end="6752" title="Andrew Killgore" label="Andrew Killgore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468328" start="6780" end="6803" title="Foreign Service Officer" label="Foreign Service Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="6822" end="6827" title="Qatar" label="Qatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423555" start="6829" end="6845" title="Thomas E. Knight" label="Thomas E. Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q845950" start="6847" end="6871" title="List of Lieutenant Governors of Alabama" label="13th Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818624" start="6887" end="6908" title="Alabama Attorney General" label="19th Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697331" start="6922" end="6936" title="Hedgemon Lewis" label="Hedgemon Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="6938" end="6943" title="Boxing" label="boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q735654" start="6975" end="6989" title="Sydenham Moore" label="Sydenham Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q32859622" start="7358" end="7380" title="William Burns Paterson" label="William Burns Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40890019" start="7402" end="7419" title="Tullibody Academy" label="Tullibody Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q941524" start="7424" end="7448" title="Alabama State University" label="Alabama State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q878577" start="7450" end="7464" title="Israel Pickens" label="Israel Pickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q294914" start="7505" end="7518" title="Eugene Sawyer" label="Eugene Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q637213" start="7555" end="7566" title="Thomas Seay" label="Thomas Seay"/>
<link wikidata="Q688628" start="7606" end="7630" title="Armistead I. Selden, Jr." label="Armistead I. Selden, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="7658" end="7696" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651999" start="7796" end="7808" title="Little Sonny" label="Little Sonny"/>
<link wikidata="Q640097" start="7810" end="7824" title="electric blues" label="electric blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864869" start="7850" end="7862" title="Barry Wagner" label="Barry Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q918224" start="7871" end="7884" title="wide receiver" label="wide receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q528145" start="7885" end="7895" title="linebacker" label="linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725641" start="7903" end="7924" title="Arena Football League" label="Arena Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934388" start="7926" end="7937" title="Bob Wiggins" label="Bob Wiggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987577" start="7957" end="7978" title="Negro American League" label="Negro American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5730257" start="7980" end="7994" title="Henry Williams (American football)" label="Henry Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q674953" start="8007" end="8021" title="defensive back" label="defensive back"/>
<link wikidata="Q16215152" start="8023" end="8040" title="Lamanzer Williams" label="Lamanzer Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q903354" start="8053" end="8066" title="defensive end" label="defensive end"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880179" start="8068" end="8081" title="Cedric Harris" label="Cedric Harris"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104728" wikidata="Q984454" url="?curid=104728" title="Moundville, Alabama">
<text>Moundville is a town in Hale and Tuscaloosa counties in the U.S. state of Alabama. At the 2020 census the population was 3,024. It is part of the Tuscaloosa Metropolitan Statistical Area. Within the town is Moundville Archaeological Site, the location of a prehistoric Mississippian culture political and ceremonial center.

==History==
Moundville was incorporated on December 22, 1908. From its incorporation until the 1970 census, it was wholly within Hale County.

In the 1930s, the photographer Walker Evans and writer James Agee documented the lives of tenant farmers living in the Moundville area in the books &quot;Let Us Now Praise Famous Men&quot; (1941) and the posthumously published &quot;Cotton Tenants&quot; (2013).

==Geography==
Moundville is located in northern Hale County at (32.998521, -87.626006), on the south side of the Black Warrior River. The town limits extend north into Tuscaloosa County. Alabama State Route 69 passes through the east side of the town, leading north to Tuscaloosa and south to Greensboro, the Hale County seat.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Moundville has a total area of , of which , or 1.26%, are water.

===Climate===
According to the Köppen climate classification, Moundville has a humid subtropical climate (abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot;).

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
At the 2000 census, there were 1,809 people, 809 total housing units with 688 being occupied households, and 479 families living in the town. The population density was . There were 780 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 61.30% White, 35.16% Black or African American, 0.66% Native American, 0.94% Asian, 0.83% from other races, and 1.11% from two or more races. 1.55% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 688 households, of which 35.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.3% were married couples living together, 19.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.4% were non-families. 27.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 3.08.

29.47% of the population were under the age of 19, 6.63% from 20 to 24, 27.7% from 25 to 44, 20.67% from 45 to 64, and 15.54% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35.9 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 83.4 males.

The median household income was $31,944 and the median family income was $36,000. Males had a median income of $30,625 compared with $25,231 for females. The per capita income was $13,014. About 21.2% of families and 20.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 24.6% of those under age 18 and 16.7% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census, there were 2,427 people, 1,003 total housing units with 894 being occupied households, and 652 families living in the town. The population density was . There were 1,003 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 56.2% White, 40.4% Black or African American, 0.7% Native American, 0.7% Asian, 0.6% from other races, and 1.4% from two or more races. 1.8% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 894 households, of which 37.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.7% were married couples living together, 18.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.1% were non-families. 23.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.62 and the average family size was 3.11.

27.7% of the population were under the age of 19, 7.6% from 20 to 24, 29.0% from 25 to 44, 23.5% from 45 to 64, and 12.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34.7 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.2 males.

The median household income was $43,083 and the median family income was $55,821. Males had a median income of $50,893 compared with $29,375 for females. The per capita income was $17,574. About 14.5% of families and 17.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.0% of those under age 18 and 24.1% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 3,024 people, 1,072 households, and 803 families residing in the town.

==Attractions==
===Moundville Archaeological Park===
The Moundville Archaeological Park is a National Historic Landmark. The park contains 26 prehistoric, Mississippian culture-era Native American earthwork mounds, burial sites and artifacts.

The largest mounds are located near the Black Warrior River. Mounds become smaller as one goes farther from the river. This might be an indication of the relative ranks of the people who built and maintained the mounds.

A palisade was built around three sides of the center of the Moundville site, surrounding the mounds, a plaza and residential areas. This palisade was rebuilt at least six times during the site&#x27;s occupation.

== Transportation ==
=== Airport ===
Moundville Airport is a privately owned, public-use airport located two nautical miles (2.3 mi, 3.7 km) south of the central business district of Moundville.

==Education==
Residents of Hale County are in the Hale County School District. Residents of Tuscaloosa County are in Tuscaloosa County School District.

==Notable person==
*Rufus Deal, former Auburn University and professional football player

== References ==
==External links==
*Town of Moundville - official website
*Moundville Archaeological Park
*Moundville profile and videos - Chickasaw.TV</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q984454" start="0" end="10" title="Moundville, Alabama" label="Moundville"/>
<link wikidata="Q501147" start="24" end="28" title="Hale County, Alabama" label="Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q503877" start="33" end="43" title="Tuscaloosa County, Alabama" label="Tuscaloosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="60" end="70" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="74" end="81" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="90" end="101" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856658" start="157" end="186" title="Tuscaloosa metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320821" start="207" end="237" title="Moundville Archaeological Site" label="Moundville Archaeological Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="269" end="290" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q363308" start="499" end="511" title="Walker Evans" label="Walker Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q352963" start="523" end="533" title="James Agee" label="James Agee"/>
<link wikidata="Q54639972" start="558" end="571" title="tenant farmer" label="tenant farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108471" start="622" end="650" title="Let Us Now Praise Famous Men" label="Let Us Now Praise Famous Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q727892" start="844" end="863" title="Black Warrior River" label="Black Warrior River"/>
<link wikidata="Q873640" start="918" end="940" title="Alabama State Route 69" label="Alabama State Route 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q79580" start="1000" end="1010" title="Tuscaloosa, Alabama" label="Tuscaloosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q79254" start="1024" end="1034" title="Greensboro, Alabama" label="Greensboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1076" end="1094" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="1193" end="1222" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="1241" end="1266" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1346" end="1352" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1602" end="1607" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1616" end="1621" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1625" end="1641" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1649" end="1664" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1672" end="1677" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1690" end="1701" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1766" end="1774" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1778" end="1784" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1903" end="1918" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="2523" end="2546" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2677" end="2694" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2775" end="2787" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2893" end="2899" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3152" end="3157" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3165" end="3170" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3174" end="3190" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3197" end="3212" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3219" end="3224" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3236" end="3247" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3310" end="3318" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3322" end="3328" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="3447" end="3462" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="4062" end="4085" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4216" end="4233" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4314" end="4326" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="4431" end="4456" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320821" start="4598" end="4628" title="Moundville Archaeological Site" label="Moundville Archaeological Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="4634" end="4660" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052095" start="4696" end="4717" title="Mississippian culture" label="Mississippian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349587" start="4738" end="4754" title="Earthworks (archaeology)" label="earthwork mounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887129" start="5257" end="5275" title="Moundville Airport" label="Moundville Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="5309" end="5316" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q93318" start="5329" end="5342" title="nautical mile" label="nautical mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q253276" start="5349" end="5351" title="mile" label="mi"/>
<link wikidata="Q828224" start="5357" end="5359" title="kilometre" label="km"/>
<link wikidata="Q738570" start="5374" end="5399" title="central business district" label="central business district"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5466" end="5493" title="Hale County School District" label="Hale County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856652" start="5533" end="5566" title="Tuscaloosa County School District" label="Tuscaloosa County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378027" start="5589" end="5599" title="Rufus Deal" label="Rufus Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="5608" end="5625" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104729" wikidata="Q66780" url="?curid=104729" title="Newbern, Alabama">
<text>Newbern is a town in Hale County, Alabama, United States. As of the 2020 census, the population of the town was 133.

==History==
The area was originally known as Cane Brake due to the large number of canebrakes in the area. The earliest known settler came to the area in 1816. The first grist mill was built in 1818, and the first store in 1829.

F.A. Borden built the first post office in 1832, and became the first postmaster. Two of Borden&#x27;s brothers came from North Carolina in 1834, and bought most of the land in the area. They organized a town named after New Bern, North Carolina. It incorporated in 1854. A railway running from Uniontown to Newbern started operation in 1859.

The 9th Alabama Infantry Regiment was organized in the town in November 1861, to fight in the American Civil War. People from the town also fought in the Fifth, Eleventh, and Twentieth regiments. The town&#x27;s economy was centered around sharecropping until the Great Depression.

The Rural Studio of Auburn University was created in 1993.

===Mayoral dispute===
Patrick Braxton was the only person to file to run in the 2020 mayoral election, with incumbent mayor Woody Stokes III failing to file. Jude Arthur Crawford, the election official for Hale County, informed Braxton that he won by default and would need to appoint a city council due to there being no candidates in the local elections. Braxton was the first black mayor and appointed the first majority black council in the town&#x27;s history. Braxton received the key to town hall from Stokes, but all of the records had been removed from the building.

Braxton changed the locks to the building as Stokes gave keys out to friends. However, Stokes changed the locks and locked Braxton and the city council out of the town hall. Stokes and his allies refused to acknowledge Braxton as mayor and restricted his access to city mail and funds.

Before Braxton was sworn in as mayor, Stokes and the city council held a secret meeting in which they held a special election and declared themselves the winners by default ten days later. No notice of the election was published. Stokes claims that they were &quot;attempting to rectify a decades-old mistake by holding a special election&quot;. This council held meetings without Braxton&#x27;s knowledge and removed him as mayor and appointed Stokes to replace him.

Braxton and his city council filed a federal civil rights lawsuit in November 2022, stating that Stokes and his allies were conspiring to prevent him from governing the town due to his race. Braxton and his allies requested a special election to occur alongside the 2024 presidential election, but Judge Kristi DuBose ruled against them although she stated that they were &quot;likely to succeed on the merits of their constitutional claim&quot;. A bench trial is scheduled for September.

Elections were not held in the town for decades and Stokes&#x27; lawyers stated that they had not occurred for 60 years. They stated that the mayoralty &quot;has simply been passed from individual to individual to anyone who would agree to be Mayor without regard to elections&quot;.

On June 21, 2024, a settlement was reached in which Braxton would return to his mayoral duties.

==Geography==
Newbern is located at (32.594818, -87.535431).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

The town is located in the geographic region known as the Black Belt, related to the fertile soil which attracted developers of cotton plantations in the antebellum years, and also to the population of enslaved African Americans who worked at those sites. Many areas of the rural Black Belt are still majority African American in population.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

Newbern is part of the Tuscaloosa, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 231 people, 91 households, and 59 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 110 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 22.94% White and 77.06% Black or African American.

There were 91 households, out of which 38.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 37.4% were married couples living together, 25.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.1% were non-families. 33.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 19.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.54 and the average family size was 3.28.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 32.0% under the age of 18, 6.5% from 18 to 24, 26.0% from 25 to 44, 18.6% from 45 to 64, and 16.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 83.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 80.5 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $20,682, and the median income for a family was $31,042. Males had a median income of $25,625 versus $11,875 for females. The per capita income for the town was $9,476. About 17.5% of families and 31.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 40.0% of those under the age of eighteen and 33.3% of those 65 or over.

==Education==
All residents in the county are in the Hale County School District.

==Notable people==
*Frank Allen, former Major League Baseball player
*Henry Watson Jr., owned a cotton plantation in Newbern

==Gallery==
The below photographs were taken in Newbern as part of the Historic American Buildings Survey in the 1930s:
== References ==
==External links==
* Rural Studio
* &quot;He became the first Black mayor of Newbern, Alabama. A white minority locked him out of town hall. Now, Mayor Patrick Braxton has filed a federal lawsuit he hopes will make things right.&quot; by Lee Hedgepeth in &quot;Tread&quot;, June 5, 2023</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66780" start="0" end="7" title="Newbern, Alabama" label="Newbern"/>
<link wikidata="Q501147" start="21" end="32" title="Hale County, Alabama" label="Hale County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="34" end="41" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="68" end="79" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q23579417" start="201" end="210" title="canebrake" label="canebrake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002490" start="569" end="593" title="New Bern, North Carolina" label="New Bern, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q79421" start="643" end="652" title="Uniontown, Alabama" label="Uniontown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646655" start="696" end="725" title="9th Alabama Infantry Regiment" label="9th Alabama Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="786" end="804" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098047" start="932" end="945" title="sharecropping" label="sharecropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="956" end="972" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942828" start="979" end="991" title="Rural Studio" label="Rural Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="995" end="1012" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q501147" start="1241" end="1252" title="Hale County, Alabama" label="Hale County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437847" start="2672" end="2685" title="Kristi DuBose" label="Kristi DuBose"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3319" end="3337" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549318" start="3439" end="3449" title="Black Belt (region of Alabama)" label="Black Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q79580" start="3783" end="3802" title="Tuscaloosa, Alabama" label="Tuscaloosa, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856658" start="3803" end="3832" title="Tuscaloosa metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3863" end="3869" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4081" end="4086" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4098" end="4103" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4107" end="4123" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4233" end="4248" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5045" end="5062" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5155" end="5167" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5305" end="5332" title="Hale County School District" label="Hale County School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484995" start="5355" end="5366" title="Frank Allen (baseball)" label="Frank Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="5375" end="5396" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200560" start="5405" end="5421" title="Henry Watson Jr." label="Henry Watson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q913956" start="5532" end="5566" title="Historic American Buildings Survey" label="Historic American Buildings Survey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104730" wikidata="Q79806" url="?curid=104730" title="Abbeville, Alabama">
<text>Abbeville is a city in and the county seat of Henry County, in the southeast part of Alabama, United States. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2020 census, the population was 2,358.

==History==
European Americans set up an active trading post in Abbeville in Alabama Territory early in 1819. The first settler gateway to the wiregrass region was at Franklin, located fourteen miles west of Abbeville.

Locals say that the name derives from the Muscogee name for Abbey Creek, &quot;Yatta Abba&quot;, meaning &quot;dogwood tree grove&quot;.

Abbeville was designated as the Henry County seat in 1833; the seat had previously been Columbia. It was formally incorporated in 1853.

===20th century to present===
Abbeville suffered a catastrophic tragedy that wiped out most of the town when an arsonist almost burned the whole town to the ground on May 20, 1906. An entire block of Kirkland Street, the major portion of the business district, was destroyed. The nearby courthouse was almost lost but was saved through the efforts of the &quot;bucket brigade&quot; firefighters, who kept pouring water on the flat roof. During the week of June 28, 1906, a mechanic named Ward was arrested and charged with arson and starting the fire. His bond was set at $500.  After his bail was paid, Ward fled Abbeville and the county and was never heard from again. Brick buildings were erected to replace the wooden structures that had been lost in the fire.

In February 1937, Wes Johnson, an 18-year-old African-American man, was accused of attacking a white woman and was arrested. He was abducted from the Henry County jail by a mob of 100 white men and lynched: shot and hanged to death. His body was found &quot;bullet marked&quot; and &quot;swinging from a tree.&quot; As was typical of lynchings, none of the members of the mob was charged with a crime. It has been suggested by local historians that Johnson and the white woman were engaged in a consensual sexual relationship, and the accusation of assault was merely a manufactured pretext for the lynching. Howell (who?) was featured on &quot;60 Minutes&quot; on April 8, 2018, during an episode featuring Oprah Winfrey touring the new National Memorial for Peace and Justice in Montgomery, Alabama. Johnson is among the lynching victims memorialized there. Henry County is noted as among the 805 counties where lynchings took place. It had a total of 13 lynchings during the decades when this was frequent. In 1937 the Alabama Attorney General filed an impeachment against the Henry County sheriff for his failure to protect Johnson. An appeal was heard by the Alabama Supreme Court, which overturned the impeachment in June 1937. The Alabama Attorney General openly declared that Johnson was innocent of the charges against him.

In 1944, Recy Taylor, an African-American woman, was gang-raped by seven white men. Although the men admitted the rape to authorities, two grand juries subsequently declined to indict them. From a historic point of view, &quot;the Recy Taylor case brought the building blocks of the Montgomery bus boycott together a decade earlier&quot; than that event.

On November 5, 2002, Kirkland Street was hit by an F2 tornado.  The tornado destroyed several single-family homes, mobile homes and many other homes and businesses. The damage at the Abbeville High School was deemed too costly to repair and was rebuilt in a new location. Downed power lines and uprooted trees were numerous and widespread.  The Old Pioneer Cemetery was especially hard-hit.

==Geography==
Abbeville is located at (31.566367, -85.251300).

The city is located in southeastern Alabama along U.S. Route 431, Alabama State Route 10, and Alabama State Route 27. U.S. 431 runs from north to south along the western side of the city as a four-lane divided highway, leading north to Eufaula and southwest to Dothan. AL-10 runs from west to east through the center of town as Washington Street, and leads east to the Georgia state line near Fort Gaines and northwest to Blue Springs. AL-27 leads southwest from the city to Ozark.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (0.32%) is water.

===Climate===
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Abbeville has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,358 people, 1,029 households, and 604 families residing in the city.

Abbeville first appeared on the 1850 U.S. Census. Although it did not report a separate population as a town from 1860 to 1880, it returned again in 1890 and has returned on every successive census to date. See also Abbeville precinct below, which includes the population of the city and surrounding area since 1860.

As of the census of 2000, there were 2,987 people, 1,172 households, and 787 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 1,353 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 56.65% White, 39.94% Black or African American, 0.07% Asian, 2.85% from other races, and 0.50% from two or more races. 3.52% of the population were Hispanic or Latino.

There were 1,172 households, out of which 27.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.8% were married couples living together, 17.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.8% were non-families. 30.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 17.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 3.01.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 22.9% under the age of 18, 8.4% from 18 to 24, 22.1% from 25 to 44, 22.8% from 45 to 64, and 23.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 82.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 78.2 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $23,266, and the median income for a family was $37,917. Males had a median income of $26,250 versus $20,603 for females. The per capita income for the city was $17,215. About 17.3% of families and 21.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.1% of those under age 18 and 29.6% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 2,688 people, 1,077 households, and 699 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 1,255 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 54.4% White, 41.4% Black or African American, 1.0% Asian, 2.0% from other races, and 1.2% from two or more races. 3.1% of the population were Hispanic or Latino.

There were 1,077 households, out of which 24.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.1% were married couples living together, 19.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.1% were non-families. 32.4% of all households were made up of individuals, and 16.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.32 and the average family size was 2.94.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 22.0% under the age of 18, 7.5% from 18 to 24, 21.3% from 25 to 44, 25.5% from 45 to 64, and 23.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 44.3 years. For every 100 females, there were 85.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.1 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $28,533, and the median income for a family was $39,167. Males had a median income of $36,630 versus $25,302 for females. The per capita income for the city was $17,756. About 16.2% of families and 18.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 25.2% of those under age 18 and 17.8% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==
Abbeville is governed via a mayor-council government. The mayor is elected at-large. The city council consists of five members who are each elected from single-member districts.

== Education ==
Abbeville is a part of the Henry County Public Schools system. It operates the Abbeville High School and the Abbeville Elementary School.

Abbeville Christian Academy is a private high school in the city and one of the last &quot;unofficially&quot; segregated high schools in the country.

==Transportation==
Intercity bus service is provided by Greyhound Lines.

== Media ==
Abbeville is served by one radio station, WESZ-LP.

Abbeville is served by a weekly newspaper, the Abbeville Herald, which has been in operation since 1915.

==Notable people==
* Leroy Cook, former defensive end for the Dallas Cowboys
* Sharlene Newman, Cognitive Neuroscientist, AAAS Fellow
* William Oates, Civil War and Spanish–American War veteran
* Chris Porter, former Auburn University basketball player and professional basketball player
* Jimmy Rane, founder / chairman / CEO of Great Southern Wood Preserving
* Al Richardson, former American football linebacker for the Atlanta Falcons
* Recy Taylor, an African-American woman activist whose rape in Abbeville by six white men was a catalyst for renewed actions of the nationwide Civil Rights Movement.
* Edward Vaughn, Black Power activist, bookstore owner, and member of the Michigan House of Representatives

== Gallery ==
== References ==
==External links==

* City of Abbeville official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79806" start="0" end="9" title="Abbeville, Alabama" label="Abbeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="31" end="42" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q501000" start="46" end="58" title="Henry County, Alabama" label="Henry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569285" start="67" end="76" title="Southeast Alabama" label="southeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="85" end="92" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="127" end="142" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="143" end="172" title="Dothan, Alabama metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="181" end="192" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814493" start="298" end="315" title="Alabama Territory" label="Alabama Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026804" start="364" end="380" title="wiregrass region" label="wiregrass region"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="483" end="491" title="Muscogee" label="Muscogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q887221" start="552" end="564" title="Cornus florida" label="dogwood tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q68444" start="667" end="675" title="Columbia, Alabama" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985086" start="1680" end="1687" title="Lynching in the United States" label="lynched"/>
<link wikidata="Q247869" start="2127" end="2137" title="60 Minutes" label="60 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="2190" end="2203" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q28335255" start="2220" end="2259" title="National Memorial for Peace and Justice" label="National Memorial for Peace and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q29364" start="2263" end="2282" title="Montgomery, Alabama" label="Montgomery, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303362" start="2825" end="2836" title="Recy Taylor" label="Recy Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q249367" start="3099" end="3121" title="Montgomery bus boycott" label="Montgomery bus boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q876972" start="3678" end="3692" title="U.S. Route 431 in Alabama" label="U.S. Route 431"/>
<link wikidata="Q872830" start="3694" end="3716" title="Alabama State Route 10" label="Alabama State Route 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q517150" start="3722" end="3744" title="Alabama State Route 27" label="Alabama State Route 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q79648" start="3864" end="3871" title="Eufaula, Alabama" label="Eufaula"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="3889" end="3895" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="3997" end="4004" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361460" start="4021" end="4032" title="Fort Gaines, Georgia" label="Fort Gaines"/>
<link wikidata="Q68271" start="4050" end="4062" title="Blue Springs, Alabama" label="Blue Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q79212" start="4103" end="4108" title="Ozark, Alabama" label="Ozark"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="4128" end="4146" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="4350" end="4379" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="4404" end="4429" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="4524" end="4549" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5188" end="5193" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5202" end="5207" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5211" end="5227" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5235" end="5240" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5253" end="5264" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5329" end="5337" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5341" end="5347" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6272" end="6289" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6383" end="6395" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6724" end="6729" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6737" end="6742" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6746" end="6762" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6769" end="6774" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6786" end="6797" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6860" end="6868" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6872" end="6878" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="7805" end="7822" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="7916" end="7928" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="8094" end="8102" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052894" start="8172" end="8194" title="single-member district" label="single-member district"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663942" start="8353" end="8380" title="Abbeville Christian Academy" label="Abbeville Christian Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="8560" end="8575" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949063" start="8632" end="8639" title="WESZ-LP" label="WESZ-LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q56290239" start="8689" end="8705" title="Abbeville Herald" label="Abbeville Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528920" start="8769" end="8779" title="Leroy Cook" label="Leroy Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q903354" start="8788" end="8801" title="defensive end" label="defensive end"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="8810" end="8824" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q91379873" start="8827" end="8842" title="Sharlene Newman" label="Sharlene Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442484" start="8870" end="8881" title="AAAS Fellow" label="AAAS Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q887318" start="8884" end="8897" title="William Calvin Oates" label="William Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675554" start="8944" end="8956" title="Chris Porter (basketball)" label="Chris Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="8965" end="8982" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q123366498" start="9038" end="9048" title="Jimmy Rane" label="Jimmy Rane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704707" start="9111" end="9124" title="Al Richardson (linebacker)" label="Al Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="9133" end="9150" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q528145" start="9151" end="9161" title="linebacker" label="linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q272059" start="9170" end="9185" title="Atlanta Falcons" label="Atlanta Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303362" start="9188" end="9199" title="Recy Taylor" label="Recy Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="9204" end="9220" title="African-American" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="9330" end="9351" title="Civil Rights Movement" label="Civil Rights Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q98596470" start="9355" end="9368" title="Edward Vaughn" label="Edward Vaughn"/>
<link wikidata="Q880483" start="9370" end="9381" title="Black Power" label="Black Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494590" start="9427" end="9460" title="Michigan House of Representatives" label="Michigan House of Representatives"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104731" wikidata="Q65763" url="?curid=104731" title="Haleburg, Alabama">
<text>Haleburg is a town in Henry County, Alabama, United States. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2020 census, the population was 112. Established in 1885 as &quot;Halesburgh&quot;, the town was incorporated in September 1911, as &quot;Halesburg&quot;. Since then, for reasons unknown, it has become known as the current &quot;Haleburg&quot;.

==Geography==
Haleburg is located in southeastern Henry County at (31.408960, -85.136035). Alabama State Route 95 passes through the town, leading north to Abbeville and south to Columbia. Haleburg is west of the Chattahoochee River, which forms the Alabama–Georgia border.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 108 people, 48 households, and 36 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 60 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 77.78% White, 18.52% Black or African American, and 3.70% from two or more races. 0.93% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 48 households, out of which 22.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.3% were married couples living together, 10.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.0% were non-families. 25.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.25 and the average family size was 2.67.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 20.4% under the age of 18, 6.5% from 18 to 24, 23.1% from 25 to 44, 28.7% from 45 to 64, and 21.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 45 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.5 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $25,500, and the median income for a family was $28,750. Males had a median income of $30,417 versus $21,250 for females. The per capita income for the town was $11,657. There were 14.3% of families and 23.3% of the population living below the poverty line, including 35.7% of under eighteens and 18.5% of those over 64.

==Notable people==
* Grover C. Hall, newspaper editor
* Monte Irvin, former Negro league and Major League Baseball player. He was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1973. On June 26, 2010, the San Francisco Giants retired his number 20 uniform.
* Curley Money, rockabilly musician inducted into the Rockabilly Hall of Fame in 2003

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q65763" start="0" end="8" title="Haleburg, Alabama" label="Haleburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q501000" start="22" end="34" title="Henry County, Alabama" label="Henry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="36" end="43" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="78" end="93" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="94" end="123" title="Dothan metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="132" end="143" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q873870" start="469" end="491" title="Alabama State Route 95" label="Alabama State Route 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q79806" start="534" end="543" title="Abbeville, Alabama" label="Abbeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q68444" start="557" end="565" title="Columbia, Alabama" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068297" start="591" end="610" title="Chattahoochee River" label="Chattahoochee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="636" end="643" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="670" end="688" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="760" end="766" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="977" end="982" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="991" end="996" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1000" end="1016" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1081" end="1089" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1093" end="1099" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1221" end="1236" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2034" end="2051" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2152" end="2164" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430355" start="2251" end="2265" title="Grover C. Hall" label="Grover C. Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356515" start="2286" end="2297" title="Monte Irvin" label="Monte Irvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="2306" end="2318" title="Negro league baseball" label="Negro league"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="2323" end="2344" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="2378" end="2399" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="2431" end="2451" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144645" start="2485" end="2497" title="Curley Money" label="Curley Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q203720" start="2499" end="2509" title="rockabilly" label="rockabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255853" start="2537" end="2560" title="Rockabilly Hall of Fame" label="Rockabilly Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104732" wikidata="Q79858" url="?curid=104732" title="Headland, Alabama">
<text>Headland is the largest city in Henry County, Alabama, United States. It is part of the Dothan metropolitan area. In 2020, the population was 4,973, up from 4,510 in the 2010 census.

==History==
James Joshua Head (1839–1927) founded Headland in 1871 as &quot;Head&#x27;s Land&quot;. He patented land, plotted the town and built his home there. The Headland post office opened on October 10, 1871.

The Headland Public Square was laid off in 1871 by Head with a vision for a branch courthouse. Henry County voters decided in the 1879 and 1885 courthouse site elections not to locate a courthouse on the public square. Henry has been Alabama&#x27;s only county with three courthouses at the same time.

Head sold Headland to Hosey C. Powell in 1879, who sold to Dr. Wyatt S. Oates in 1880. Head moved to Tampa, Florida, in 1883 and later established Lake Magdalene, Florida.

Headland incorporated in 1884 with 26 white and 4 Black petitioners. The railroad was built in 1893 along with the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad Depot. The depot was added to the National Register of Historic Places on September 4, 1980. It has since been disassembled.

Headland&#x27;s &quot;The Spirit of the American Doughboy&quot; statue was the first public statue in Henry County. It was erected on the square in 1926 as a tribute to the town&#x27;s military dead. The square was paved in 1935.

As of the 1960 U.S. census, Headland had grown into Henry County&#x27;s largest city, narrowly edging out Abbeville, which had been the largest since Dothan was removed into Houston County in 1903. Headland lost that distinction to Abbeville again in 1970, but regained it in 1980 and has since solidified its hold. In 2000, it broke Dothan&#x27;s then-Henry County 1900 record of 3,275 residents with 3,523 and added nearly 1,000 more by 2010.

==Geography==
Headland is located in the southwest corner of Henry County at (31.353410, -85.339793). It is bordered to the south by the city of Dothan and town of Kinsey in Houston County and to the west by Dale County.

U.S. Route 431, a four-lane highway, passes through the east side of Headland, leading south to the center of Dothan and north to Abbeville. Alabama State Route 134 runs through the center of Headland, leading east to Columbia next to the Georgia line, and west to Midland City.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Headland has a total area of , of which , or 0.03%, are water.

===Climate===
==Demographics==
===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 4,510 people, 1,799 households, and 1,291 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 1,949 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 70.1% White, 27.5% Black or African American, 0.4% Native American, 0.3% Asian, 0.6% from other races, and 1.2% from two or more races. 1.4% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 1,799 households, out of which 30.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.1% were married couples living together, 17.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.2% were non-families. 25.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.50 and the average family size was 2.99.

In the city, the age distribution of the population shows 25.6% under the age of 18, 6.7% from 18 to 24, 26.6% from 25 to 44, 27.0% from 45 to 64, and 14.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38.3 years. For every 100 females, there were 83.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 82.9 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $45,813, and the median income for a family was $50,120. Males had a median income of $37,025 versus $30,734 for females. The per capita income for the city was $20,304. About 13.6% of families and 12.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.7% of those under age 18 and 20.7% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 4,973 people, 1,583 households, and 1,131 families residing in the city.

== Education ==
Headland is a part of the Henry County Public Schools system. It operates Headland Elementary School (K-5), Headland Middle School (6-9) and Headland High School (10-12).

==Sports==
Headland was home to the Headland Dixie Runners, a Minor League Baseball team in the Alabama State League/Alabama–Florida League from 1950 to 1952.

Headland was also the home to the 2016 Dixie Youth Baseball World Champions.

==Notable people==

* M. Watt Espy, death penalty historian
* W. Thomas West, former major general in the U.S. Air Force
* Charles Woods, businessman and political candidate

== Photo gallery ==
== References ==
==External links==
* Headland, Alabama Chamber of Commerce</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79858" start="0" end="8" title="Headland, Alabama" label="Headland"/>
<link wikidata="Q501000" start="32" end="44" title="Henry County, Alabama" label="Henry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="46" end="53" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="88" end="112" title="Dothan metropolitan area, Alabama" label="Dothan metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="117" end="121" title="2020 United States census" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="170" end="181" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="803" end="817" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463958" start="849" end="872" title="Lake Magdalene, Florida" label="Lake Magdalene, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q19720558" start="990" end="1024" title="Seaboard Coast Line Railroad Depot (Headland, Alabama)" label="Seaboard Coast Line Railroad Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841436" start="1053" end="1089" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Henry County, Alabama" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578024" start="1161" end="1208" title="Spirit of the American Doughboy" label="&amp;quot;The Spirit of the American Doughboy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121694" start="1386" end="1402" title="1960 United States census" label="1960 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q79806" start="1482" end="1491" title="Abbeville, Alabama" label="Abbeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="1550" end="1564" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston County"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="1967" end="1973" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66385" start="1986" end="1992" title="Kinsey, Alabama" label="Kinsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q488840" start="2030" end="2041" title="Dale County, Alabama" label="Dale County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816707" start="2044" end="2058" title="U.S. Route 431" label="U.S. Route 431"/>
<link wikidata="Q28973647" start="2185" end="2208" title="Alabama State Route 134" label="Alabama State Route 134"/>
<link wikidata="Q68444" start="2262" end="2270" title="Columbia, Alabama" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="2283" end="2290" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q67065" start="2309" end="2321" title="Midland City, Alabama" label="Midland City"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2341" end="2359" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2484" end="2498" title="2010 United States census" label="census of 2010"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2675" end="2688" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3835" end="3852" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3946" end="3958" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="4062" end="4087" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258957" start="4216" end="4243" title="Henry County Public Schools" label="Henry County Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689673" start="4398" end="4420" title="Headland Dixie Runners" label="Headland Dixie Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="4424" end="4445" title="minor league baseball" label="Minor League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973266" start="4458" end="4478" title="Alabama State League" label="Alabama State League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705168" start="4479" end="4501" title="Alabama–Florida League" label="Alabama–Florida League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018427" start="4622" end="4634" title="M. Watt Espy" label="M. Watt Espy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946023" start="4662" end="4676" title="W. Thomas West" label="W. Thomas West"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="4685" end="4698" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="4706" end="4720" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083704" start="4723" end="4736" title="Charles Woods (Alabama)" label="Charles Woods"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104733" wikidata="Q67928" url="?curid=104733" title="Newville, Alabama">
<text>Newville is a town in Henry County, Alabama, United States. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2020 census, the population was 544.

==History==
James Madison Wells founded a village called &quot;Wells&quot; c. 1882. When the Abbeville Southern Railroad laid tracks through the town in 1893, its name was changed to &quot;Wells Station&quot;. The post office was built in 1894. Wells Station incorporated as &quot;Newville&quot; in 1903.

The town of Newville became prosperous with merchants, banks, lodges, doctors, churches, Newville High School, Rosenwald High School, societies, a newspaper, a depot, sawmills, cotton gins, mule stables and all the elements required by a developing town. Newville&#x27;s slow decline commenced after the Great Depression due to farm mechanization and loss of commerce.

===Newville Baptist Church Cemetery===
James M. and Catherine Wells donated one-half acre of land in 1887 for the site of the church and cemetery. The oldest known grave is that of William Y. Kirkland who died April 10, 1891. The church paid W.M. Harris fifty dollars in 1901 for two and one-half acres of land for the cemetery. In 1947, burial spaces were sold for 25 center per square foot. Nancy Price gave the church one acre of land for the cemetery in 1958. There are over 700 marked and unmarked graves. The Newville Cemetery was listed on the Alabama Historic Cemetery Register in 2005.

===Newville High School===
The first known school in Newville was at Center Church in 1881. When Grange Hall was built in 1891, church service and school were held on the first floor. In 1913, Grange Hall was torn down and the wood was used to build a school. Newville Public School became Newville Junior High in 1920. In 1923, it was decided to build a modern brick school. Newville High School was opened in 1929. The school building at Concord was moved to Newville in 1935. In 1936, the school building burned. A new structure was built with five rooms and a large auditorium. In 1938, the Works Progress Administration built the vocational building. When bathrooms were added in 1944, Newville School became one of the most modern buildings in Henry County. The Newville High School band was organized in 1961. In 1968, Newville High School closed.

===Newville Rosenwald School===
In 1894, the first known black school in Newville was organized and a building was built. The Jacksonian Enterprise School opened in May 1894. Parents and patrons financially supported this school. The school library contained more books than any school in this part of the country. The school grounds included Store&#x27;s Grove, a circular grove of 104 oak trees with a 30-foot avenue running through the middle of it. Each tree was named in honor of a patron. In 1919, the Newville Community requested assistance for the school. They received it from the Rosenwald Foundation. A new school was built and named &quot;Newville Rosenwald School&quot;. The Henry County Board of Education began to contribute to the finances of Newville Rosenwald School about 1922. During the late 1940s, Newville Rosenwald School became a high school. It was about this time that the original school burned down and a new building was constructed. In 1968 Rosenwald High School was closed.

==Geography==
Newville is located in southwestern Henry County at (31.421841, -85.336434). Alabama State Route 173 passes through the center of town as Broad Street, leading north to Abbeville and south to Headland. U.S. Route 431, a four-lane highway, cuts through the southeast corner of Newville, also connecting Newville and Headland. Dothan is to the south via US 431.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Newville has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 553 people, 221 households, and 163 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 246 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 52.80% White, 44.30% Black or African American, 2.71% from other races, and 0.18% from two or more races. 2.35% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 221 households, out of which 32.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.0% were married couples living together, 17.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.2% were non-families. 23.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.50 and the average family size was 2.93.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 27.1% under the age of 18, 5.8% from 18 to 24, 27.8% from 25 to 44, 21.5% from 45 to 64, and 17.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 86.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.9 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $27,596, and the median income for a family was $31,375. Males had a median income of $25,714 versus $21,250 for females. The per capita income for the town was $13,890. About 8.9% of families and 14.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.4% of those under age 18 and 20.2% of those age 65 or over.

==Notable people==
* Monica Cox, Professor and Department Chair, Ohio State University
* Willie Tullis, former NFL defensive back
* Frederick Palmer Whiddon, founder and long-time president of the University of South Alabama

==See also==

* List of towns in Alabama

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67928" start="0" end="8" title="Newville, Alabama" label="Newville"/>
<link wikidata="Q501000" start="22" end="34" title="Henry County, Alabama" label="Henry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="36" end="43" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="45" end="58" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="78" end="93" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="94" end="123" title="Dothan metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q79806" start="263" end="272" title="Abbeville, Alabama" label="Abbeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368619" start="587" end="608" title="Rosenwald School" label="Rosenwald High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="780" end="796" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="2037" end="2066" title="Works Progress Administration" label="Works Progress Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q501000" start="2192" end="2204" title="Henry County, Alabama" label="Henry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368617" start="2888" end="2908" title="Rosenwald Foundation" label="Rosenwald Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q875635" start="3396" end="3419" title="Alabama State Route 173" label="Alabama State Route 173"/>
<link wikidata="Q79806" start="3488" end="3497" title="Abbeville, Alabama" label="Abbeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q79858" start="3511" end="3519" title="Headland, Alabama" label="Headland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816707" start="3521" end="3535" title="U.S. Route 431" label="U.S. Route 431"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="3644" end="3650" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3697" end="3715" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3786" end="3792" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4006" end="4011" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4020" end="4025" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4029" end="4045" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4058" end="4069" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4134" end="4142" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4146" end="4152" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4275" end="4290" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5087" end="5104" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5197" end="5209" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q53865506" start="5306" end="5316" title="Monica Cox" label="Monica Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="5350" end="5371" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021856" start="5374" end="5387" title="Willie Tullis" label="Willie Tullis"/>
<link wikidata="Q674953" start="5400" end="5414" title="defensive back" label="defensive back"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498512" start="5417" end="5441" title="Frederick Palmer Whiddon" label="Frederick Palmer Whiddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13572981" start="5482" end="5509" title="University of South Alabama" label="University of South Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q256352" start="5527" end="5551" title="List of towns in Alabama" label="List of towns in Alabama"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104734" wikidata="Q66528" url="?curid=104734" title="Ashford, Alabama">
<text>Ashford is a town in Houston County, Alabama, United States. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. The town was incorporated in June 1891. For most of its history, it was a center for naval stores production, pulpwood harvesting, and cotton agriculture. The population was 2,148 at the 2010 census, up from 1,853 at the 2000 census.

==Geography==
Ashford is located slightly northeast of the center of Houston County at (31.184032, -85.235286). U.S. Route 84 passes through the southern part of the town, leading west to Dothan and southeast to Donalsonville, Georgia. The Chattahoochee River, which forms the Georgia state line, is southeast of Ashford on US 84.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which , or 0.34%, are water.

==History==

In March 1888, the Alabama Midland Railway built a small depot of Victorian railroad architecture in Ashford to be a waystation along the Bainbridge-to-Montgomery route. The depot was the only building to survive the 1915 fire that destroyed the rest of the town. The original depot received additions at least twice—an enclosed warehouse and open loading dock were added to the east, followed by racially segregated passenger waiting rooms on the west side. The depot faced two sidings that served for loading turpentine from the Adams Company still one block away, and pulpwood. Cotton bales, fertilizer, and a single sweet potato crop were loaded from both sidings.
The depot changed hands as railroads consolidated. The Alabama Midland was absorbed by the Atlantic Coast Line, which merged in the 1980s with the Seaboard Air Line to form the Seaboard Coast Line. CSX Transportation later bought the Seaboard Coast Line. Ashford Depot had fallen into disrepair after it closed in 1978. In the 1980s, concerned citizens founded a preservation committee, led by Jimmy Burgess, and received a grant to add a new roof to the building. This committee also placed the depot on the Alabama Register of Historical Places. It remained active into the 1990s. Former Mayor Bryan Alloway revived the depot preservation committee after his 2000 election. This committee planned to incorporate and seek tax-exempt status in 2005. It received two US Department of Transportation grants ($850,000), two Alabama Department of Economic and Community Affairs grants ($290,000), and one Alabama Resource Conservation &amp; Development (RC&amp;D) grant ($7500) to thoroughly renovate the depot. Construction began in fall 2004. The committee and Ashford City officials held a ribbon-cutting ceremony on November 17, 2005, to mark the end of Phase I of the reconstruction. Now the depot can be used for reunions, birthdays, and social events that the city might sponsor.

On October 10, 2018, Hurricane Michael&#x27;s western eye wall passed thru the City of Ashford causing major damage and left 100% of the city without power. No injuries or fatalities were associated with the storm.

==Government==

The current mayor is Carole Barfield, and City Council members are Place 1 - John Wayne Massey, Place 2 - Ronnie L. Whitehead, Place 3 - Jash Johnson, Place 4 - Blake Rosenkoetter, Place 5 - James Edward Smith. The City Clerk is Janet Rumley.

The police chief is Malvin Anderson, who supervises four full-time police officers; the fire chief is Jimmy Posey. The fire department and rescue squad are all volunteers.

The City of Ashford&#x27;s website is City of Ashford, Official Website

Previous mayors of the City of Ashford:
Jonathon Grecu,
Rusty Burgess,
Bryan Alloway

2020 Election:

Mayor - Carole Barfield 257 votes (57%) Gary Gibson 194 votes (43%)

Place 1 - John Wayne Massey (unopposed)

Place 2 - Ronnie L. Whitehead 257 votes (58%) Benji McWaters 186 (42%)

Place 3 - Josh Johnson replaced Alan Anderson. Mr. Anderson resigned in 2022.

Place 4 - Blake Rosenkoetter 258 votes (59%) Terry A. Smith 176 votes (41%)

Place 5 - James Edward Smith 213 votes (50%) Richard Bolden 145 votes (34%) Jimmy R. Weems 65 votes (15%)

==Education==

Ashford schools are part of the Houston County Board of Education. Ashford has one elementary school for grades K-5 and a high school for grades 6-12. The schools mascot is known as the yellow jackets named Buzz. The current principal of Ashford Elementary School is Sharon LeRoy and the principal of Ashford High School is Dr. Donnie Chambers.

Ashford Academy was once a private school that closed its doors at the end of the 2014–2015 school year.

==Recreation==
The City of Ashford offers recreation activities throughout the year, including baseball, softball, soccer, and basketball. Football and cheerleading is organized through the Ashford Youth Sports Association. The recreation ball fields are located behind Ashford High School on 8th Avenue. The recreation park includes T-Ball, softball, and baseball fields. Basketball is played at Watermark Church of Ashford. In 2015, Ashford hosted the 2015 Alabama State Class &quot;A&quot; Baseball Tournament. In 2021, the Ashford recreation boys 8u all-star team won the state championship in Tuscaloosa, Alabama, and then went on to Laurel, Mississippi to play in the 2021 Dixie Youth World Series where they finished 3rd in the class AA division.

==Demographics==
===Town of Ashford===

Ashford first appeared on the 1900 U.S. Census as an incorporated town, then in Henry County. In 1903, Ashford was shifted into the new county of Houston. See also Ashford Precinct below.

===2000 Census data===
As of the census of 2000, there were 1,853 people, 763 households, and 527 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 877 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 71.45% White, 27.52% Black or African American, 0.70% Native American, 0.05% Asian, and 0.27% from two or more races. 1.51% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 763 households, out of which 30.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.3% were married couples living together, 14.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 30.9% were non-families. 29.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 16.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.43 and the average family size was 2.99.

In the city the population was spread out, with 25.1% under the age of 18, 7.1% from 18 to 24, 26.2% from 25 to 44, 24.2% from 45 to 64, and 17.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 83.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 76.8 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $29,444, and the median income for a family was $40,313. Males had a median income of $30,167 versus $22,286 for females. The per capita income for the city was $15,135. About 11.3% of families and 16.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.5% of those under age 18 and 27.7% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 2,148 people, 867 households, and 623 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 1,004 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 79.0% White, 19.5% Black or African American, 0.2% Native American, 0.2% Asian, and 0.7% from two or more races. .8% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 867 households, out of which 27.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.6% were married couples living together, 14.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.1% were non-families. 24.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.48 and the average family size was 2.94.

In the city the population was spread out, with 23.7% under the age of 18, 9.0% from 18 to 24, 21.7% from 25 to 44, 28.2% from 45 to 64, and 17.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41.2 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.0 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $35,709, and the median income for a family was $55,833. Males had a median income of $38,654 versus $27,143 for females. The per capita income for the city was $21,444. About 9.1% of families and 14.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.5% of those under age 18 and 15.5% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,246 people, 865 households, and 635 families residing in the town.

==Ashford Precinct/Division (1900-70)==

Ashford Precinct was first created in 1900, then as the 19th precinct of Henry County. In 1903, Ashford was shifted into the new county of Houston and its precinct was renumbered the 10th. In 1960, it was reorganized into a census division. In 1980, the Ashford Census Division was merged into the Dothan Census Division.

==Notable person==
* Robert Stewart, former Arena Football League player

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66528" start="0" end="7" title="Ashford, Alabama" label="Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="21" end="35" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="37" end="44" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="46" end="59" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="79" end="94" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="95" end="124" title="Dothan, Alabama metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982026" start="211" end="223" title="naval stores" label="naval stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026887" start="236" end="244" title="pulpwood" label="pulpwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="261" end="267" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="313" end="324" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q410700" start="473" end="486" title="U.S. Route 84" label="U.S. Route 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="549" end="555" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598606" start="573" end="595" title="Donalsonville, Georgia" label="Donalsonville, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068297" start="601" end="620" title="Chattahoochee River" label="Chattahoochee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="638" end="645" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="710" end="737" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="873" end="878" title="train station" label="depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q788794" start="954" end="964" title="Bainbridge, Georgia" label="Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q29364" start="968" end="978" title="Montgomery, Alabama" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q201382" start="1327" end="1337" title="turpentine" label="turpentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436130" start="1361" end="1366" title="still" label="still"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026887" start="1387" end="1395" title="pulpwood" label="pulpwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="1436" end="1448" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066966" start="1576" end="1595" title="Atlantic Coast Line Railroad" label="Atlantic Coast Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q175292" start="1632" end="1649" title="Seaboard Air Line" label="Seaboard Air Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q262673" start="1662" end="1681" title="Seaboard Coast Line" label="Seaboard Coast Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="1683" end="1701" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q914856" start="1848" end="1860" title="historic preservation" label="preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="5522" end="5528" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5744" end="5749" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5758" end="5763" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5767" end="5783" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5791" end="5806" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5814" end="5819" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5884" end="5892" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="5896" end="5902" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="6025" end="6040" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="6836" end="6853" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6947" end="6959" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="7063" end="7069" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7286" end="7291" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7299" end="7304" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7308" end="7324" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7331" end="7346" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7353" end="7358" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7420" end="7428" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7432" end="7438" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="7561" end="7576" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="8374" end="8391" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8484" end="8496" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="8601" end="8626" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508626" start="9094" end="9108" title="Robert Stewart (lineman)" label="Robert Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725641" start="9117" end="9138" title="Arena Football League" label="Arena Football League"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104735" wikidata="Q66690" url="?curid=104735" title="Avon, Alabama">
<text>Avon is a town in Houston County, Alabama, United States. It incorporated in January 1957. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. As of the 2010 census, the population of the town was 543, its highest to date, up from 466 in 2000.

==Geography==
Avon is located near the geographic center of Houston County at (31.189409, -85.279156). It is bordered to the northwest by Cowarts, and the town limits of Ashford are to the east. U.S. Route 84 passes through Avon, leading west to the center of Dothan and southeast to the Georgia state line at the Chattahoochee River. Bainbridge, Georgia, is southeast of Avon.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which , or 0.78%, are water.

==Demographics==
===2000 Census data===
As of the census of 2000, there were 466 people, 185 households, and 138 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 202 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 94.42% White, 4.29% Black or African American, 0.21% Native American, and 1.07% from two or more races. 0.43% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 185 households, out of which 36.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 61.1% were married couples living together, 9.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.9% were non-families. 21.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 2.88.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 23.4% under the age of 18, 10.1% from 18 to 24, 32.2% from 25 to 44, 21.7% from 45 to 64, and 12.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.2 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $37,679, and the median income for a family was $42,273. Males had a median income of $28,438 versus $18,068 for females. The per capita income for the town was $18,152. About 9.2% of families and 12.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.9% of those under age 18 and 4.3% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 Census data===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 465 people, 200 households, and 161 families residing in the town.

==References==
=== Notes ===
===References===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66690" start="0" end="4" title="Avon, Alabama" label="Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="18" end="32" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="34" end="41" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="43" end="56" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="109" end="124" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="125" end="154" title="Dothan metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q67046" start="396" end="403" title="Cowarts, Alabama" label="Cowarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q66528" start="428" end="435" title="Ashford, Alabama" label="Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q410700" start="453" end="466" title="U.S. Route 84" label="U.S. Route 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="518" end="524" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="546" end="553" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068297" start="572" end="591" title="Chattahoochee River" label="Chattahoochee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q788794" start="593" end="612" title="Bainbridge, Georgia" label="Bainbridge, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="654" end="672" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="788" end="794" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1008" end="1013" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1021" end="1026" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1030" end="1046" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1054" end="1069" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1134" end="1142" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1146" end="1152" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1275" end="1290" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2086" end="2103" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2196" end="2208" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="2317" end="2342" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104736" wikidata="Q68444" url="?curid=104736" title="Columbia, Alabama">
<text>Columbia is a rural town in Houston County, Alabama, United States. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2010 census the population was 740, down from 804 in 2000.

==History==

Founded in 1820, Columbia served as a major trading center for communities throughout the Wiregrass Region of Alabama between 1822 and 1833, which coincided as its time as Henry County seat. Henry County which then comprised portions of present-day Covington, Dale, Barbour, Coffee, Crenshaw, Bullock, Geneva, and Houston counties. It lost the county seat status to Abbeville in 1833.

Bordering the State of Georgia and the Chattahoochee River, Columbia was a major port-of-call for steamboats and was known to many as &quot;Old Columbia&quot;. The town was incorporated on April 29, 1880 and was the center of education, culture, commerce, and trade. Columbia was the largest town in the area during the 19th century and remains one of the area&#x27;s oldest continuously operating municipalities.

Columbia received its first cotton textile mill in 1891 and its first electric plant in 1892. A branch of the Henry County Courthouse was located here from 1889 until Columbia became part of Houston County in 1903. Columbia got electric street lights in 1900 and its first electric utility company in 1914.

At the turn of the 20th century, Columbia was bypassed by the Alabama Midland Railway in favor of Dothan. As the railroads continued to take freight trade away from the riverboats. Columbia&#x27;s position as a principal trade center began to decline; however, Columbia sustained itself as a thriving farming community through the mid-20th century.

===Old Columbia Jail===
Erected sometime in the early 1860s, the Old Columbia Jail is today one of the last wooden jails still standing in Alabama. Originally, there were two cells, each measuring 10x15 feet. Interior walls are studded every two inches with iron spikes to prevent prisoners from being able to escape. The Columbia Women&#x27;s Club and the Columbia Bicentennial Committee have completely renovated the building for use as a museum to preserve some of the articles of historical interest to Columbia citizens.

===Purcell-Killingsworth House===
The Purcell-Killingsworth House, also known as &quot;Traveler&#x27;s Rest&quot; was completed in 1890 by William Henry Purcell (1845–1910), a prominent Columbia business man and politician. Purcell had many business interests including a steamboat landing on the Chattahoochee River. This was the boyhood home of Bishop Clare Purcell (1884–1964) who, in 1955, was elected President of the United Methodist Council of Bishops, the highest place of recognition ever achieved by a native-born Alabama Methodist minister. In 1946, the Purcell Family sold the two acre homestead to Mr. &amp; Mrs. Henry Killingsworth who have meticulously restored this imposing Victorian mansion. It was placed on the National Register of Historic Places on December 16, 1982.

==Geography==
Columbia is located in the northeastern corner of Houston County at .

The town is located on the Georgia-Alabama state line along Alabama State Routes 52 and 95. AL-52 is the main east–west
route through the town, leading east to the Georgia state line, and west to Webb. AL-95 begins in the town and leads north to Abbeville. Alabama State Route 134 also begins in the town, leading west to Headland.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (1.75%) is water.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 690 people, 343 households, and 192 families residing in the town.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 804 people, 344 households, and 226 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 462 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 74.38% White, 24.50% Black or African American, 0.62% Native American, 0.12% from other races, and 0.37% from two or more races. 0.50% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 344 households, out of which 27.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.4% were married couples living together, 12.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.3% were non-families. 33.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 18.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.34 and the average family size was 2.98.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 25.7% under the age of 18, 6.5% from 18 to 24, 24.0% from 25 to 44, 22.1% from 45 to 64, and 21.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females, there were 87.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.3 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $27,500, and the median income for a family was $36,339. Males had a median income of $29,821 versus $18,393 for females. The per capita income for the town was $15,248. About 12.3% of families and 18.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 24.0% of those under age 18 and 18.6% of those age 65 or over.

==Notable people==
*Dave Edwards, former Auburn University and Dallas Cowboys player
*Monte Irvin, born in Columbia, member of the Baseball Hall of Fame
*B&#x27;Ho Kirkland, born in Columbia, played for the Alabama Crimson Tide and went on to play for the Brooklyn Dodgers (NFL).
*Clare Purcell, born in Columbia, American Bishop of the Methodist Episcopal Church, South and the Methodist Church, elected in 1938.

==Gallery==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q68444" start="0" end="8" title="Columbia, Alabama" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="28" end="42" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="44" end="51" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="86" end="101" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="102" end="131" title="Dothan metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026804" start="303" end="319" title="Wiregrass Region" label="Wiregrass Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="398" end="402" title="county seat" label="seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q501000" start="404" end="416" title="Henry County, Alabama" label="Henry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q487725" start="462" end="471" title="Covington County, Alabama" label="Covington"/>
<link wikidata="Q488840" start="473" end="477" title="Dale County, Alabama" label="Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q109437" start="479" end="486" title="Barbour County, Alabama" label="Barbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q485660" start="488" end="494" title="Coffee County, Alabama" label="Coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q488831" start="496" end="504" title="Crenshaw County, Alabama" label="Crenshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q111259" start="506" end="513" title="Bullock County, Alabama" label="Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q494620" start="515" end="521" title="Geneva County, Alabama" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="527" end="534" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q79806" start="579" end="588" title="Abbeville, Alabama" label="Abbeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="613" end="629" title="Georgia (U.S. State)" label="State of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068297" start="638" end="657" title="Chattahoochee River" label="Chattahoochee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q501000" start="1124" end="1136" title="Henry County, Alabama" label="Henry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="1205" end="1219" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston County"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="1420" end="1426" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068297" start="2496" end="2515" title="Chattahoochee River" label="Chattahoochee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126239" start="2546" end="2566" title="Clare Purcell" label="Bishop Clare Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888258" start="2622" end="2657" title="United Methodist Council of Bishops" label="United Methodist Council of Bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="2890" end="2899" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2930" end="2966" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Alabama#Houston County" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="3102" end="3109" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q873381" start="3156" end="3158" title="Alabama State Route 52" label="52"/>
<link wikidata="Q873870" start="3163" end="3165" title="Alabama State Route 95" label="95"/>
<link wikidata="Q67381" start="3271" end="3275" title="Webb, Alabama" label="Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q79806" start="3321" end="3330" title="Abbeville, Alabama" label="Abbeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q28973647" start="3332" end="3355" title="Alabama State Route 134" label="Alabama State Route 134"/>
<link wikidata="Q79858" start="3397" end="3405" title="Headland, Alabama" label="Headland"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3425" end="3443" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3562" end="3587" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="3696" end="3702" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3916" end="3921" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3930" end="3935" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3939" end="3955" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3963" end="3978" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3991" end="4002" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4067" end="4075" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="4079" end="4085" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="4208" end="4223" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="5020" end="5037" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5131" end="5143" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4108324" start="5239" end="5251" title="Dave Edwards (linebacker)" label="Dave Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q540672" start="5260" end="5277" title="Auburn University" label="Auburn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="5282" end="5296" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356515" start="5305" end="5316" title="Monte Irvin" label="Monte Irvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="5350" end="5371" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833599" start="5373" end="5391" title="B&amp;#x27;Ho Kirkland" label="B&amp;#x27;Ho Kirkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q971195" start="5426" end="5446" title="Alabama Crimson Tide" label="Alabama Crimson Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q929532" start="5475" end="5497" title="Brooklyn Dodgers (NFL)" label="Brooklyn Dodgers (NFL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126239" start="5500" end="5513" title="Clare Purcell" label="Clare Purcell"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5533" end="5541" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="5542" end="5548" title="Bishop" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q839112" start="5556" end="5589" title="Methodist Episcopal Church, South" label="Methodist Episcopal Church, South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751185" start="5594" end="5614" title="The Methodist Church (USA)" label="the Methodist Church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104737" wikidata="Q68127" url="?curid=104737" title="Cottonwood, Alabama">
<text>Cottonwood is a town in Houston County, Alabama, United States. One source said the town incorporated in 1901, although the 1910 U.S. Census stated 1903. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2010 census the population was 1,289, up from 1,170 in 2000. The area was heavily damaged by an EF2 tornado on January 9, 2024. One person was killed and five others were injured.

==Geography==
Cottonwood is located in southern Houston County at (31.053646, -85.302409). Alabama State Route 53 passes through the center of town, leading north to Dothan and southeast to the Florida state line. Malone, Florida, is southeast of Cottonwood.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which , or 0.45%, are water.

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
At the 2000 census there were 1,170 people, 485 households, and 323 families in the town. The population density was . There were 548 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 69.06% White, 29.06% Black or African American, 0.68% Native American, and 1.20% from two or more races. 1.97% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 485 households 29.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 48.2% were married couples living together, 14.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.2% were non-families. 30.5% of households were one person and 15.5% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.41 and the average family size was 3.01.

The age distribution was 26.5% under the age of 18, 7.1% from 18 to 24, 25.0% from 25 to 44, 24.5% from 45 to 64, and 16.9% 65 or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.1 males.

The median household income was $21,452 and the median family income was $32,065. Males had a median income of $25,833 versus $15,515 for females. The per capita income for the town was $13,111. About 18.1% of families and 27.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 28.8% of those under age 18 and 42.1% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census there were 1,289 people, 553 households, and 350 families in the town. The population density was . There were 638 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 71.8% White, 25.4% Black or African American, 0.6% Native American, and 1.9% from two or more races. 1.1% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 553 households 24.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.0% were married couples living together, 16.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.7% were non-families. 33.5% of households were one person and 13.9% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.33 and the average family size was 2.99.

The age distribution was 22.5% under the age of 18, 9.2% from 18 to 24, 22.2% from 25 to 44, 29.2% from 45 to 64, and 16.9% 65 or older. The median age was 42.4 years. For every 100 females, there were 87.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.4 males.

The median household income was $26,570 and the median family income was $27,465. Males had a median income of $28,942 versus $27,857 for females. The per capita income for the town was $15,090. About 26.1% of families and 28.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 38.5% of those under age 18 and 13.5% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,048 people, 494 households, and 305 families residing in the town.

==Notable people==
*Pete Coachman, former Major League Baseball player (California Angels)
*Emmett Ripley Cox, Senior Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit
*Curtis McGriff, former defensive lineman for the New York Giants of the National Football League
*Katherine Reid, born in Cottonwood in about 1901, performed stage shows as the Lady Alligator Wrestler in the 1930s before retiring. But in 1968, at age 67, she came out of retirement to appear on Rowan and Martin&#x27;s Laugh-In.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q68127" start="0" end="10" title="Cottonwood, Alabama" label="Cottonwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="24" end="38" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="40" end="47" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="49" end="62" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042032" start="124" end="140" title="1910 United States census" label="1910 U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="172" end="187" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="188" end="217" title="Dothan, Alabama metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="337" end="352" title="January 8–10, 2024 North American storm complex#Tornado outbreak" label="January 9, 2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q873390" start="498" end="520" title="Alabama State Route 53" label="Alabama State Route 53"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="573" end="579" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="601" end="608" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093590" start="621" end="636" title="Malone, Florida" label="Malone, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="684" end="702" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="810" end="821" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="982" end="995" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2078" end="2090" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2191" end="2202" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2363" end="2376" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3456" end="3468" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3573" end="3598" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16194004" start="3701" end="3714" title="Pete Coachman" label="Pete Coachman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="3723" end="3744" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="3753" end="3770" title="Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim" label="California Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373562" start="3773" end="3790" title="Emmett Ripley Cox" label="Emmett Ripley Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548931" start="3792" end="3804" title="Senior Status" label="Senior Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q250446" start="3812" end="3867" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195828" start="3869" end="3883" title="Curtis McGriff" label="Curtis McGriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="3918" end="3933" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="3941" end="3965" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235088" start="4164" end="4196" title="Rowan and Martin&amp;#x27;s Laugh-In" label="Rowan and Martin&amp;#x27;s Laugh-In"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104738" wikidata="Q67046" url="?curid=104738" title="Cowarts, Alabama">
<text>Cowarts is a town in Houston County, Alabama, United States. The town incorporated in August 1961. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2010 census the population was 1,871, up from 1,546 in 2000.

==Geography==
Cowarts is located in north-central Houston County at (31.199575, -85.306272). It is bordered to the north and west by the city of Dothan and to the southeast by the town of Avon. A small part of the northern border of Cowarts is with the town of Webb.

U.S. Route 84 passes through the southern part of the town, leading west to the center of Dothan and southeast to Bainbridge, Georgia.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Cowarts has a total area of , of which are land and , or 0.58%, are water.

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
At the 2000 census there were 1,546 people, 603 households, and 469 families in the town. The population density was . There were 684 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 84.93% White, 12.35% Black or African American, 0.65% Native American, 0.39% Asian, 0.39% from other races, and 1.29% from two or more races. 0.52% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 603 households 32.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.9% were married couples living together, 15.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.1% were non-families. 18.6% of households were one person and 6.8% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.56 and the average family size was 2.90.

The age distribution was 24.7% under the age of 18, 8.8% from 18 to 24, 28.1% from 25 to 44, 27.5% from 45 to 64, and 10.9% 65 or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.6 males.

The median household income was $36,688 and the median family income was $41,198. Males had a median income of $28,281 versus $19,464 for females. The per capita income for the town was $17,793. About 10.3% of families and 13.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.7% of those under age 18 and 18.0% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census there were 1,871 people, 734 households, and 557 families in the town. The population density was . There were 814 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 80.8% White, 14.6% Black or African American, 0.7% Native American, 0.1% Asian, 0.6% from other races, and 3.2% from two or more races. 1.7% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 734 households 29.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.2% were married couples living together, 13.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.1% were non-families. 21.1% of households were one person and 8.2% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.55 and the average family size was 2.92.

The age distribution was 24.3% under the age of 18, 6.5% from 18 to 24, 25.9% from 25 to 44, 29.2% from 45 to 64, and 14.2% 65 or older. The median age was 40.1 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.4 males.

The median household income was $36,014 and the median family income was $47,625. Males had a median income of $42,016 versus $29,450 for females. The per capita income for the town was $19,808. About 10.4% of families and 14.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 22.8% of those under age 18 and 17.3% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,930 people, 734 households, and 568 families residing in the town.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67046" start="0" end="7" title="Cowarts, Alabama" label="Cowarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="21" end="35" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="37" end="44" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="46" end="59" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="117" end="132" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="133" end="162" title="Dothan metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="378" end="384" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q66690" start="421" end="425" title="Avon, Alabama" label="Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q67381" start="494" end="498" title="Webb, Alabama" label="Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q410700" start="501" end="514" title="U.S. Route 84" label="U.S. Route 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q788794" start="615" end="634" title="Bainbridge, Georgia" label="Bainbridge, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="654" end="672" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="792" end="803" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="964" end="977" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2096" end="2108" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2209" end="2220" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2381" end="2394" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3508" end="3520" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3625" end="3650" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104739" wikidata="Q65974" url="?curid=104739" title="Gordon, Alabama">
<text>Gordon is a town in Houston County, Alabama, United States. It was incorporated in February 1872. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2010 census the population was 332, down from 408 in 2000.

==Geography==
Gordon is located in eastern Houston County at (31.143171, -85.096114). It is bordered to the northeast by the Chattahoochee River, which forms the Alabama–Georgia border, and to the south by U.S. Route 84. US 84 leads west to Dothan and southeast to Bainbridge, Georgia. Alabama State Route 95 passes through the north and east sides of Gordon, leading north to Columbia and south to the Florida state line.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Gordon has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 294 people, 113 households, and 68 families residing in the town.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 408 people, 144 households, and 108 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 165 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 74.02% Black or African American, 23.04% White, 0.74% Native American, 0.25% Asian, 0.25% from other races, and 1.72% from two or more races. 1.47% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 144 households, out of which 41.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 47.2% were married couples living together, 22.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.0% were non-families. 25.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.83 and the average family size was 3.33.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 33.8% under the age of 18, 7.4% from 18 to 24, 22.5% from 25 to 44, 24.0% from 45 to 64, and 12.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 84.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 78.8 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $16,917, and the median income for a family was $17,708. Males had a median income of $25,625 versus $15,536 for females. The per capita income for the town was $6,795. About 30.3% of families and 39.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 48.9% of those under age 18 and 19.4% of those age 65 or over.

==Gallery==
Below are photographs taken in Gordon as part of the Historic American Buildings Survey:
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q65974" start="0" end="6" title="Gordon, Alabama" label="Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="20" end="34" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="36" end="43" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="45" end="58" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="116" end="131" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="132" end="161" title="Dothan metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068297" start="355" end="374" title="Chattahoochee River" label="Chattahoochee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="400" end="407" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q410700" start="436" end="449" title="U.S. Route 84" label="U.S. Route 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="471" end="477" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q788794" start="495" end="514" title="Bainbridge, Georgia" label="Bainbridge, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q873870" start="516" end="538" title="Alabama State Route 95" label="Alabama State Route 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q68444" start="607" end="615" title="Columbia, Alabama" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="633" end="640" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="671" end="689" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="777" end="802" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="910" end="916" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1130" end="1135" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1139" end="1155" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1164" end="1169" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1177" end="1192" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1200" end="1205" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1218" end="1229" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1294" end="1302" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1306" end="1312" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1435" end="1450" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2247" end="2264" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2357" end="2369" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q913956" start="2510" end="2544" title="Historic American Buildings Survey" label="Historic American Buildings Survey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104740" wikidata="Q66385" url="?curid=104740" title="Kinsey, Alabama">
<text>Kinsey is a town in Houston County, Alabama, United States. It was initially located and incorporated in Henry County in February 1893. In 1903, it was redrawn into newly created Houston County and was later reincorporated in August 1957. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2010 census the population was 2,198, up from 1,796 in 2000.

==History==
Kinsey was named for an early postmaster, Eliza Kinsey.

==Geography==
Kinsey is located in northern Houston County at (31.291688, -85.345487). It is bordered to the south and west by the city of Dothan, to the southeast by the town of Webb, and to the north by the city of Headland in Henry County.

U.S. Route 431 passes through the western part of Kinsey, leading north to Abbeville and southwest to Dothan.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Kinsey has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
At the 2000 census there were 1,796 people in 687 households, including 509 families, in the town. The population density was . There were 768 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 58.07% White, 40.48% Black or African American, 0.33% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 0.56% from other races, and 0.50% from two or more races. 1.22% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 687 households 42.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.8% were married couples living together, 19.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.8% were non-families. 22.9% of households were one person and 7.4% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.61 and the average family size was 3.07.

The age distribution was 32.2% under the age of 18, 8.6% from 18 to 24, 32.3% from 25 to 44, 18.0% from 45 to 64, and 8.8% 65 or older. The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females, there were 86.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 83.3 males.

The median household income was $27,578 and the median family income was $33,950. Males had a median income of $25,669 versus $20,227 for females. The per capita income for the town was $14,196. About 20.3% of families and 21.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 29.0% of those under age 18 and 17.8% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census there were 2,198 people in 810 households, including 598 families, in the town. The population density was . There were 899 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 49.9% White, 46.0% Black or African American, 0.1% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 2.1% from other races, and 1.5% from two or more races. 4.0% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 810 households 37.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.8% were married couples living together, 21.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.2% were non-families. 22.8% of households were one person and 6.0% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.71 and the average family size was 3.18.

The age distribution was 30.2% under the age of 18, 9.1% from 18 to 24, 28.5% from 25 to 44, 22.6% from 45 to 64, and 9.7% 65 or older. The median age was 32.4 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.4 males.

The median household income was $33,516 and the median family income was $34,643. Males had a median income of $29,429 versus $22,339 for females. The per capita income for the town was $17,145. About 20.3% of families and 23.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 40.2% of those under age 18 and 10.7% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,203 people, 796 households, and 519 families residing in the town.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66385" start="0" end="6" title="Kinsey, Alabama" label="Kinsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="20" end="34" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="36" end="43" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="45" end="58" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q501000" start="105" end="117" title="Henry County, Alabama" label="Henry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="257" end="263" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="273" end="302" title="Dothan metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="581" end="587" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q67381" start="621" end="625" title="Webb, Alabama" label="Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q79858" start="659" end="667" title="Headland, Alabama" label="Headland"/>
<link wikidata="Q501000" start="671" end="683" title="Henry County, Alabama" label="Henry County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816707" start="686" end="700" title="U.S. Route 431" label="U.S. Route 431"/>
<link wikidata="Q79806" start="761" end="770" title="Abbeville, Alabama" label="Abbeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="814" end="832" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="916" end="927" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1097" end="1110" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2229" end="2241" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2342" end="2353" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2523" end="2536" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3650" end="3662" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3767" end="3792" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104741" wikidata="Q66470" url="?curid=104741" title="Madrid, Alabama">
<text>Madrid ( ) is a town in Houston County, Alabama, United States. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the 2010 census the population was 350, up from 303 in 2000.

==History==
In 1905, A. B. Steele began to build the Bay Line Railroad from Panama City, Florida to Dothan, Alabama. The Geneva Lumber Company also surveyed a country road from Cottonwood, Alabama to intersect the railroad.

In 1905, Ed Watford, a resident of Houston County, bought 180 acres at the intersection, intending for it to become a town.

At the same time, land speculator J. B. Dell and his partner W. C. Fenn, prominent people in Houston County, bought 80 acres east of Watford&#x27;s property. They were able to record the acreage at the courthouse as the town of &quot;Madrid&quot; before Watford could. Consequently, Watford&#x27;s property became known as &quot;Watford&#x27;s Addition&quot;. Madrid was named after Madrid, Spain, but Dell decided to pronounce it differently with emphasis on the &quot;Mad&quot;.

Watford, Dell, and Fenn all had their acres surveyed and then divided into lots. However, Dell and Fenn threw a big celebration for their public action, throwing a barbecue and hiring a brass brand. This enticed many buyers to come. Watford was successful in selling his 40 acres, and Dell and Fenn were able to sell most of their 80 acres.

After the auction, Madrid started to become a prosperous town. A ready market existed in the town for timber, turpentine, and cotton. Many buildings, including stores and churches, began to be built in the town. Madrid also had a cotton oil mill and gin.

In 1912, Mayor Ed Watford founded the Bank of Madrid. The bank survived for 12 years before being closed in 1924.

After a prosperous beginning, Madrid&#x27;s population began to precipitously decline when the boll weevil started attacking cotton crops and timber supplies were exhausted.

==Geography==
Madrid is located in southwestern Houston County at . U.S. Route 231 passes through the west side of the town, leading north to Dothan and south to Cottondale, Florida.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 265 people, 117 households, and 78 families residing in the town.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 303 people, 119 households, and 89 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 134 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 82.84% White, 16.17% Black or African American, 0.33% Asian, and 0.66% from two or more races.

There were 119 households, out of which 42.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.5% were married couples living together, 10.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.4% were non-families. 20.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.55 and the average family size was 2.96.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 29.4% under the age of 18, 6.6% from 18 to 24, 33.0% from 25 to 44, 19.1% from 45 to 64, and 11.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 85.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.1 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $14,943, and the median income for a family was $21,563. Males had a median income of $25,000 versus $16,563 for females. The per capita income for the town was $10,409. About 18.1% of families and 30.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 31.6% of those under the age of eighteen and 51.5% of those 65 or over.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66470" start="0" end="6" title="Madrid, Alabama" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="24" end="38" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="40" end="47" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="49" end="62" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="82" end="97" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="98" end="127" title="Dothan metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892173" start="247" end="264" title="Bay Line Railroad" label="Bay Line Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q852591" start="270" end="290" title="Panama City, Florida" label="Panama City, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="294" end="309" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q68127" start="371" end="390" title="Cottonwood, Alabama" label="Cottonwood, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="562" end="577" title="land speculator" label="land speculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="927" end="940" title="Madrid" label="Madrid, Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="1470" end="1476" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q201382" start="1478" end="1488" title="turpentine" label="turpentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="1494" end="1500" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q217336" start="1834" end="1845" title="boll weevil" label="boll weevil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432498" start="1982" end="1996" title="U.S. Route 231" label="U.S. Route 231"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="2056" end="2062" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702320" start="2076" end="2095" title="Cottondale, Florida" label="Cottondale, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="2115" end="2133" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="2223" end="2248" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2356" end="2362" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2575" end="2580" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2589" end="2594" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2598" end="2614" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2622" end="2627" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2772" end="2787" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3584" end="3601" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3695" end="3707" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104742" wikidata="Q67090" url="?curid=104742" title="Rehobeth, Alabama">
<text>Rehobeth is a town in Houston County, Alabama, United States. Rehobeth, originally named Sanders, began as a crossroads community in the 1890s; however, it was not until 1996, that the town was incorporated. Rehobeth is part of the Dothan Metropolitan Statistical Area. At the time of the 2010 census, the population was 1,297, up from 993 at the 2000 census.

==Geography==
Rehobeth is located in western Houston County at the geographic coordinates of (31.12296, -85.45271 decimal degrees). It is bordered to the north by the city of Dothan and to the northwest by the town of Taylor.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Rehobeth has a total area of , of which , or 0.41%, is water.

==Demographics==
===2010 census===
As of the 2010 census, there were 1,297 people in 485 households, including 388 families, in the town. The population density was . There were 528 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 95.9% White, 1.5% Black or African American, 0.8% American Indian and Alaska Native, 0.2% Asian, 0.8% some other race, and 0.9% two or more races. Two-and-a-half percent of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 485 households 35.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 66.0% were married couples living together, 8.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 20.0% were non-families. 17.7% of households were one person and 7.6% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.67 and the average family size was 3.02.

The age distribution was 26.2% under the age of 18, 7.6% from 18 to 24, 26.9% from 25 to 44, 27.2% from 45 to 64, and 12.1% 65 or older. The median age was 37.3 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.5 males.

The median household income was $51,328 and the median family income was $55,156. Males had a median income of $37,647 versus $31,898 for females. The per capita income for the town was $20,195. About 7.3% of families and 9.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.2% of those under age 18 and 20.0% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As enumerated in the census of 2000, there were 993 people in 375 households, including 292 families, in the town. The population density was . There were 399 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 96.68% White, 0.81% Black or African American, 0.40% American Indian and Alaska Native, 0.10% Asian, 0.40% some other race, and 1.61% two or more races. 1.51% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 375 households 38.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 61.3% were married couples living together, 12.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.1% were non-families. 20.3% of households were one person and 8.5% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.65 and the average family size was 3.04.

The age distribution was 27.5% under the age of 18, 8.9% from 18 to 24, 30.0% from 25 to 44, 21.9% from 45 to 64, and 11.8% 65 or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 96.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.0 males.

The median household income was $34,267 and the median family income was $39,625. Males had a median income of $31,513 versus $21,518 for females. The per capita income for the town was $17,149. About 12.6% of families and 14.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.5% of those under age 18 and 13.9% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,791 people, 611 households, and 486 families residing in the town.

== References ==
==External links==
* 
* 
* Houston County, Alabama official website
* Dothan Area Chamber of Commerce</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67090" start="0" end="8" title="Rehobeth, Alabama" label="Rehobeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="22" end="36" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="38" end="45" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q67090" start="89" end="96" title="Rehobeth, Alabama" label="Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188856" start="109" end="129" title="Crossroads village" label="crossroads community"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="194" end="206" title="Municipal corporation#United States" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="232" end="238" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="239" end="268" title="Dothan metropolitan area, Alabama" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="289" end="300" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="347" end="358" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="428" end="450" title="Geographic coordinate system" label="geographic coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798227" start="475" end="490" title="decimal degrees" label="decimal degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="536" end="542" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q68361" start="579" end="585" title="Taylor, Alabama" label="Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="605" end="623" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="733" end="744" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="915" end="928" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#21st century" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="951" end="956" title="White Americans" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="963" end="988" title="African Americans" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="995" end="1010" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="American Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="1015" end="1028" title="Alaska Natives" label="Alaska Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="1035" end="1040" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="1073" end="1090" title="Multiracial Americans" label="two or more races"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="1138" end="1156" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2069" end="2081" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2178" end="2188" title="Census#Enumeration strategies" label="enumerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="2196" end="2210" title="2000 United States Census" label="census of 2000"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2379" end="2392" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 Census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3640" end="3665" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123526" start="3847" end="3866" title="Chamber of commerce" label="Chamber of Commerce"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104743" wikidata="Q45068" url="?curid=104743" title="Carl XVI Gustaf">
<text>Carl XVI Gustaf (Carl Gustaf Folke Hubertus; born 30 April 1946) is King of Sweden. Having reigned since 1973, he is the longest-reigning monarch in Swedish history.

Carl Gustaf was born during the reign of his paternal great-grandfather, King Gustaf V, as the youngest child and only son of Prince Gustaf Adolf, Duke of Västerbotten, and Princess Sibylla of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. His father died in an airplane crash in Denmark in January 1947, when Carl Gustaf was nine months old. Carl Gustaf became crown prince and heir apparent to the Swedish throne at the age of four when his grandfather Gustaf VI Adolf acceded to the throne in 1950.

Carl Gustaf acceded to the throne upon his grandfather&#x27;s death on 15 September 1973. Shortly after he became king, the new 1974 Instrument of Government took effect, formally stripping the monarchy of its remaining executive powers. As a result, Carl Gustaf no longer performs many of the duties normally accorded to a head of state in parliamentary regimes, such as the formal appointment of the prime minister, signing legislation into law, and being commander-in-chief of the nation&#x27;s military. The new instrument explicitly limited the king to ceremonial and representative functions, while he retained the right to be regularly informed of affairs of state. As head of the House of Bernadotte, Carl Gustaf has also been able to make a number of decisions about the titles and positions of its members.

In June 1976, Carl Gustaf married Silvia Sommerlath. They have three children: Victoria, Carl Philip, and Madeleine. The king&#x27;s heir apparent, after passage on 1 January 1980 of a new law establishing absolute primogeniture, is his eldest child, Crown Princess Victoria. Victoria&#x27;s younger brother, Carl Philip, was briefly the heir apparent from his birth in May 1979 until the adoption of said law.

== Early life ==
Carl Gustaf was born on 30 April 1946 at 10:20 in Haga Palace in Solna, Stockholm County. He was the youngest of five children and the only son of Sweden&#x27;s Prince Gustaf Adolf and Princess Sibylla. He was christened at the Royal Chapel on 7 June 1946 by the Archbishop of Uppsala, Erling Eidem.

Carl Gustaf was baptised in Charles XI&#x27;s baptismal font, which stood on Gustav III&#x27;s carpet; he lay in Charles XI&#x27;s cradle with Oscar II&#x27;s crown beside him. The same christening gown in white linen batiste which the prince carried had been worn by his father in 1906 and would later be worn by his three children. His godparents were the Crown Prince and Crown Princess of Denmark (his paternal uncle and aunt), the Crown Prince of Norway, Princess Juliana of the Netherlands, the King of Sweden (his paternal great-grandfather), the Hereditary Prince of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (his maternal uncle), the Crown Prince and Crown Princess of Sweden (his paternal grandfather and step-grandmother), and Count Folke and Countess Maria Bernadotte of Wisborg.

Prince Carl Gustaf was also given the title of the Duke of Jämtland. His father, Prince Gustaf Adolf, Duke of Västerbotten, was killed in an airplane crash on 26 January 1947 at Copenhagen Airport. His father&#x27;s death had left the nine-month-old prince second in line for the throne, behind his grandfather, then Crown Prince Gustaf Adolf. When his paternal great-grandfather, Gustaf V died in 1950, the four-year-old prince became the heir apparent of Sweden.

Carl Gustaf was seven years old before he was told about his father&#x27;s death. He expressed his feelings about growing up without knowing his father in a speech in 2005.

== Youth and education ==
Carl Gustaf&#x27;s earliest education was received privately at the Royal Palace. He was then sent to Broms school, and then on to Sigtuna boarding school. After graduating from high school in 1966, Carl Gustaf completed two-and-a-half years of education in the Swedish Army, the Royal Swedish Navy, and the Swedish Air Force. During the winter 1966–1967, he took part in a round-the-world voyage with the mine-laying vessel &quot;Älvsnabben&quot;. The Crown Prince received his commission as an officer in all three services in 1968, eventually rising to the rank of captain (in the army and air force) and lieutenant (in the navy), before his accession to the throne. He also completed his academic studies in history, sociology, political science, tax law, and economics at Uppsala University and later economics at Stockholm University.

To prepare for his role as the head of state, Crown Prince Carl Gustaf followed a broad program of studies on the court system, social organisations and institutions, trade unions, and employers&#x27; associations. In addition, he closely studied the affairs of the Riksdag, Government, and Ministry for Foreign Affairs. The Crown Prince also spent time at the Swedish Mission to the United Nations and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA), worked at a bank in London and at the Swedish Embassy there, at the Swedish Chamber of Commerce in France, and at the Alfa Laval Company factory in France. In 1970, he represented the King at the head of the Swedish delegation to the World Exposition in Osaka, Japan. Since his youth the present monarch has been a strong supporter of the Scout Movement in Sweden.

Carl Gustaf has dyslexia, as do his daughter Crown Princess Victoria and his son Prince Carl Philip.

== Reign ==

On 15 September 1973, Carl Gustaf became King of Sweden upon the death of his grandfather, Gustaf VI Adolf. On 19 September, he took the required regal assurance () during an extraordinary meeting of the cabinet. Afterwards, he appeared before the parliament, diplomatic corps, court, etc. in the Hall of State at the Royal Palace where he was enthroned on the Silver Throne and gave a speech. Both the cabinet meeting and ceremony at the Hall were broadcast live on television. Following the ceremonies, he appeared on the balcony to acknowledge gathered crowds. At the cabinet meeting, the King declared that his regnal name would be Carl XVI Gustaf, King of Sweden. He adopted &quot;For Sweden – With the times&quot; as his personal motto (&quot;För Sverige – i tiden&quot;).

He is the foremost representative of Sweden and pays state visits abroad and receives those to Sweden, he opens the annual session of the Riksdag, chairs the Special Council held during a change of Government (), holds regular Information Councils with the Prime Minister and the Cabinet (), chairs the meetings of the Advisory Council on Foreign Affairs (), and receives Letters of Credence of foreign ambassadors to Sweden and signs those of Sweden to foreign nations. As a figurehead, he also voluntarily abstains from voting in Swedish elections.

King Carl Gustaf holds the highest ranks in the three branches of the Swedish Armed Forces; this is due to the fact that he was, as stipulated by § 14 of the 1809 Instrument of Government in effect at the time of his accession to the throne in 1973, the Commander-in-Chief (; not to be confused with the military professional holding the position of Supreme Commander) and therefore he was promoted &quot;ex officio&quot; from his earlier ranks of captain (Army &amp; Air Force) and lieutenant (Navy), to general and admiral. Under the provisions of the Instrument of Government of 1974, which became effective on 1 January 1975, the King no longer holds this constitutionally-mandated position, but he kept his ranks &quot;à la suite&quot; since he no longer has any military command authority, except over His Majesty&#x27;s Military Staff.

Worldwide, Carl XVI Gustaf is probably best known as the presenter of the Nobel Prizes each year; the first Nobel laureate who received the prize from his hands was Leo Esaki. He also hands over the Polar Music Prize. The King holds honorary doctoral degrees from the Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, the Stockholm School of Economics and from the Åbo Akademi University in Finland.

Carl Gustaf has made a number of controversial statements considered political. In his critique of Norwegian prime minister Gro Harlem Brundtland and her seal hunting policy, he questioned whether someone who could not take care of the seal problem really could take care of the Norwegian people. In 2004, after a state visit to Brunei, he praised Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah and described Brunei as an &quot;open country&quot;, despite its controversial human rights history. In 2023 Carl Gustaf said that while he understands that Brunei has a non-democratic form of government it is still an open country. Both statements made public support for the monarchy reach the lowest numbers in many years. Public trust increased, however, after the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami, in which many Swedes died. Then-prime minister Göran Persson then failed to carry out his constitutional obligation to inform the king on matters of state which resulted in criticism of the government. During a memorial ceremony held at Stockholm City Hall on 10 January 2005 the king gave a highly praised speech which restored support of the monarchy.

Carl Gustaf has claimed to have played an important part in solving a diplomatic crisis with Saudi Arabia in 2015. This crisis began when foreign minister Margot Wallström criticized Saudi Arabia&#x27;s form of government and human rights situation. Saudi Arabia responded by recalling its ambassador to Sweden and ending a military co-operation agreement between the two nations. The Swedish government then reportedly asked for the king&#x27;s help in solving the crisis. He then wrote a letter to the Saudi Arabian king and shortly thereafter diplomatic relations went back to normal. Carl Gustaf&#x27;s role in solving the crisis, and his statement regarding said role during which he claimed to have &quot;good relations&quot; with the Saudi king have both received criticism.

On 26 April 2018, Carl Gustaf became the longest-reigning Swedish monarch when he surpassed Magnus Eriksson&#x27;s reign of 44 years and 222 days.

In March 2022, the King condemned the Russian invasion of Ukraine during a visit to the Life Regiment Hussars to present a new standard to the regiment. He stated that Europe was in an extremely difficult situation and accused Russia of violating international law and creating a humanitarian catastrophe.

The King&#x27;s Golden Jubilee was celebrated in 2023. The celebrations included tours of all of Sweden&#x27;s 21 counties, a jubilee banquet at the Royal Palace and a carriage procession through the streets of Stockholm. Leading up to that year and including it, beginning already in 2018, some of the most serious criticism ever published took place about Carl Gustaf and the way his monarchy has developed. Support for the monarchy overall remained strong in the Swedish public, however, in large part due to the popularity of Crown Princess Victoria.

Following the abdication of his cousin, Margrethe II of Denmark, Carl Gustaf became the longest-serving incumbent head of state in Europe and the longest-reigning sovereign in the world. His reign saw Sweden end over 200 years of neutrality by joining NATO on 18 March 2024. During a ceremony held outside the Riksdag building, Carl Gustaf described the move to join the alliance as a new era in Swedish security policy and reaffirmed Sweden&#x27;s wish for peace.

At the 2025 Society and Defence National Conference in Sälen the King addressed Sweden&#x27;s security situation. He said that whilst Sweden was not at war it could no longer consider itself at peace, echoing a sentiment voiced by prime minister Ulf Kristersson. The King also highlighted the need societal preparedness and stated that he believed the public&#x27;s willingness to defend the realm had grown in recent years.

== Personal interests and views==
The king is passionate about the environment, technology, agriculture, trade, and industry. Like many members of the Swedish royal family, he has a keen interest in automobiles. He owns several Porsche 911s, a car model which is said to be a particular favourite of his, as well as a vintage Volvo PV444, a Ferrari 456M GT, an AC Cobra and other cars. The first pictures taken of him and his future wife were of them sitting in his Porsche 911. In the summer of 2005 he was involved in a traffic accident in Norrköping. The accident was described as a &quot;fender bender&quot;, with no serious personal injuries claimed. Nevertheless, the incident caused national headlines. The king and queen of Sweden frequently travel to the Summer and Winter Olympic Games, including in 2014, 2016, 2018 and 2024.

In 2016, the king intervened in the raging debate surrounding the proposed Nobel Center at Blasieholmen in central Stockholm, near the Nationalmuseum and old town, by stating that he thought the proposed structure was “too big and in the wrong place” and that it “could be relocated”. Following the 2018 election, the City of Stockholm abandoned the original proposal opting instead for creating new plans near Slussen.

In December 2020, the king said Sweden&#x27;s approach to dealing with COVID-19 had failed. Prime Minister Stefan Löfven said that &quot;the fact that so many have died can&#x27;t be considered as anything other than a failure&quot;.

In 2023, the Nobel Foundation announced that they intended to invite ambassadors from Russia, Belarus and Iran to attend that year&#x27;s Nobel Prize awards ceremony. This sparked mass criticism and the royal court issued a statement saying the king was still deciding on whether or not to attend the ceremony, as has been tradition since it was first held. Many leaders of political parties also threatened to boycott the ceremony. Eventually the Foundation backed down on its decision.

=== Scouting ===
The King is the honorary chairman of the World Scout Foundation, and often participates in Scout activities both in Sweden and abroad. He regularly visits World Scout Jamborees, for instance the 1979 Dalajamb World Jamboree International Encampment hosted by Sweden, the 2002 World Jamboree held in Sattahip, Thailand, and the 100th Anniversary of World Scouting 2007 World Jamboree held in Hylands Park, England. He also attended the 1981 National Scout Jamboree in Virginia, United States, and was awarded the Bronze Wolf, the only distinction of the World Organization of the Scout Movement, awarded by the World Scout Committee for exceptional services to world Scouting, in 1982. He also attended the 22nd World Scout Jamboree. He gave a speech on 6 August 2011 at the closing ceremony with more than 40,000 people watching. The band Europe also performed for him singing &quot;The Final Countdown&quot;. King Carl Gustaf made an appearance at the 2013 Boy Scouts of America National Jamboree in West Virginia.

== Use of remaining power ==

So empowered as head of the House of Bernadotte, King Carl Gustaf, since he was enthroned in 1973, has made a number of personal decisions regarding the titles and positions of relatives and family members, including the demotion of a sister, elevation of several commoners to royalty, rebuff of an elderly uncle&#x27;s wishes and the creation of new Swedish titles and duchies.
* 1974: his sister Christina married a non-royal Swedish man and Carl Gustaf followed the example which his grandfather and predecessor had set for two of Christina&#x27;s older sisters with like marriages, so Christina was removed from the Royal House, no longer a &quot;Royal Highness&quot; and was given the courtesy title &quot;Princess Christina, Mrs. Magnuson&quot; (a special non-royal, non-noble style first invented in 1953 by King Haakon VII of Norway for his granddaughter Ragnhild).
* 1976: his own choice, taking advantage of his constitutional prerogative as king when he married a non-royal German-Brazilian woman, saw her created &quot;Her Majesty Queen Silvia of Sweden&quot;.
* 1976: his paternal uncle Bertil (later that year) married the non-royal British woman who had lived with Bertil for decades, and (with Bertil&#x27;s titles) Carl Gustaf created her a &quot;Royal Highness&quot; Princess of Sweden and Duchess of Halland.
* 1977: his daughter Victoria was born, and in 1980, Carl Gustaf created her Duchess of Västergötland (which has had duchesses before).
* 1979: his son Carl Philip was born, and Carl Gustaf created him Duke of Värmland (which has had dukes before).
* 1982: his daughter Madeleine was born, and Carl Gustaf created a new duchy for her as Duchess of Hälsingland and Gästrikland.
* 1983: his paternal uncle Sigvard, since 1934 no longer Prince of Sweden because of a non-royal marriage to a German woman, supported by legal experts announced his own title as &quot;Prince Sigvard Bernadotte&quot;, 18 years later clearly citing a great-uncle Prince Oscar Bernadotte&#x27;s title as his main precedent; however, Sigvard died in 2002 with Carl Gustaf never having responded to his uncle&#x27;s statement, and with the Royal Court of Sweden consistently refusing to honor it.
* 2003: his paternal grandfather&#x27;s first cousin Carl died, and Carl Gustaf formally recognized his Belgian title by allowing &quot;Prince Carl Bernadotte&quot; on the gravestone at the Royal Cemetery which is owned by the king; in 2014 he did the same there, allowing Carl&#x27;s widow&#x27;s name as &quot;Princess Kristine Bernadotte&quot; when she died.
* 2010: his daughter Victoria married a non-royal Swede whom Carl Gustaf created a &quot;Royal Highness&quot; Prince of Sweden and (with her title) Duke of Västergötland.
* 2012: his granddaughter Estelle was born and created Duchess of Östergötland (which has had duchesses before).
* 2013: his daughter Madeleine married a non-royal British American who declined Swedish citizenship, and Carl Gustaf gave him the special courtesy title of &quot;Herr&quot; (with a capital h).
* 2014: his granddaughter Leonore was born and created Duchess of Gotland (which also previously has been a duchy).
* 2015: his son Carl Philip married a non-royal Swede whom Carl Gustaf created a &quot;Royal Highness&quot; Princess of Sweden and (with the son&#x27;s title) Duchess of Värmland.
* 2015: his grandson Nicolas was born, and Carl Gustaf created a new duchy for him as Duke of Ångermanland.
* 2016: his grandson Oscar was born and created Duke of Scania (which has had dukes before).
* 2016: his grandson Alexander was born (later that year) and created Duke of Södermanland (which has had dukes before).
* 2017: his grandson Gabriel was born and created Duke of Dalarna (which has had dukes before).
* 2018: his granddaughter Adrienne was born, and Carl Gustaf created a new duchy for her as Duchess of Blekinge.
* 2019: Carl Gustaf issued a statement rescinding the royal status of his grandchildren Leonore, Nicolas, Alexander, Gabriel and Adrienne in an effort to more strictly associate Swedish royalty to the office of the head of state; the five are still to be styled as princes/princesses and dukes/duchesses of their provinces, and they remain in the line of succession to the throne.
* 2021: his grandson Julian was born and created Duke of Halland (which has had dukes before) with the same standing of 2019 as his elder brothers.
* 2025: his granddaughter Ines was born and created Duchess of Västerbotten with the same standing of 2019 as her elder brothers.

== Marriage and family ==
The King married Silvia Sommerlath, whose father was German and whose mother was Brazilian, and who had grown up in both countries. They met at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich, where she was an interpreter and host. The wedding was held on 19 June 1976, at Stockholm Cathedral, the ceremony performed by the Archbishop of Uppsala, Olof Sundby. The wedding was preceded the previous evening by a Royal Variety Performance, at which, among other performances, the Swedish musical group ABBA gave one of the first performances of &quot;Dancing Queen&quot;, as a tribute to Sweden&#x27;s future queen. The King and his family moved to Drottningholm Palace west of Stockholm in 1980. He and the Queen have maintained their business offices at the Royal Palace of Stockholm.

King Carl Gustaf and Queen Silvia have three children and nine grandchildren:
*Crown Princess Victoria, Duchess of Västergötland (born 14 July 1977), who is married to Daniel Westling and has two children
*Prince Carl Philip, Duke of Värmland (born 13 May 1979), who is married to Sofia Hellqvist and has four children
*Princess Madeleine, Duchess of Hälsingland and Gästrikland (born 10 June 1982), who is married to Christopher O&#x27;Neill and has three children

Prince Carl Philip was born the heir apparent. However, a constitutional reform, which was already under way at the time of his birth, made his elder sister, Victoria, the heir apparent and Crown Princess of Sweden on 1 January 1980, according to the principles of absolute primogeniture, which Sweden was the first recognised monarchy to adopt. King Carl Gustaf objected after the reform, not to the succession by females but to the fact that his son lost the position and title which he had had since birth.

== Health ==
In February 2023, Carl Gustaf underwent &quot;a surgical intervention with catheter technology in the heart area.&quot;

== Titles, styles, honours and arms ==

Carl XVI Gustaf ended the centuries-old traditional style &quot;King of Sweden, the Goths and the Wends&quot;, instead choosing the simpler &quot;King of Sweden&quot; (&quot;Sveriges Konung&quot;).

=== Regnal name ===
There have not been sixteen kings of Sweden named Carl/Charles. The numeral stems from an erroneous genealogy that includes fictitious kings, created by 16th-century writer Johannes Magnus.

=== Arms ===
On his creation as Duke of Jämtland, Carl XVI Gustaf was granted an achievement of arms which featured the arms of Jämtland in base (these arms can be seen on his as knight of the Danish Order of the Elephant at Frederiksborg Palace). Since his accession to the throne, he has used the greater coat of arms of Sweden although he is still associated with the ducal title of Jämtland he held as a prince.

=== Distinctions ===
==== National ====
* : Recipient of the 90th Birthday Medal of King Gustaf V
* : Recipient of the 85th Birthday Medal of King Gustaf VI Adolf
* : Recipient of the Wedding Medal of Crown Princess Victoria to Daniel Westling

==== Foreign ====
* : Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the Liberator General San Martín (1998)
* : Grand Star of the Order of Honour for Services to the Republic of Austria, Special Class (1967)
* : Grand Cordon of the Order of Leopold (1977)
* : Grand Collar of the Order of the Southern Cross (2007)
* : Recipient of the Royal Family Order of the Crown of Brunei (2004)
* : Sash of the Order of Stara Planina
* : Collar of the Order of Merit
* : Grand Cross of the Grand Order of King Tomislav (2013)
** Knight with Collar of the Order of the Elephant (12 January 1965)
** Grand Commander of the Order of the Dannebrog (1975)
* : Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the Nile
** Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana (1995)
** Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the White Star (2011)
* : Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the White Rose (1974)
* : Grand Cross of the Order of the Legion of Honour
** Grand Cross Special Class of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany
** Ducal Family of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha: Knight Grand Cross of the Ducal Royal Saxe-Ernestine Saxe-Coburg and Gotha House Order
* : Grand Cross of the Order of the Redeemer
* : Knight with the Collar of the Order of Pope Pius IX
* : Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary
* : Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the Falcon
* : Star of the Republic of Indonesia, 1st Class (2017)
* : Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic (1991)
* : Collar of the Order of the Chrysanthemum
* : Grand Cordon with Collar of the Order of al-Hussein bin Ali
** Grand Cross with Chain of the Order of the Three Stars (1995)
** Grand Cross of the Order of Viesturs
* : Grand Cross with Golden Chain of the Order of Vytautas the Great (1995)
* : Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Gold Lion of the House of Nassau
* : Honorary Recipient of the Order of the Crown of the Realm (1996)
* : Collar of the Order of the Aztec Eagle (2004)
** Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Netherlands Lion
** Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the House of Orange
** Commander of the Order of the Golden Ark
* : Knight Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of St. Olav (1974)
* : Knight of the Order of the White Eagle
** Grand Collar of the Order of Saint James of the Sword
** Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of Prince Henry (1987)
* : Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the Star of Romania (2003)
* : Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of Abdulaziz al Saud
* : First Class of the Order of the White Double Cross
* : Recipient of the Decoration for Exceptional Merits
* : Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of Good Hope (1997)
* : Recipient of the Grand Order of Mugunghwa (2012)
** 1,183rd Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece (1983)
** Knight of the Collar of the Royal and Distinguished Spanish Order of Charles III
** Knight of the Order of the Rajamitrabhorn (2003)
** Knight of the Order of Ramkeerati (2008)
* : Grand Cordon of the Order of the Republic
* : Collar of the Order of the State of Republic of Turkey (2013)
** Member of the Order of Liberty (2008)
** Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of Prince Yaroslav the Wise
** Grand Officer of the Order of Merit, 1st Class
** Stranger Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter (1983)
** Recipient of the Royal Victorian Chain (8 July 1975)
* : Order of the Yugoslav Great Star (1976)

=== Awards ===

==== Foreign ====
* United Nations Peace Medal (1976)
* World Organization of the Scout Movement: Bronze Wolf Award (1982)
* : Golden Pheasant Award of the Scout Association of Japan (1980)
* : Mount Makiling Award

=== Honorary military positions ===
* Honorary Admiral, British Royal Navy (seniority: 25 June 1975)

== Patronages ==
== Ancestry ==
== References ==

=== Explanatory footnotes ===
== References ==

== External links ==
* Royal Court of Sweden – Official site


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q45068" start="0" end="15" title="Carl XVI Gustaf" label="Carl XVI Gustaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="68" end="82" title="King of Sweden" label="King of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="240" end="253" title="King Gustaf V" label="King Gustaf V"/>
<link wikidata="Q347374" start="293" end="334" title="Prince Gustaf Adolf, Duke of Västerbotten" label="Prince Gustaf Adolf, Duke of Västerbotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q57626" start="340" end="381" title="Princess Sibylla of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Princess Sibylla of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164685" start="399" end="419" title="1947 KLM Douglas DC-3 crash" label="in an airplane crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="522" end="535" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q52878" start="598" end="613" title="Gustaf VI Adolf" label="Gustaf VI Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="774" end="803" title="Basic Laws of Sweden#Instrument of Government" label="1974 Instrument of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="970" end="983" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="1104" end="1122" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q201625" start="1334" end="1353" title="House of Bernadotte" label="House of Bernadotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020020" start="1478" end="1497" title="Wedding of Carl XVI Gustaf and Silvia Sommerlath" label="Carl Gustaf married"/>
<link wikidata="Q152308" start="1498" end="1515" title="Queen Silvia of Sweden" label="Silvia Sommerlath"/>
<link wikidata="Q156390" start="1543" end="1551" title="Victoria, Crown Princess of Sweden" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q214704" start="1553" end="1564" title="Prince Carl Philip, Duke of Värmland" label="Carl Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q212035" start="1570" end="1579" title="Princess Madeleine, Duchess of Hälsingland and Gästrikland" label="Madeleine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="1597" end="1610" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="1670" end="1692" title="absolute primogeniture" label="absolute primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574523" start="1943" end="1954" title="Haga Palace" label="Haga Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q109010" start="1958" end="1963" title="Solna" label="Solna"/>
<link wikidata="Q104231" start="1965" end="1981" title="Stockholm County" label="Stockholm County"/>
<link wikidata="Q10671642" start="2121" end="2133" title="Royal Chapel (Sweden)" label="Royal Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162994" start="2156" end="2177" title="Archbishop of Uppsala" label="Archbishop of Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q820962" start="2179" end="2191" title="Erling Eidem" label="Erling Eidem"/>
<link wikidata="Q52935" start="2222" end="2232" title="Charles XI" label="Charles XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="2271" end="2281" title="Gustav III" label="Gustav III"/>
<link wikidata="Q52924" start="2337" end="2345" title="Oscar II" label="Oscar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103193" start="2412" end="2419" title="batiste" label="batiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q151312" start="2552" end="2564" title="Frederick IX of Denmark" label="Crown Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q163010" start="2569" end="2594" title="Ingrid of Sweden" label="Crown Princess of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q154912" start="2630" end="2652" title="Olav V of Norway" label="Crown Prince of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q154946" start="2654" end="2689" title="Princess Juliana of the Netherlands" label="Princess Juliana of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q52890" start="2695" end="2709" title="Gustaf V of Sweden" label="King of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q72834" start="2748" end="2790" title="Friedrich Josias, Prince of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Hereditary Prince of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q52878" start="2817" end="2829" title="Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden" label="Crown Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q115477" start="2834" end="2858" title="Louise Mountbatten" label="Crown Princess of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q212163" start="2912" end="2923" title="Folke Bernadotte" label="Count Folke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541434" start="2957" end="2964" title="Wisborg" label="Wisborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q211661" start="3026" end="3034" title="Jämtland" label="Jämtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q347374" start="3048" end="3089" title="Prince Gustaf Adolf, Duke of Västerbotten" label="Prince Gustaf Adolf, Duke of Västerbotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164685" start="3108" end="3122" title="1947 KLM Douglas DC-3 Copenhagen accident" label="airplane crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q206277" start="3145" end="3163" title="Copenhagen Airport" label="Copenhagen Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q52890" start="3348" end="3356" title="Gustaf V" label="Gustaf V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="3407" end="3420" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q750444" start="3701" end="3713" title="Stockholm Palace" label="Royal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7513193" start="3764" end="3787" title="Sigtunaskolan Humanistiska Läroverket" label="Sigtuna boarding school"/>
<link wikidata="Q121116229" start="3811" end="3822" title="High school (upper secondary)" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492012" start="3895" end="3907" title="Swedish Army" label="Swedish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141396" start="3913" end="3931" title="Royal Swedish Navy" label="Royal Swedish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q113525" start="3941" end="3958" title="Swedish Air Force" label="Swedish Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q640078" start="4039" end="4057" title="Mine layer" label="mine-laying vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636040" start="4064" end="4074" title="HSwMS Älvsnabben (M01)" label="Älvsnabben"/>
<link wikidata="Q25114211" start="4201" end="4208" title="captain" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q186024" start="4241" end="4251" title="lieutenant" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="4345" end="4352" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="4354" end="4363" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="4365" end="4382" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q856251" start="4384" end="4391" title="tax law" label="tax law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="4397" end="4406" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="4410" end="4428" title="Uppsala University" label="Uppsala University"/>
<link wikidata="Q221645" start="4452" end="4472" title="Stockholm University" label="Stockholm University"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="4506" end="4519" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="4642" end="4653" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="4741" end="4748" title="Riksdag" label="Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q776570" start="4766" end="4794" title="Ministry for Foreign Affairs (Sweden)" label="Ministry for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="4859" end="4873" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670860" start="4882" end="4934" title="Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency" label="Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q686030" start="5061" end="5071" title="Alfa Laval" label="Alfa Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q172754" start="5177" end="5193" title="World Exposition" label="World Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="5197" end="5202" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="5282" end="5296" title="Scout Movement" label="Scout Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="5325" end="5333" title="dyslexia" label="dyslexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10476966" start="5781" end="5798" title="Silver Throne" label="the Silver Throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9538752" start="6257" end="6276" title="List of state visits made by Carl XVI Gustaf" label="state visits abroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965657" start="6281" end="6289" title="List of state visits received by Carl XVI Gustaf" label="receives"/>
<link wikidata="Q124540402" start="6310" end="6334" title="Opening of the Riksdag" label="opens the annual session"/>
<link wikidata="Q272930" start="6342" end="6349" title="Riksdag" label="Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782529" start="6362" end="6412" title="Council of State (Sweden)" label="Special Council held during a change of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q10711550" start="6523" end="6558" title="Advisory Council on Foreign Affairs" label="Advisory Council on Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758647" start="6576" end="6595" title="Letters of Credence" label="Letters of Credence"/>
<link wikidata="Q783911" start="6826" end="6846" title="Swedish Armed Forces" label="Swedish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255302" start="6914" end="6943" title="1809 Instrument of Government" label="1809 Instrument of Government"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7010" end="7028" title="Commander-in-chief#Sweden" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514364" start="7106" end="7123" title="Supreme Commander of the Swedish Armed Forces" label="Supreme Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353577" start="7161" end="7171" title="ex officio" label="ex officio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067493" start="7261" end="7268" title="General (Sweden)" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683639" start="7273" end="7280" title="Admiral (Sweden)" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503325" start="7310" end="7342" title="Constitution of Sweden" label="Instrument of Government of 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q249405" start="7480" end="7490" title="à la suite" label="à la suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q31883805" start="7564" end="7597" title="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Military Staff" label="His Majesty&amp;#x27;s Military Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="7674" end="7685" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="7708" end="7722" title="Nobel laureate" label="Nobel laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q179852" start="7765" end="7774" title="Leo Esaki" label="Leo Esaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q754841" start="7799" end="7816" title="Polar Music Prize" label="Polar Music Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="7833" end="7841" title="honorary degree" label="honorary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312762" start="7868" end="7911" title="Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences" label="Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q854280" start="7913" end="7946" title="KTH Royal Institute of Technology" label="KTH Royal Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061504" start="7952" end="7981" title="Stockholm School of Economics" label="Stockholm School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q917874" start="7995" end="8017" title="Åbo Akademi University" label="Åbo Akademi University"/>
<link wikidata="Q133009" start="8155" end="8176" title="Gro Harlem Brundtland" label="Gro Harlem Brundtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502014" start="8185" end="8197" title="seal hunting" label="seal hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q921" start="8360" end="8366" title="Brunei" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q57327" start="8386" end="8402" title="Hassanal Bolkiah" label="Hassanal Bolkiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="8772" end="8812" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q53747" start="8861" end="8874" title="Göran Persson" label="Göran Persson"/>
<link wikidata="Q648483" start="9051" end="9070" title="Stockholm City Hall" label="Stockholm City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q237522" start="9324" end="9340" title="Margot Wallström" label="Margot Wallström"/>
<link wikidata="Q18176361" start="9554" end="9572" title="Löfven I cabinet" label="Swedish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q367825" start="9673" end="9691" title="Salman of Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabian king"/>
<link wikidata="Q314457" start="10044" end="10059" title="Magnus Eriksson" label="Magnus Eriksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="10138" end="10165" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q114361961" start="10411" end="10437" title="Golden Jubilee of Carl XVI Gustaf" label="King&amp;#x27;s Golden Jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q156390" start="10937" end="10960" title="Crown Princess Victoria" label="Crown Princess Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q124058909" start="10977" end="10987" title="Abdication of Margrethe II" label="abdication"/>
<link wikidata="Q102139" start="11003" end="11015" title="Margrethe II" label="Margrethe II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304859" start="11126" end="11135" title="sovereign" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="11215" end="11219" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101073" start="11273" end="11289" title="Riksdag building" label="Riksdag building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552043" start="11441" end="11480" title="Society and Defence" label="Society and Defence National Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780398" start="11675" end="11690" title="Ulf Kristersson" label="Ulf Kristersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q219357" start="12083" end="12094" title="Porsche 911" label="Porsche 911"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303581" start="12181" end="12192" title="Volvo PV444" label="Volvo PV444"/>
<link wikidata="Q900741" start="12196" end="12207" title="Ferrari 456" label="Ferrari 456"/>
<link wikidata="Q289168" start="12216" end="12224" title="AC Cobra" label="AC Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q25724" start="12397" end="12407" title="Norrköping" label="Norrköping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="12637" end="12650" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888208" start="12784" end="12796" title="Blasieholmen" label="Blasieholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q842858" start="12828" end="12842" title="Nationalmuseum" label="Nationalmuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q97578035" start="13104" end="13111" title="Slussen" label="Slussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740012" start="13221" end="13234" title="Stefan Löfven" label="Stefan Löfven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781959" start="13362" end="13378" title="Nobel Foundation" label="Nobel Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="13435" end="13441" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="13443" end="13450" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="13455" end="13459" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036147" start="13896" end="13918" title="World Scout Foundation" label="World Scout Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="13946" end="13951" title="Scouting" label="Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142916" start="13968" end="13977" title="Svenska Scoutrådet" label="in Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q843065" start="14010" end="14030" title="World Scout Jamboree" label="World Scout Jamboree"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14055" end="14103" title="15th World Scout Jamboree (cancelled)#World Jamboree Year" label="Dalajamb World Jamboree International Encampment"/>
<link wikidata="Q240919" start="14154" end="14172" title="20th World Scout Jamboree" label="Sattahip, Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q213445" start="14243" end="14267" title="21st World Scout Jamboree" label="in Hylands Park, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191874" start="14290" end="14318" title="National Scout jamboree (Boy Scouts of America)" label="1981 National Scout Jamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="14322" end="14330" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928309" start="14367" end="14378" title="Bronze Wolf" label="Bronze Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q210347" start="14408" end="14448" title="World Organization of the Scout Movement" label="World Organization of the Scout Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884219" start="14561" end="14586" title="22nd World Scout Jamboree" label="22nd World Scout Jamboree"/>
<link wikidata="Q185144" start="14694" end="14700" title="Europe (band)" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q201625" start="14930" end="14949" title="House of Bernadotte" label="House of Bernadotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443060" start="15166" end="15174" title="commoner" label="commoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268637" start="15300" end="15309" title="Princess Christina, Mrs. Magnuson" label="Christina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15522" end="15533" title="Swedish royal family#Royal House" label="Royal House"/>
<link wikidata="Q154927" start="15717" end="15742" title="King Haakon VII of Norway" label="King Haakon VII of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q235236" start="15765" end="15773" title="Princess Ragnhild, Mrs. Lorentzen" label="Ragnhild"/>
<link wikidata="Q361261" start="16002" end="16008" title="Prince Bertil, Duke of Halland" label="Bertil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156390" start="16251" end="16259" title="Victoria, Crown Princess of Sweden" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q214704" start="16382" end="16393" title="Carl Philip" label="Carl Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q212035" start="16500" end="16509" title="Princess Madeleine, Duchess of Hälsingland and Gästrikland" label="Madeleine"/>
<link wikidata="Q447209" start="16634" end="16641" title="Sigvard Bernadotte" label="Sigvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069138" start="16869" end="16892" title="Prince Oscar Bernadotte" label="Prince Oscar Bernadotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338017" start="17043" end="17064" title="Royal Court of Sweden" label="Royal Court of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883487" start="17153" end="17157" title="Prince Carl Bernadotte" label="Carl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243834" start="17236" end="17242" title="Prince Bernadotte" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457348" start="17290" end="17304" title="Kungliga begravningsplatsen" label="Royal Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959929" start="17421" end="17429" title="Princess Kristine Bernadotte" label="Kristine"/>
<link wikidata="Q214025" start="17659" end="17666" title="Princess Estelle, Duchess of Östergötland" label="Estelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22997937" start="18365" end="18370" title="Prince Oscar, Duke of Skåne" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252328" start="18821" end="18833" title="Royal highness" label="royal status"/>
<link wikidata="Q152308" start="19470" end="19487" title="Silvia Sommerlath" label="Silvia Sommerlath"/>
<link wikidata="Q8438" start="19601" end="19621" title="1972 Summer Olympics" label="1972 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133075" start="19713" end="19732" title="Stockholm Cathedral" label="Stockholm Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162994" start="19764" end="19785" title="Archbishop of Uppsala" label="Archbishop of Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233" start="19940" end="19944" title="ABBA" label="ABBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q870786" start="19989" end="20002" title="Dancing Queen" label="Dancing Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208559" start="20087" end="20107" title="Drottningholm Palace" label="Drottningholm Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q156390" start="20305" end="20354" title="Crown Princess Victoria, Duchess of Västergötland" label="Crown Princess Victoria, Duchess of Västergötland"/>
<link wikidata="Q209449" start="20394" end="20409" title="Daniel Westling" label="Daniel Westling"/>
<link wikidata="Q214704" start="20432" end="20468" title="Prince Carl Philip, Duke of Värmland" label="Prince Carl Philip, Duke of Värmland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988701" start="20507" end="20522" title="Sofia Hellqvist" label="Sofia Hellqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212035" start="20546" end="20604" title="Princess Madeleine, Duchess of Hälsingland and Gästrikland" label="Princess Madeleine, Duchess of Hälsingland and Gästrikland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753075" start="20644" end="20668" title="Christopher O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Christopher O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="20725" end="20738" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="20958" end="20980" title="absolute primogeniture" label="absolute primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="21292" end="21300" title="catheter" label="catheter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="21450" end="21456" title="Kingdom of Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496339" start="21462" end="21467" title="Geat" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q158281" start="21476" end="21481" title="Wends" label="Wends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812674" start="21687" end="21737" title="Historia de omnibus Gothorum Sueonumque regibus" label="erroneous genealogy that includes fictitious kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q550662" start="21770" end="21785" title="Johannes Magnus" label="Johannes Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q976544" start="21988" end="22009" title="Order of the Elephant" label="Order of the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q226103" start="22013" end="22033" title="Frederiksborg Palace" label="Frederiksborg Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q190129" start="22087" end="22117" title="greater coat of arms of Sweden" label="greater coat of arms of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10550208" start="22266" end="22302" title="Swedish Royal Jubilee Commemorative Medals" label="90th Birthday Medal of King Gustaf V"/>
<link wikidata="Q10550208" start="22324" end="22367" title="Swedish Royal Jubilee Commemorative Medals" label="85th Birthday Medal of King Gustaf VI Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q10550208" start="22389" end="22448" title="Swedish Royal Jubilee Commemorative Medals" label="Wedding Medal of Crown Princess Victoria to Daniel Westling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783970" start="22503" end="22544" title="Order of the Liberator General San Martín" label="Order of the Liberator General San Martín"/>
<link wikidata="Q94044" start="22574" end="22644" title="Decoration of Honour for Services to the Republic of Austria" label="Order of Honour for Services to the Republic of Austria, Special Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q26126" start="22676" end="22692" title="Order of Leopold (Belgium)" label="Order of Leopold"/>
<link wikidata="Q93713" start="22724" end="22751" title="Order of the Southern Cross" label="Order of the Southern Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q65923771" start="22780" end="22821" title="Royal Family Order of the Crown of Brunei" label="Royal Family Order of the Crown of Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q983760" start="22845" end="22867" title="Order of Stara Planina" label="Order of Stara Planina"/>
<link wikidata="Q93988" start="22886" end="22900" title="Order of Merit (Chile)" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q94121" start="22924" end="22952" title="Grand Order of King Tomislav" label="Grand Order of King Tomislav"/>
<link wikidata="Q976544" start="22989" end="23010" title="Order of the Elephant" label="Order of the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q20872" start="23055" end="23077" title="Order of the Dannebrog" label="Order of the Dannebrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783222" start="23120" end="23137" title="Order of the Nile" label="Order of the Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q60476" start="23172" end="23207" title="Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana" label="Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633913" start="23249" end="23272" title="Order of the White Star" label="Order of the White Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q94437" start="23315" end="23338" title="Order of the White Rose" label="Order of the White Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="23369" end="23398" title="Legion of Honour" label="Order of the Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="23435" end="23484" title="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753846" start="23488" end="23525" title="House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha" label="Ducal Family of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q564942" start="23553" end="23613" title="Saxe-Ernestine House Order" label="Ducal Royal Saxe-Ernestine Saxe-Coburg and Gotha House Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q614661" start="23637" end="23658" title="Order of the Redeemer" label="Order of the Redeemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423841" start="23693" end="23714" title="Order of Pope Pius IX" label="Order of Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q113068" start="23738" end="23779" title="Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary" label="Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394282" start="23815" end="23834" title="Order of the Falcon" label="Order of the Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340171" start="23839" end="23872" title="Star of the Republic of Indonesia" label="Star of the Republic of Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059569" start="23926" end="23964" title="Order of Merit of the Italian Republic" label="Order of Merit of the Italian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q696246" start="23990" end="24016" title="Order of the Chrysanthemum" label="Order of the Chrysanthemum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010500" start="24053" end="24080" title="Order of al-Hussein bin Ali" label="Order of al-Hussein bin Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q913910" start="24114" end="24138" title="Order of the Three Stars" label="Order of the Three Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q567740" start="24168" end="24185" title="Order of Viesturs" label="Order of Viesturs"/>
<link wikidata="Q768999" start="24227" end="24254" title="Order of Vytautas the Great" label="Order of Vytautas the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q93976" start="24292" end="24337" title="Order of the Gold Lion of the House of Nassau" label="Order of the Gold Lion of the House of Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q94405" start="24368" end="24399" title="Order of the Crown of the Realm" label="Order of the Crown of the Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q93956" start="24425" end="24449" title="Order of the Aztec Eagle" label="Order of the Aztec Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471215" start="24486" end="24515" title="Order of the Netherlands Lion" label="Order of the Netherlands Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q286898" start="24545" end="24573" title="Order of the House of Orange" label="Order of the House of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417045" start="24594" end="24617" title="Order of the Golden Ark" label="Order of the Golden Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q94345" start="24660" end="24677" title="Order of St. Olav" label="Order of St. Olav"/>
<link wikidata="Q84020" start="24703" end="24727" title="Order of the White Eagle (Poland)" label="Order of the White Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515829" start="24751" end="24784" title="Order of Saint James of the Sword" label="Order of Saint James of the Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q93488" start="24819" end="24840" title="Order of Prince Henry" label="Order of Prince Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q950604" start="24883" end="24911" title="Order of the Star of Romania" label="Order of the Star of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q93923" start="24954" end="24980" title="Order of Abdulaziz al Saud" label="Order of Abdulaziz al Saud"/>
<link wikidata="Q93724" start="25004" end="25035" title="Order of the White Double Cross" label="Order of the White Double Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716439" start="25057" end="25090" title="Order for Exceptional Merits (Slovenia)" label="Decoration for Exceptional Merits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037015" start="25126" end="25144" title="Order of Good Hope" label="Order of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q624463" start="25173" end="25197" title="Grand Order of Mugunghwa" label="Grand Order of Mugunghwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q465774" start="25230" end="25256" title="Order of the Golden Fleece" label="Order of the Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q751275" start="25295" end="25347" title="Order of Charles III" label="Royal and Distinguished Spanish Order of Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q582930" start="25365" end="25392" title="Order of the Rajamitrabhorn" label="Order of the Rajamitrabhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q690829" start="25417" end="25436" title="Order of Ramkeerati" label="Order of Ramkeerati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304559" start="25468" end="25489" title="Order of the Republic (Tunisia)" label="Order of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077245" start="25508" end="25548" title="Order of the State of Republic of Turkey" label="Order of the State of Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469017" start="25573" end="25589" title="Order of Liberty (Ukraine)" label="Order of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379783" start="25631" end="25664" title="Order of Prince Yaroslav the Wise" label="Order of Prince Yaroslav the Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q431230" start="25689" end="25714" title="Order of Merit (Ukraine)" label="Order of Merit, 1st Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="25751" end="25781" title="Most Noble Order of the Garter" label="Most Noble Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171187" start="25809" end="25830" title="Royal Victorian Chain" label="Royal Victorian Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q747248" start="25849" end="25881" title="Order of the Yugoslav Great Star" label="Order of the Yugoslav Great Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421395" start="25926" end="25952" title="United Nations Peace Medal" label="United Nations Peace Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q210347" start="25962" end="26002" title="World Organization of the Scout Movement" label="World Organization of the Scout Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q928309" start="26004" end="26021" title="Bronze Wolf Award" label="Bronze Wolf Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154448" start="26033" end="26054" title="Golden Pheasant Award" label="Golden Pheasant Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118784" start="26062" end="26088" title="Scout Association of Japan" label="Scout Association of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26100" end="26120" title="Mount Makiling#Hiking activity" label="Mount Makiling Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916006" start="26169" end="26176" title="Admiral (Royal Navy)" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="26186" end="26196" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104744" wikidata="Q67381" url="?curid=104744" title="Webb, Alabama">
<text>Webb is a town in Houston County, Alabama, United States. It is named for plantation owner B. F. Webb, who settled in the area around 1890. The town was incorporated in 1903. It is part of the Dothan, Alabama Metropolitan Statistical Area. As of the 2010 census, the population was 1,430, up from 1,298 in 2000.

==Geography==
Webb is located in northern Houston County at (31.260358, -85.283533). It is bordered to the northwest by the town of Kinsey, to the west by the city of Dothan, and at its southern tip by the town of Cowarts.

Alabama State Route 52 passes through Webb, leading west into Dothan and east to Columbia at the Georgia border.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town of Webb has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
At the 2000 census there were 1,298 people, 491 households, and 375 families in the town. The population density was . There were 523 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 79.20% White, 19.65% Black or African American, 0.31% Native American, and 0.85% from two or more races. 1.00% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 491 households 38.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 61.9% were married couples living together, 11.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 23.6% were non-families. 22.6% of households were one person and 8.6% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.63 and the average family size was 3.06.

The age distribution was 28.1% under the age of 18, 8.1% from 18 to 24, 29.7% from 25 to 44, 23.7% from 45 to 64, and 10.5% 65 or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.9 males.

The median household income was $31,364 and the median family income was $36,667. Males had a median income of $32,656 versus $19,479 for females. The per capita income for the town was $15,150. About 13.7% of families and 17.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 22.4% of those under age 18 and 16.9% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census there were 1,430 people, 544 households, and 391 families in the town. The population density was . There were 616 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 74.8% White, 18.7% Black or African American, 0.7% Native American, and 1.5% from two or more races. 6.2% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 544 households 28.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.0% were married couples living together, 14.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.1% were non-families. 22.1% of households were one person and 7.9% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.60 and the average family size was 3.05.

The age distribution was 24.0% under the age of 18, 8.0% from 18 to 24, 27.6% from 25 to 44, 26.9% from 45 to 64, and 13.6% 65 or older. The median age was 39.1 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.4 males.

The median household income was $34,650 and the median family income was $38,352. Males had a median income of $32,847 versus $18,938 for females. The per capita income for the town was $15,124. About 13.2% of families and 15.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.2% of those under age 18 and 13.7% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,270 people, 481 households, and 330 families residing in the town.

== References ==
==External links==
*Town of Webb unofficial website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67381" start="0" end="4" title="Webb, Alabama" label="Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q496292" start="18" end="32" title="Houston County, Alabama" label="Houston County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="34" end="41" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="43" end="56" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91" end="101" title="B. F. Webb" label="B. F. Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="193" end="208" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299429" start="209" end="238" title="Dothan metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q66385" start="445" end="451" title="Kinsey, Alabama" label="Kinsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q79519" start="480" end="486" title="Dothan, Alabama" label="Dothan"/>
<link wikidata="Q67046" start="527" end="534" title="Cowarts, Alabama" label="Cowarts"/>
<link wikidata="Q873381" start="537" end="559" title="Alabama State Route 52" label="Alabama State Route 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q68444" start="618" end="626" title="Columbia, Alabama" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="634" end="641" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="668" end="686" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="780" end="791" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="952" end="965" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2047" end="2059" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="2160" end="2171" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2332" end="2345" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3424" end="3436" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3541" end="3566" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104745" wikidata="Q79654" url="?curid=104745" title="Bridgeport, Alabama">
<text>Bridgeport is a city in Jackson County, Alabama, United States. At the time of 2020 census the population was 2,264, down from 2,418 in 2010. Bridgeport is included in the Chattanooga-Cleveland-Dalton, TN-GA-AL Combined Statistical Area.

==History==

Bridgeport developed after the 1840s, when European Americans established a riverboat landing here along the Tennessee River. This landing was a place for local farmers to trade their crops for other goods. Within a few years, a small hamlet known as &quot;Jonesville&quot; had developed around the landing, and included a trading post, gristmill, warehouses, and several saloons. The Jonesville post office opened in 1852.

Fluctuating river levels made riverboat trade unreliable, and area merchants began campaigning for railroad access in the late 1840s. The first rail line reached Jonesville in 1852. A railroad bridge over the Tennessee River was completed in 1854, connecting the city with Chattanooga, Tennessee. In recognition of this accomplishment, the name of the city was changed to &quot;Bridgeport.&quot; Construction of a second rail line connecting Bridgeport with Jasper, Tennessee, to the north, began in 1860, but was not completed until after the Civil War.

Because of its location on both a rail line and the Tennessee River, Bridgeport was a strategic site during the Civil War. The rail bridge at Bridgeport was among those targeted by the East Tennessee bridge-burning conspiracy in November 1861. Although this attempt failed, the bridge would be burned twice during the course of the war.

Bridgeport was the site of numerous skirmishes across 1862 and 1863 when Union General Ormsby Mitchel seized control of the city, and numerous other small actions over the following year as Confederate forces attempted to regain control of the area. The city was burned by Confederate troops under General Braxton Bragg in the Summer of 1863, but it was reoccupied by Union forces. In the latter part of the war, Bridgeport was the site of a major Union shipyard that built gunboats and transports for the Union Army. The &quot;USS Chattanooga&quot; was built here; it became a vital part of the famous &quot;Cracker Line,&quot; which broke the Confederates&#x27; siege of Chattanooga in November 1863.

In the early 1880s, brothers Frank and Walter Kilpatrick, investors from New York, along with their father, Edward, established a lumber company in Bridgeport. Believing the city&#x27;s location and resources had extraordinary potential for development, the Kilpatricks began buying up land in the area. Other investors became interested in the city, and in 1889 the Bridgeport Land and Development Company was incorporated. This company bought up land and laid out a new grid pattern for the city, which incorporated in 1891.

Frank Kilpatrick, who became the city&#x27;s mayor, built a series of imposing Queen Anne-style houses on the street now known as Kilpatrick Row. Several factories, including a pipe works, stove works, rail car works, and planing mill, were built along the river. The rapid development of Bridgeport came to an abrupt end, however, with the onset of the financial Panic of 1893. Investors withdrew from the area, and the Bridgeport Land and Improvement Company went out of business.

Frank Kilpatrick returned to Bridgeport in 1895, and managed to lure some industry to the city. The Mission Revival-style Bridgeport Depot was completed in 1917, and two hosiery mills were operating in the city by the 1920s. The construction of the nearby Widows Creek Power Plant by the Tennessee Valley Authority in the 1950s brought a small housing boom to the city.

On January 22, 1999, at 10:02 A.M, three people were killed, at least eight more were critically injured, and three buildings were leveled when a gas pipeline exploded in downtown Bridgeport. Earlier that morning, between 8:15 and 9:15 A.M, the line was damaged when workers digging a trench with a backhoe pulled the line, causing two leaks. Gas filled a building and came in contact with the pilot light of a gas heater, causing the explosion.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (4.00%) is water. The city is situated along the western bank of the Tennessee River, at river mile 410. This section of the river is part of Guntersville Lake, which is created by Guntersville Dam about 60 miles downstream from Bridgeport. The Cumberland Plateau rises prominently to the northwest, and the plateau&#x27;s southern extension, Sand Mountain, rises across the river to the east. U.S. Route 72 connects Bridgeport with South Pittsburg across the Tennessee state line to the north, and Stevenson to the southwest.

Russell Cave National Monument is located close to Bridgeport.

===Climate===
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Bridgeport has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps.

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
At the 2000 census there were 2,728 people in 1,159 households, including 793 families, in the city. The population density was . There were 1,290 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 87.76% White, 8.03% Black or African American, 1.43% Native American, 0.11% Asian, 0.37% from other races, and 2.31% from two or more races. 1.32% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 1,159 households 29.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.7% were married couples living together, 13.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.5% were non-families. 29.5% of households were one person and 13.1% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.35 and the average family size was 2.88.

The age distribution was 24.0% under the age of 18, 8.4% from 18 to 24, 27.1% from 25 to 44, 24.9% from 45 to 64, and 15.5% 65 or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.3 males.

The median household income was $28,981 and the median family income was $33,712. Males had a median income of $30,685 versus $19,583 for females. The per capita income for the city was $15,779. About 9.5% of families and 13.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.4% of those under age 18 and 23.8% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census there were 2,418 people in 1,012 households, including 686 families, in the city. The population density was . There were 1,159 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 84.0% White, 8.6% Black or African American, 1.9% Native American, 0.2% Asian, 1.2% from other races, and 4.1% from two or more races. 1.7% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.
Of the 1,012 households 26.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.0% were married couples living together, 15.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.2% were non-families. 27.9% of households were one person and 13.1% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.39 and the average family size was 2.89.

The age distribution was 23.9% under the age of 18, 7.8% from 18 to 24, 23.1% from 25 to 44, 28.9% from 45 to 64, and 16.4% 65 or older. The median age was 40.5 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.3 males.

The median household income was $36,282 and the median family income was $43,239. Males had a median income of $44,188 versus $28,944 for females. The per capita income for the city was $19,048. About 14.0% of families and 16.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 32.1% of those under age 18 and 4.6% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,264 people, 1,031 households, and 586 families residing in the city.

==Culture==
The Bridgeport Depot Museum is home to railroad memorabilia as well as a range of local artifacts. The museum, operated by the Bridgeport Area Historical Association, is located on the site of the town&#x27;s fourth railroad depot, which was constructed in 1917.

Every April, Bridgeport hosts a reenactment of the Siege of Bridgeport.

== References ==
==External links==

*Bridgeport, Alabama history
*
*Siege at Bridgeport re-enactment site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79654" start="0" end="10" title="Bridgeport, Alabama" label="Bridgeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="24" end="47" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087906" start="172" end="236" title="Chattanooga-Cleveland-Dalton, TN-GA-AL Combined Statistical Area" label="Chattanooga-Cleveland-Dalton, TN-GA-AL Combined Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938673" start="338" end="345" title="landing (water transport)" label="landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="361" end="376" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q39463" start="575" end="587" title="trading post" label="trading post"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="589" end="598" title="gristmill" label="gristmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="950" end="972" title="Chattanooga, Tennessee" label="Chattanooga, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124712" start="1135" end="1152" title="Jasper, Tennessee" label="Jasper, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1221" end="1230" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329513" start="1418" end="1458" title="East Tennessee bridge burnings" label="East Tennessee bridge-burning conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187972" start="1598" end="1617" title="Siege of Bridgeport" label="numerous skirmishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4296928" start="1658" end="1672" title="Ormsby Mitchel" label="Ormsby Mitchel"/>
<link wikidata="Q380562" start="1877" end="1890" title="Braxton Bragg" label="Braxton Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q476070" start="2099" end="2114" title="USS Chattanooga" label="USS Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="2244" end="2255" title="Chattanooga" label="Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270218" start="2882" end="2898" title="Queen Anne style architecture in the United States" label="Queen Anne-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418422" start="3167" end="3180" title="Panic of 1893" label="Panic of 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700522" start="3387" end="3408" title="Mission Revival architecture" label="Mission Revival-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930752" start="3409" end="3425" title="Bridgeport Depot Museum" label="Bridgeport Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013497" start="3543" end="3567" title="Widows Creek Power Plant" label="Widows Creek Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367577" start="3575" end="3601" title="Tennessee Valley Authority" label="Tennessee Valley Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="4136" end="4154" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="4277" end="4292" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561578" start="4350" end="4367" title="Guntersville Lake" label="Guntersville Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619444" start="4389" end="4405" title="Guntersville Dam" label="Guntersville Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143656" start="4453" end="4471" title="Cumberland Plateau" label="Cumberland Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415837" start="4551" end="4564" title="Sand Mountain (Alabama)" label="Sand Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q410334" start="4602" end="4615" title="U.S. Route 72" label="U.S. Route 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q2800120" start="4641" end="4656" title="South Pittsburg, Tennessee" label="South Pittsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q79563" start="4707" end="4716" title="Stevenson, Alabama" label="Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q661092" start="4736" end="4766" title="Russell Cave National Monument" label="Russell Cave National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="4931" end="4960" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="4986" end="5011" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="5101" end="5112" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5286" end="5299" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2000 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6419" end="6431" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="6532" end="6543" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6717" end="6730" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="7846" end="7858" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="7962" end="7987" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930752" start="8088" end="8111" title="Bridgeport Depot Museum" label="Bridgeport Depot Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187972" start="8399" end="8418" title="Siege of Bridgeport" label="Siege of Bridgeport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104747" wikidata="Q66247" url="?curid=104747" title="Dutton, Alabama">
<text>Dutton is a town in Jackson County, Alabama, United States. It was incorporated in 1963. As of the 2010 census, the population of the town was 315, up from 310 in 2000. Dutton is located atop Sand Mountain.

==History==
Dutton was founded in 1888, and was initially known by several different names, including &quot;Press,&quot; &quot;Barnes,&quot; &quot;Callahan,&quot; and &quot;Fern Hill.&quot; When urged by the U.S. Postal Service to choose a permanent name in 1896, the town chose &quot;Dutton&quot; in honor of a prominent local businessman.

==Geography==
Dutton is located at (34.607639, -85.915563). The town is situated along State Route 71 between Section and Pisgah, near the western edge of Sand Mountain.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 310 people, 120 households, and 87 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 137 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 97.10% White, 2.26% Native American, and 0.65% from two or more races. 0.65% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 120 households, out of which 36.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.8% were married couples living together, 7.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.5% were non-families. 25.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.58 and the average family size was 3.08.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 26.8% under the age of 18, 6.8% from 18 to 24, 28.7% from 25 to 44, 25.8% from 45 to 64, and 11.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.2 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $32,125, and the median income for a family was $35,000. Males had a median income of $23,500 versus $18,438 for females. The per capita income for the town was $14,052. About 1.1% of families and 7.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.3% of those under the age of eighteen and 21.1% of those 65 or over.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66247" start="0" end="6" title="Dutton, Alabama" label="Dutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="20" end="34" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="36" end="43" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415837" start="192" end="205" title="Sand Mountain (Alabama)" label="Sand Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q873663" start="637" end="651" title="Alabama State Route 71" label="State Route 71"/>
<link wikidata="Q67828" start="660" end="667" title="Section, Alabama" label="Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q68182" start="672" end="678" title="Pisgah, Alabama" label="Pisgah"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="738" end="756" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="827" end="833" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1046" end="1051" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1059" end="1074" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1139" end="1147" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1151" end="1157" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1280" end="1295" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2091" end="2108" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2200" end="2212" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104748" wikidata="Q66045" url="?curid=104748" title="Hollywood, Alabama">
<text>Hollywood is a town in Jackson County, northeast Alabama, United States. In 2020, the census showed a population of 914 residents. Hollywood is considered a suburb of Scottsboro, the county seat. The town is the site of the Tennessee Valley Authority&#x27;s never-completed Bellefonte Nuclear Generating Station. The TVA sold the plant, and as of 2018, it is to be developed by private interests.

==History==

Originally established as Samples on December 14, 1883, the town was renamed as Hollywood on May 13, 1887. It formally incorporated on May 24, 1897, and held its first election on June 8 of that year.

In 1994, it and 10 other towns named Hollywood successfully fought Hollywood, California&#x27;s attempt to trademark its name and force same-named communities to pay royalties to it. A key point was that Hollywood in Alabama was the first incorporated Hollywood in the nation, whereas the one in California did not incorporate until 1903, 6 years after Alabama&#x27;s. In addition, it merged with Los Angeles in 1910 and was no longer identified as a separate city.

==Geography==
Hollywood is located at (34.716960, -85.965689).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and 0.11% is water.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 950 people, 375 households, and 265 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 404 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 80.63% White, 16.32% Black or African American, 0.32% Native American, 0.11% from other races, and 2.63% from two or more races. 0.42% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 375 households, out of which 32.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.2% were married couples living together, 14.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.1% were non-families. 25.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 3.03.

The town&#x27;s population was spread out, with 26.7% under the age of 18, 7.1% from 18 to 24, 31.8% from 25 to 44, 24.7% from 45 to 64, and 9.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.8 males.
Beaver creek was the main road in the community. Star Island convent is also a main attraction for visitors. 
The town is historically known for the large sinkhole that appeared in 1892. The event caused the deaths of 17 people. 
The median income for a household in the town was $27,500, and the median income for a family was $34,306. Males had a median income of $26,667 versus $21,563 for females. The per capita income for the town was $16,498. About 6.8% of families and 11.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.9% of those under age 18 and 10.6% of those age 65 or over.

==Notable persons==
* Human Tornado, Craig Williams, born 1983 in Hollywood, Alabama, known by his &quot;ring name&quot; as a professional wrestler and champion.
* Amy O&#x27;Neill, former actress.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66045" start="0" end="9" title="Hollywood, Alabama" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="23" end="37" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="49" end="56" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79577" start="167" end="177" title="Scottsboro, Alabama" label="Scottsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367577" start="224" end="250" title="Tennessee Valley Authority" label="Tennessee Valley Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q675779" start="274" end="311" title="Bellefonte Nuclear Generating Station" label="Bellefonte Nuclear Generating Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="680" end="701" title="Hollywood, California" label="Hollywood, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1010" end="1021" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1161" end="1179" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1277" end="1283" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1497" end="1502" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1511" end="1516" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1520" end="1536" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1544" end="1559" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1572" end="1583" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1648" end="1656" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1660" end="1666" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1789" end="1804" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2827" end="2844" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2937" end="2949" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937642" start="3046" end="3059" title="Human Tornado" label="Human Tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q131359" start="3150" end="3171" title="professional wrestling" label="professional wrestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844571" start="3188" end="3204" title="Amy O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Amy O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104749" wikidata="Q66495" url="?curid=104749" title="Hytop, Alabama">
<text>Hytop is a town in Jackson County, Alabama, United States. It incorporated on May 17, 1991. As of the 2010 census, the population of the town was 354, up from 315 in 2000. The Walls of Jericho, a popular hiking area, is located just north of Hytop.

==Geography==
Hytop is located at (34.904816, -86.086634). The town is situated atop the Cumberland Plateau just south of the Alabama-Tennessee state line. State Route 79 traverses Hytop, connecting the town with Skyline to the south, and Tennessee to the north. The highway becomes Tennessee State Route 16 at the border, and continues northward to Winchester, Tennessee. A narrow valley carved by Hurricane Creek (a tributary of the Paint Rock River) is located just west of Hytop, and The Walls of Jericho lie near the head of this valley at the state line.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 315 people, 124 households, and 108 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 139 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 96.19% White, 1.27% Native American, and 2.54% from two or more races. 0.32% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 124 households, out of which 37.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 76.6% were married couples living together, 7.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 12.1% were non-families. 10.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.54 and the average family size was 2.72.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 23.8% under the age of 18, 9.2% from 18 to 24, 34.9% from 25 to 44, 24.4% from 45 to 64, and 7.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 99.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.5 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $34,306, and the median income for a family was $34,821. Males had a median income of $29,107 versus $19,286 for females. The per capita income for the town was $15,093. None of the families and none of the population were living below the poverty line.

==Radar site==
The National Weather Service has a radar site in Hytop. It was damaged during the 2011 Super Outbreak, but later replaced.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66495" start="0" end="5" title="Hytop, Alabama" label="Hytop"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="19" end="33" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="35" end="42" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073707" start="172" end="192" title="The Walls of Jericho (canyon)" label="The Walls of Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143656" start="339" end="357" title="Cumberland Plateau" label="Cumberland Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="384" end="393" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q873721" start="406" end="420" title="Alabama State Route 79" label="State Route 79"/>
<link wikidata="Q65558" start="463" end="470" title="Skyline, Alabama" label="Skyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q13606491" start="533" end="557" title="Tennessee State Route 16" label="Tennessee State Route 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012613" start="600" end="621" title="Winchester, Tennessee" label="Winchester, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124947" start="685" end="701" title="Paint Rock River" label="Paint Rock River"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="829" end="847" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="918" end="924" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1138" end="1143" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1151" end="1166" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1231" end="1239" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1243" end="1249" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1372" end="1387" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2181" end="2198" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2295" end="2307" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="2329" end="2353" title="National Weather Service" label="National Weather Service"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104750" wikidata="Q67732" url="?curid=104750" title="Langston, Alabama">
<text>Langston is a town in Jackson County, Alabama, United States, and is included in the Chattanooga-Cleveland-Dalton, TN-GA-AL Combined Statistical Area. In the 2010 census, the population was 270, up from 254. It initially incorporated in 1899. At some point after 1920 it disincorporated, then reincorporated in 1980 (after the census was taken that year, since it was not counted). Its peak population was 500, in 1920.

==History==

Langston was settled in the 1810s, and was initially known as &quot;Coffeetown&quot; after the Coffee brothers, who were among the early settlers. A post office was established in 1845 with Langston Coffee as the first postmaster. In 1869, most of Coffeetown&#x27;s residents moved to Texas, and the following year, James Morgan sold lots for the creation of a new town. The new town was named &quot;Langston&quot; after Langston Coffee.

Langston initially thrived as a river port along the Tennessee River, eventually growing to include nine stores and a blacksmith. With the rise of railroad traffic in the late 19th century and automobile traffic in the early 20th, it began to decline. The construction of Guntersville Dam by the Tennessee Valley Authority in the late 1930s flooded a significant portion, further reducing its population.

==Geography==
Langston is located at . The town is situated on the eastern shore of the Tennessee River, at river mile 377. This section of the river is part of Guntersville Lake, which is formed by Guntersville Dam nearly downstream. Sand Mountain rises immediately to the east of Langston. Scottsboro lies across the river to the north, and Section lies atop Sand Mountain to the northeast. County Road 67 connects Langston with State Route 35 to the northeast.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and (39.06%) is water.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 254 people, 109 households, and 80 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 193 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 94.09% White, 3.15% Black or African American and 2.76% Native American.

There were 109 households, out of which 21.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 61.5% were married couples living together, 9.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 25.7% were non-families. 25.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.33 and the average family size was 2.74.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 19.3% under the age of 18, 6.3% from 18 to 24, 22.4% from 25 to 44, 35.0% from 45 to 64, and 16.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 46 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.8 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $33,333, and the median income for a family was $42,344. Males had a median income of $26,750 versus $29,375 for females. The per capita income for the town was $16,266. About 2.7% of families and 6.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under the age of eighteen and 13.9% of those 65 or over.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67732" start="0" end="8" title="Langston, Alabama" label="Langston"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="22" end="36" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="38" end="45" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087906" start="85" end="149" title="Chattanooga-Cleveland-Dalton, TN-GA-AL Combined Statistical Area" label="Chattanooga-Cleveland-Dalton, TN-GA-AL Combined Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="719" end="724" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="926" end="941" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619444" start="1145" end="1161" title="Guntersville Dam" label="Guntersville Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367577" start="1169" end="1195" title="Tennessee Valley Authority" label="Tennessee Valley Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="1367" end="1382" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415837" start="1514" end="1527" title="Sand Mountain (Alabama)" label="Sand Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q79577" start="1571" end="1581" title="Scottsboro, Alabama" label="Scottsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q67828" start="1622" end="1629" title="Section, Alabama" label="Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q873102" start="1710" end="1724" title="Alabama State Route 35" label="State Route 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1761" end="1779" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1880" end="1886" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2099" end="2104" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2112" end="2117" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2121" end="2137" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2148" end="2163" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2274" end="2289" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3085" end="3102" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3194" end="3206" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104752" wikidata="Q66967" url="?curid=104752" title="Paint Rock, Alabama">
<text>Paint Rock is a town in Jackson County, Alabama, United States, along the Paint Rock River, and is included in the Huntsville-Decatur Combined Statistical Area. It was incorporated in July 1894.

As of the 2010 census, the population of the town was 210, up from 185 in 2000. This was the first time in 100 years it increased in population. Out of 13 incorporated communities in Jackson County, it is the least populated. Its peak population was in 1910 when it had 534 people and was the 4th largest town in the county.

Paint Rock is the location where the Scottsboro Boys were arrested.

==History==
Paint Rock was settled in the 1820s, and was initially known as &quot;Camden.&quot; A post office was established in 1836, and a railroad depot was constructed in 1856. The name was changed from Camden to &quot;Paint Rock&quot; in 1876.

Ray Albright (1934-2017), Tennessee state legislator and businessman, was born in Paint Rock.

==Geography==
Paint Rock is located at (34.660172, -86.328018). The town is situated along the Paint Rock River in a relatively narrow valley between Keel Mountain to the west and the Cumberland Plateau to the east. Gurley lies to the northwest, Woodville lies to the southeast, and Owens Cross Roads lies across Keel Mountain to the southwest. The Fern Cave National Wildlife Refuge is located along the base of the Cumberland Plateau just east of Paint Rock. U.S. Route 72 passes through Paint Rock, connecting the town with Scottsboro to the east and Huntsville to the west.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 185 people, 81 households, and 57 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 94 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 96.76% White, 0.54% Native American, and 2.70% from two or more races.

There were 81 households, out of which 27.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.3% were married couples living together, 11.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.6% were non-families. 29.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.28 and the average family size was 2.77.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 18.4% under the age of 18, 14.1% from 18 to 24, 24.9% from 25 to 44, 24.9% from 45 to 64, and 17.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.7 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $35,521, and the median income for a family was $36,875. Males had a median income of $28,750 versus $16,719 for females. The per capita income for the town was $15,551. About 8.3% of families and 10.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under the age of eighteen or sixty-five or over.

== References ==
==External links==
* Motorcycle Ride Paint Rock</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66967" start="0" end="10" title="Paint Rock, Alabama" label="Paint Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="16" end="20" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="24" end="38" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="40" end="47" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124947" start="74" end="90" title="Paint Rock River" label="Paint Rock River"/>
<link wikidata="Q9098507" start="115" end="159" title="Huntsville-Decatur Combined Statistical Area" label="Huntsville-Decatur Combined Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360071" start="559" end="574" title="Scottsboro Boys" label="Scottsboro Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q34546226" start="841" end="853" title="Ray Albright" label="Ray Albright"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382725" start="1086" end="1099" title="Keel Mountain (Alabama)" label="Keel Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143656" start="1120" end="1138" title="Cumberland Plateau" label="Cumberland Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q67451" start="1152" end="1158" title="Gurley, Alabama" label="Gurley"/>
<link wikidata="Q67108" start="1182" end="1191" title="Woodville, Alabama" label="Woodville"/>
<link wikidata="Q65700" start="1219" end="1236" title="Owens Cross Roads, Alabama" label="Owens Cross Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444446" start="1285" end="1319" title="Fern Cave National Wildlife Refuge" label="Fern Cave National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q410334" start="1397" end="1410" title="U.S. Route 72" label="U.S. Route 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q79577" start="1463" end="1473" title="Scottsboro, Alabama" label="Scottsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q79860" start="1490" end="1500" title="Huntsville, Alabama" label="Huntsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1532" end="1550" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1621" end="1627" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1838" end="1843" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1851" end="1866" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2010" end="2025" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2823" end="2840" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2933" end="2945" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104753" wikidata="Q68182" url="?curid=104753" title="Pisgah, Alabama">
<text>Pisgah is a town in Jackson County, Alabama, United States, and is included in the Huntsville-Decatur Combined Statistical Area. It incorporated in 1947. As of the 2020 census, the population of the town was 681, down from 722 in 2010. Pisgah is located atop Sand Mountain.

==History==

Pisgah was first settled in the late 1830s. A post office was established in 1878.

==Geography==
Pisgah is located at (34.685022, -85.846575). The town is situated just off State Route 71, northeast of Section and northwest of Henagar. It lies along the western edge of Sand Mountain, with the Tennessee River (Guntersville Lake) below.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 706 people, 294 households, and 206 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 323 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 94.33% White, 0.14% Black or African American, 3.40% Native American, and 2.12% from two or more races. 0.28% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 294 households, out of which 32.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.8% were married couples living together, 12.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.6% were non-families. 28.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size was 2.95.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 25.4% under the age of 18, 9.3% from 18 to 24, 28.9% from 25 to 44, 20.4% from 45 to 64, and 16.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 87.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 82.4 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $28,750, and the median income for a family was $36,250. Males had a median income of $26,146 versus $17,917 for females. The per capita income for the town was $14,503. About 9.5% of families and 10.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.2% of those under age 18 and 15.0% of those age 65 or over.

==Pisgah High School==
Pisgah High School is a kindergarten through twelfth grade school and is part of the Jackson County school system. Enrollment is around 570 students.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q68182" start="0" end="6" title="Pisgah, Alabama" label="Pisgah"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="20" end="34" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="36" end="43" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q9098507" start="83" end="127" title="Huntsville-Decatur Combined Statistical Area" label="Huntsville-Decatur Combined Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415837" start="259" end="272" title="Sand Mountain (Alabama)" label="Sand Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q873663" start="462" end="476" title="Alabama State Route 71" label="State Route 71"/>
<link wikidata="Q67828" start="491" end="498" title="Section, Alabama" label="Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259031" start="516" end="523" title="Henagar, Alabama" label="Henagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="583" end="598" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="644" end="662" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="733" end="739" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="953" end="958" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="966" end="971" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="975" end="991" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="999" end="1014" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1079" end="1087" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1091" end="1097" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1220" end="1235" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2032" end="2049" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2142" end="2154" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104754" wikidata="Q66699" url="?curid=104754" title="Pleasant Groves, Alabama">
<text>Pleasant Groves is a town in Jackson County, Alabama, United States. It incorporated on February 17, 1993. As of the 2010 census, the population of the town was 420, down from 447 in 2000.

==Geography==
Pleasant Groves is located at 34°44&#x27;29&quot; North, 86°11&#x27;26&quot; West (34.741295, -86.190445). The town is situated on a narrow ridge that extends outward from the Cumberland Plateau in western Jackson County. Woodville lies at the base of the plateau to the southwest, Skyline lies along the plateau to the northeast, and the Paint Rock River flows through the valley to the northwest. County Road 8 is the primary traffic artery in Pleasant Groves.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 447 people, 166 households, and 138 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 177 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 89.04% White, 0.00% Black or African American, 5.37% Native American, 0.00% Asian, 0.00% Pacific Islander, 0.00% from other races, and 5.59% from two or more races. 0.22% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 166 households, out of which 42.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 70.5% were married couples living together, 10.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 16.3% were non-families. 15.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.69 and the average family size was 3.00.

In the town, 27.1% of the population were under the age of 18, 10.7% from 18 to 24, 28.2% from 25 to 44, 24.8% from 45 to 64, and 9.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 89.5 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $33,854, and the median income for a family was $38,056. Males had a median income of $31,705 versus $17,222 for females. The per capita income for the town was $14,251. 6.4% of the population and 5.8% of families were below the poverty line. Out of the total population, 4.0% of those under the age of 18 and 17.9% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66699" start="0" end="15" title="Pleasant Groves, Alabama" label="Pleasant Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="29" end="43" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="45" end="52" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="54" end="67" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143656" start="380" end="398" title="Cumberland Plateau" label="Cumberland Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q67108" start="426" end="435" title="Woodville, Alabama" label="Woodville"/>
<link wikidata="Q65558" start="486" end="493" title="Skyline, Alabama" label="Skyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124947" start="543" end="559" title="Paint Rock River" label="Paint Rock River"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="685" end="703" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="774" end="780" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="994" end="999" title="Race (U.S. census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1007" end="1012" title="Race (U.S. census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1016" end="1032" title="Race (U.S. census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1040" end="1055" title="Race (U.S. census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1063" end="1068" title="Race (U.S. census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1076" end="1092" title="Race (U.S. census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1105" end="1116" title="race (U.S. census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1181" end="1189" title="Race (U.S. census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1193" end="1199" title="Race (U.S. census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1322" end="1337" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2120" end="2137" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2223" end="2235" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104755" wikidata="Q79577" url="?curid=104755" title="Scottsboro, Alabama">
<text>Scottsboro is a city in and the county seat of Jackson County, Alabama, United States. The city was named for its founder Robert T. Scott. As of the 2020 census, the population of the city is 15,578.

From its incorporation in 1870 until 1890, it was the largest community in Jackson County, losing the distinction from 1900 to 1920 to Bridgeport, but reclaiming the title in 1930 and holding it since that time. It is located 30 miles each from the state boundaries of Georgia to the east (Dade County) and Tennessee to the north, about 45 miles from Huntsville, Alabama to the west and about 55 miles from Chattanooga, Tennessee to the northeast.

The city lent its name to the Scottsboro Boys case, which is one of the most important civil rights cases in the history of American jurisprudence.

== History ==

===Early history===
Prior to Scottsboro&#x27;s founding, the area surrounding the present-day city was inhabited by the Cherokee Indians. While the Tennessee Valley did not have large Native American settlements at the time of the first white settlers, there was a Cherokee town named &quot;Sauta&quot; near where Scottsboro developed along the Tennessee River.

As settlers began pouring into the eastern Tennessee region, chiefly from the Upper South, they found the Tennessee River to be an excellent source of food, water, and a way of shipping goods to the big cities. John Hunt, in 1805, decided to migrate to the area and built a small log cabin in the woods near the river. More people settled in the area, and Huntsville was formally incorporated in 1811.

More settlers moved into the Mississippi Territory, resulting in the statehood of Mississippi, and the creation of the Alabama Territory in 1818. Delegates from Tennessee and the newly formed Madison County met in Sauta Cave and decided to admit a new county. On December 13, 1819, Jackson County was formed. One day later, the State of Alabama was admitted into the Union as the 22nd state on December 14, 1819.

The first county seat of Jackson County was at &quot;Sauta&quot;, a former native town, near present-day Scottsboro. Early county meetings were held in Sauta cave. Sauta did not survive after the courthouse was moved to Bellefonte in 1821.

Since Bellefonte had better access to the Tennessee River than Sauta, more settlers started moving to the area. They were also attracted by it being the county seat.

Scottsboro&#x27;s founder, Robert Thomas Scott, served in the Alabama Legislature for almost 20 years and later ran a hotel in Bellefonte.

Since he and his wife, Elizabeth, wanted a place to call their own and were not very fond of Bellefonte, they moved to Scottsboro around 1850–53. The town was called Scottsville, Scott&#x27;s Mill, or Sage Town until 1868. In 1853, the newly formed Memphis and Charleston Railroad (a stretch of railroad that starts at Memphis, Tennessee, and ends in Charleston, South Carolina) decided to build a station at Scottsboro and did so in 1857. In the same year, passengers started disembarking at Scott&#x27;s Station. On January 20, 1870, Scottsboro was incorporated by the Alabama Legislature. A. Snodgrass was the first mayor. Scottsboro got its first telegraph office in 1872.

Bellefonte citizens rejected the railroad because they did not want train travel to interfere with the town&#x27;s thriving river trade. In addition, its low riverside land was not suitable for tracks.

In 1861/1863, the Bellefonte courthouse was set ablaze and charred. The area was heavily damaged during the U.S. Civil War. 

Selection of the new county seat began in 1860 by having a contest to see which towns were suitable.
Many of the county&#x27;s towns pushed for their selection, but the leading candidates were Hollywood, Stevenson, Larkinsville, and Scotts-borough (Scottsboro). To narrow consideration, the county council decided that:

* The town must be within of the Memphis &amp; Charleston Railroad line (the rising form of transportation).
* The town must be near the center of the county.

The second requirement eliminated Stevenson and Larkinsville, and the County Commissioners ultimately selected Scottsboro as the county seat. This led to the rapid decline of Bellefonte, which also suffered from no railroad access. Courthouse construction began in 1868 with the jail following two years later. County commissioners sited the courthouse at its current location in the public square.

The 20th century brought great changes to Scottsboro. In 1902, two cases of smallpox were found but the disease did not spread more widely. In 1903, the first car that came to the town drove through the square en route from Ohio to Florida. In 1906, local blacksmith H.C. Payne built Scottsboro&#x27;s first homemade automobile, which was made with a wooden frame, four sprocket wheels and hand-powered cranks. In 1911, the courthouse was set ablaze and was rebuilt. In 1912, the courthouse was demolished and an election was held to determine whether the courthouse would be moved to Stevenson or stay in Scottsboro (some Stevenson residents did not think Scottsboro deserved the role of county seat). Scottsboro won the vote and the present courthouse was built (It was later renovated and expanded in 1954.)

===The Scottsboro Boys===
The Scottsboro Boys case was among the most important civil rights cases in the history of American jurisprudence. It was twice appealed to the United States Supreme Court and established the principles that, in the United States, criminal defendants are entitled to effective assistance of counsel and that people may not be &quot;de facto&quot; excluded from juries due to their race.

In 1931 nine black youths, ranging in age from twelve to twenty, were accused in Scottsboro of raping two white women, Victoria Price and Ruby Bates, one of whom would later recant her accusation. The victims and accused alike had all hitched rides on a passing train on the Southern Railroad freight route from Chattanooga to Memphis on March 25, 1931. It happened to stop in Jackson County, Alabama where these women made their accusations to local officials against these black youths. The defendants were brought to Scottsboro for trial because it was the seat of Jackson County.

During the course of four trials, most of the youths were convicted and sentenced to death by all-white juries, although witnesses provided weak and contradictory testimonies. The case is now widely regarded (including in Scottsboro) as one of the worst travesties of justice perpetrated against blacks in the post-Reconstruction South. Only the first trials were held in Scottsboro. Of the original nine young black defendants (some of them minors at the time of arrest), accused of gang raping two fellow hobo white women on a freight train, eight were quickly convicted and sentenced to death by all-white juries in trials occurring in a mob atmosphere in Scottsboro.

The only two local attorneys who were willing to take the cases had few qualifications for criminal defense work. They were unable to put up much of a defense when the judge gave them no time to prepare their defenses before the trials. He started the first trial as soon as they agreed to take the cases, and then began each case as soon as the jury had gone out on the previous one.

In its two reviews of appeals from the case, the United States Supreme Court overturned their death sentences and convictions, saying that the convictions had been obtained by improper procedures. Those convicted spent at least six years and as many as nineteen years incarcerated in harsh local jails and state prisons. The Scottsboro Boys had served long prison sentences when Governor George Wallace partially mitigated this widely accepted injustice by issuing a pardon in 1976 for the one remaining Scottsboro defendant still imprisoned.

&quot;In January, 2004, amidst television cameras and radio and newspaper reporters, a crowd gathered near the Jackson County Court House in Scottsboro to dedicate a historical marker commemorating the Scottsboro Boys&#x27; trial and their struggle for justice.&quot; &quot;An 87-year-old black man who attended the ceremony, one of the few who could remember the cases firsthand, recalled that the mob scene following the Boys&#x27; arrest &#x27;was frightening&#x27; and that death threats were leveled against the jailed suspects. He applauded the town&#x27;s move to install the plaque on the courthouse yard. &#x27;I think it will bring the races closer together,&#x27; he said, &#x27;to understand each other better.&#x27;&quot;

The Scottsboro Boys Museum was opened in this city in February 2010.

===Modern history===

In 1900, Scottsboro was home to about 1,000 residents.

Beginning in 1908, a ferry began transporting passengers and automobiles to and from Sand Mountain. In 1928–1931, the Kansas City Bridge Company built the B.B. Comer Bridge, a long steel bridge that now connects the county seat to Sand Mountain, almost tripling the town&#x27;s population. The bridge entered use in July 1930. By 2007, the aging structure was classified by the Alabama Department of Transportation as being a structurally deficient bridge with an overall rating of 7.7 out of 100. Construction of a replacement bridge commenced in October 2007, and was expected to be complete by 2012. In 1932, a couple were wed on top of the bridge. The newlywed wife commented, &quot;I wanted to be married where the light-blue water touches and meets with the light-blue sky…&quot;
In the 1980s, a second bridge was built to increase travel and reduce traffic on the B.B. Comer bridge.

In 1913, the city purchased approximately for a water system on Sand Mountain. The first electric lights in Scottsboro became operational on January 21, 1916. Scottsboro&#x27;s first hospital was established in 1923.

In 1927, aviator Charles Lindbergh performed stunts in his famous plane the Spirit of St. Louis. In 1932, Scottsboro officially became a &quot;city&quot; when an act of the Alabama Legislature bestowed that title on towns with more than 2,000 inhabitants. Scottsboro&#x27;s population at the time was about 2,304.

In 1954, the courthouse was starting to deteriorate, so it was renovated and all the wooden walls were replaced with marble. Because of the growth in population and demand, more rooms were added to expand offices for services such as automobile tags and land records.

Since the early 1980s to the late 2000s, Scottsboro has seen substantial population growth and an economy moved away from its rural agrarian past to a more diversified one. Real estate in a small town environment and competitive state business tax rates both appealed to newcomers who bought homes and/or commuted to jobs in Chattanooga, Huntsville and Atlanta.

==Geography==
Scottsboro is located at (34.651368, −86.042570).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which, of it is land and of it (8.47%) is water. The water areas are the Tennessee River and its backwaters.

The section of the Tennessee River Valley that includes Scottsboro is geologically related to the Sequatchie Valley.

==Climate==


==Demographics==
===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 14,762 people, 6,224 households, and 4,201 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 6,848 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 91.11% White, 5.34% African American, 1.02% Native American, 0.54% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.56% from other races, and 1.42% from two or more races. 1.50% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 6,224 households, out of which 28.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.5% were married couples living together, 12.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.5% were non-families. 29.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.32 and the average family size was 2.85.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 22.8% under the age of 18, 7.7% from 18 to 24, 27.8% from 25 to 44, 25.9% from 45 to 64, and 15.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.5 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $32,654, and the median income for a family was $42,509. Males had a median income of $32,318 versus $21,965 for females. The per capita income for the city was $18,430. About 9.9% of families and 14.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.1% of those under age 18 and 20.5% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 14,770 people, 6,245 households, and 4,141 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 7,039 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 89.8% White, 4.6% African American, .8% Native American, 0.8% Asian, 0.2% Pacific Islander, 2.0% from other races, and 1.8% from two or more races. 3.5% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 6,245 households, out of which 25.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.6% were married couples living together, 12.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.7% were non-families. 30.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.31 and the average family size was 2.86.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 21.7% under the age of 18, 7.9% from 18 to 24, 23.8% from 25 to 44, 27.7% from 45 to 64, and 18.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42.2 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.4 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $36,554, and the median income for a family was $48,803. Males had a median income of $35,909 versus $25,403 for females. The per capita income for the city was $21,065. About 14.6% of families and 16.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 23.0% of those under age 18 and 14.6% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 15,578 people, 5,995 households, and 3,865 families residing in the city.

==Attractions==
Scottsboro is home to the Unclaimed Baggage Center. This center sells articles of unclaimed and undeliverable airline luggage whose owners the airlines cannot locate. The Center ends up with such items as electronics, clothing, and any other item that might be found in lost airline luggage. The prices are low and the offerings eclectic enough to attract visitors from other states, and even from other parts of the world who make their way to Scottsboro to see what others have lost. The Unclaimed Baggage Center has been featured several times in the media, including in &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, &quot;Vogue Magazine&quot;, &quot;The Los Angeles Times&quot;, Good Morning America, &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, &quot;The Dallas Morning News&quot;, &quot;The Atlanta Journal-Constitution&quot;, &quot;The Baltimore Sun&quot;, &quot;The Seattle Times&quot; and the travel/adventure television series &quot;Globe Trekker&quot;.

Also, on the old Memphis and Charleston Railroad near the public square, the freight depot still stands. Built in 1861, it is considered the oldest standing structure in the original city limits. During the Civil War, Union raiders and Confederate soldiers fought in a skirmish, which ended up with bullet holes in the brick walls and wooden cargo doors. The structure was restored and reopened as a museum in June 2012.

First Monday has been a major draw for over one hundred years, perhaps since 1870. In the old Southern style, First Monday is a trade day (or craft show) in which people set up booths and sell homemade wares.

Payne&#x27;s Soda Fountain, located on the Courthouse Square, has been in business since 1869. It has been in its current location on the northwest corner of the Square since 1891. The small, yet elegant, shop shows off a 1950s-themed design, offering the classic malt, and it even sports rare photographs of Scottsboro&#x27;s past.

King Caldwell Park is situated near downtown Scottsboro, right next to the Library and across the street from the Police Department. It is largely wooded, with several nature trails running through it. It offers picnic tables, a pavilion with rest rooms and a playground. It is the home of Art Sunday, which is an arts and crafts festival that Scottsboro holds the Sunday before Labor Day each year. Many exhibitors and thousands of people attend this festival each year. The King Caldwell Park is named after Scottsboro native and philanthropist, David King Caldwell, who went by the name &quot;King Caldwell&quot;. He moved to Tyler, Texas, where he became an oil tycoon and founded the Caldwell Zoo. He constantly gave generously to local causes in Scottsboro and paid for the higher education of many Scottsboro school children. He visited his namesake Caldwell School in Scottsboro and gave every child in the school a shiny new half-dollar, at a time when that was a lot of money for a child to receive.

==Development==
The attraction of Guntersville Lake has brought in numerous real estate developers. The Goose Pond area of Scottsboro has seen recent development of communities centered around a lake-living lifestyle.

==Media==
*&quot;The Progressive Age&quot; (also titled &quot;Scottsboro Progressive Age&quot;) (1889–1962)
*&quot;The Clarion&quot; (weekly community newspaper—15,500 subscribers across three counties)
*&quot;Jackson County Sentinel&quot; (newspaper)

== Health care ==
*Highlands Medical Center, a 170-bed facility

== Education ==
Scottsboro High School is the primary educational institution in Scottsboro, Alabama. Scottsboro High School was originally established as Jackson County High School in 1913. In 1957, the school&#x27;s name was changed from Jackson County High School to Scottsboro High School. Jeff Tubbs currently serves as the school&#x27;s principal.

==Notable people==
* Lucille Benson, actress
* Kenneth Carter, member of the Rhode Island House of Representatives
* John Allen Chau, evangelical christian missionary
* Bob Clemens, NFL player
* Robert K. Dawson, U.S. Assistant Secretary of the Army (Civil Works) from 1985 to 1987
* Babs Hodges Deal, novelist
* William Ledbetter Heath, novelist
* Robert E. Jones, Jr., U.S. Representative from 1947 to 1977
* Ken Kifer, bicyclist and writer. Lived near Scottsboro.
*Mike Kirkland, member of the Alabama House of Representatives and resident of Scottsboro
* Pat Trammell, former University of Alabama quarterback
* Thomas E. Weatherly, Jr., poet
* Debra Webb, romance novelist

==References ==
==External links==
*City of Scottsboro</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79577" start="0" end="10" title="Scottsboro, Alabama" label="Scottsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="32" end="43" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="47" end="61" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q79654" start="336" end="346" title="Bridgeport, Alabama" label="Bridgeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="470" end="477" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q486654" start="491" end="502" title="Dade County, Georgia" label="Dade County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="508" end="517" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q79860" start="552" end="571" title="Huntsville, Alabama" label="Huntsville, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="608" end="630" title="Chattanooga, Tennessee" label="Chattanooga, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360071" start="680" end="695" title="Scottsboro Boys" label="Scottsboro Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q105405" start="934" end="950" title="Cherokee" label="Cherokee Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554094" start="962" end="978" title="Tennessee Valley" label="Tennessee Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="1220" end="1229" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="1283" end="1298" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q79860" start="1533" end="1543" title="Huntsville, Alabama" label="Huntsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q660384" start="1609" end="1630" title="Mississippi Territory" label="Mississippi Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="1662" end="1673" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814493" start="1699" end="1716" title="Alabama Territory" label="Alabama Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q493715" start="1772" end="1786" title="Madison County, Alabama" label="Madison County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883764" start="2241" end="2251" title="Bellefonte, Alabama" label="Bellefonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920179" start="2791" end="2822" title="Memphis and Charleston Railroad" label="Memphis and Charleston Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="2861" end="2879" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="2893" end="2919" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="3531" end="3545" title="U.S. Civil War" label="U.S. Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q66045" start="3742" end="3751" title="Hollywood, Alabama" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q79563" start="3753" end="3762" title="Stevenson, Alabama" label="Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="5412" end="5439" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829455" start="5931" end="5948" title="Alabama Great Southern Railroad" label="Southern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="5968" end="5979" title="Chattanooga" label="Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="5983" end="5990" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="6033" end="6056" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728463" start="6335" end="6351" title="all-white jury" label="all-white juries"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="7687" end="7701" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q795199" start="8882" end="8892" title="B.B. Comer" label="B.B. Comer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415837" start="8958" end="8971" title="Sand Mountain (Alabama)" label="Sand Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618" start="9853" end="9870" title="Charles Lindbergh" label="Charles Lindbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="10773" end="10780" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="10865" end="10883" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452438" start="11127" end="11144" title="Sequatchie Valley" label="Sequatchie Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11435" end="11440" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11448" end="11464" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11472" end="11487" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11495" end="11500" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11508" end="11524" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11537" end="11548" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11613" end="11621" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="11625" end="11631" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13022" end="13027" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13034" end="13050" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13056" end="13071" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13078" end="13083" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13090" end="13106" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13118" end="13129" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13192" end="13200" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="13204" end="13210" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="14377" end="14402" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882674" start="14532" end="14556" title="Unclaimed Baggage Center" label="Unclaimed Baggage Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="15086" end="15109" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="15123" end="15137" title="Vogue Magazine" label="Vogue Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="15151" end="15172" title="The Los Angeles Times" label="The Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q825946" start="15180" end="15200" title="Good Morning America" label="Good Morning America"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="15212" end="15227" title="Washington Post" label="Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q889935" start="15241" end="15264" title="The Dallas Morning News" label="The Dallas Morning News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092348" start="15278" end="15310" title="The Atlanta Journal-Constitution" label="The Atlanta Journal-Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q47287" start="15324" end="15341" title="The Baltimore Sun" label="The Baltimore Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q221718" start="15355" end="15372" title="The Seattle Times" label="The Seattle Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q597325" start="15428" end="15441" title="Globe Trekker" label="Globe Trekker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920179" start="15467" end="15498" title="Memphis and Charleston Railroad" label="Memphis and Charleston Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16014" end="16024" title="craft show" label="craft show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019173" start="17105" end="17117" title="Caldwell Zoo" label="Caldwell Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561578" start="17461" end="17478" title="Guntersville Lake" label="Guntersville Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q23302926" start="17980" end="18002" title="Scottsboro High School" label="Scottsboro High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="18057" end="18064" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18258" end="18268" title="Jeff Tubbs" label="Jeff Tubbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6697263" start="18340" end="18354" title="Lucille Benson" label="Lucille Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389957" start="18366" end="18380" title="Kenneth Carter (politician)" label="Kenneth Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734753" start="18396" end="18433" title="Rhode Island House of Representatives" label="Rhode Island House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q59296773" start="18436" end="18451" title="John Allen Chau" label="John Allen Chau"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="18475" end="18485" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932090" start="18488" end="18499" title="Bob Clemens (American football)" label="Bob Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346218" start="18514" end="18530" title="Robert K. Dawson (public official)" label="Robert K. Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809029" start="18537" end="18582" title="Assistant Secretary of the Army (Civil Works)" label="Assistant Secretary of the Army (Civil Works)"/>
<link wikidata="Q98098759" start="18603" end="18619" title="Babs Hodges Deal" label="Babs Hodges Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17485990" start="18632" end="18655" title="William L. Heath" label="William Ledbetter Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q174690" start="18668" end="18688" title="Robert E. Jones, Jr." label="Robert E. Jones, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="18690" end="18709" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387948" start="18730" end="18739" title="Ken Kifer" label="Ken Kifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="18741" end="18750" title="bicyclist" label="bicyclist"/>
<link wikidata="Q122350060" start="18787" end="18800" title="Mike Kirkland (politician)" label="Mike Kirkland"/>
<link wikidata="Q909041" start="18816" end="18848" title="Alabama House of Representatives" label="Alabama House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006488" start="18878" end="18890" title="Pat Trammell" label="Pat Trammell"/>
<link wikidata="Q492318" start="18899" end="18920" title="University of Alabama" label="University of Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q622747" start="18921" end="18932" title="quarterback" label="quarterback"/>
<link wikidata="Q18763554" start="18935" end="18959" title="Thomas E. Weatherly, Jr." label="Thomas E. Weatherly, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5248525" start="18968" end="18978" title="Debra Webb" label="Debra Webb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104756" wikidata="Q67828" url="?curid=104756" title="Section, Alabama">
<text>Section is a town in Jackson County, Alabama, United States and is included in the Chattanooga-Cleveland-Dalton, TN-GA-AL Combined Statistical Area. As of the 2010 census, the population of the town was 770, an increase of one person (769) from 2000. Section is located on top of Sand Mountain.

==History==

Section is located on land where the Cherokee once hunted and lived. The community was originally known as Mt. Zion when the first post office was established. There were communities such as Kirby&#x27;s Creek, Gossets Hollow, and Fern Cliff. These communities came together to form the Town of Section. Pioneer settlers came in 1862 to Section, in large numbers. Settlers were required to live on the land for five years before claiming the property as their own. It became known later as &quot;Section&quot; because it was the location of a square-mile parcel of land, known as the 16th Section, required by the federal government to be set aside in support of public schools. Bort Harrison ran a 6-horsepower, water-powered flour and grist mill in 1886, and the first store in the community was built in 1889. The first school was built in the area before 1890, which was the year it burned. Its successor lasted 25 years before it also burned. Section was cited as having incorporated in 1910, however, on the 1950 U.S. Census rolls, it stated Section incorporated in 1946.

==Geography==
Section is located at (34.578155, -85.988114). The town is situated along State Route 35, northwest of Rainsville and southeast of Scottsboro. It lies along the western edge of Sand Mountain, and several points in the town, including Weathington Park, offer dramatic views of the Tennessee River and valley to the west. State Route 71 intersects State Route 35 in Section, connecting the area with Dutton and the Pisgah area to the northeast.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 769 people, 321 households, and 228 families residing in the township. The population density was . There were 352 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the township was 93.89% White, 0.78% Black or African American, 2.34% Native American, 0.13% from other races, and 2.86% from two or more races. 0.52% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 321 households, out of which 27.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.1% were married couples living together, 12.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.7% were non-families. 25.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size was 2.88.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 21.2% under the age of 18, 8.5% from 18 to 24, 24.3% from 25 to 44, 30.9% from 45 to 64, and 15.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 84.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 82.5 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $31,500, and the median income for a family was $37,115. Males had a median income of $29,205 versus $20,781 for females. The per capita income for the township was $17,036. About 15.0% of families and 16.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 25.5% of those under age 18 and 12.4% of those age 65 or over.

==Section High School==
Section High School is a kindergarten through twelfth grade school and is part of the Jackson County school system. Section became a high school in 1955. The first principal was Roy L. Buford.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67828" start="0" end="7" title="Section, Alabama" label="Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="21" end="35" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="37" end="44" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087906" start="83" end="147" title="Chattanooga-Cleveland-Dalton, TN-GA-AL Combined Statistical Area" label="Chattanooga-Cleveland-Dalton, TN-GA-AL Combined Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415837" start="280" end="293" title="Sand Mountain (Alabama)" label="Sand Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q873102" start="1476" end="1490" title="Alabama State Route 35" label="State Route 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q79346" start="1505" end="1515" title="Rainsville, Alabama" label="Rainsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q79577" start="1533" end="1543" title="Scottsboro, Alabama" label="Scottsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="1682" end="1697" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q873663" start="1722" end="1736" title="Alabama State Route 71" label="State Route 71"/>
<link wikidata="Q66247" start="1800" end="1806" title="Dutton, Alabama" label="Dutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q68182" start="1815" end="1821" title="Pisgah, Alabama" label="Pisgah"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1863" end="1881" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1952" end="1958" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2180" end="2185" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2193" end="2198" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2202" end="2218" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2226" end="2241" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2254" end="2265" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2330" end="2338" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2342" end="2348" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2471" end="2486" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3283" end="3300" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3398" end="3410" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104757" wikidata="Q65558" url="?curid=104757" title="Skyline, Alabama">
<text>Skyline is a town in Jackson County, Alabama, United States. The town incorporated in 1985. As of the 2010 census, the population of the town was 851, up from 843 in 2000.

==History==
Skyline began in 1934 as a cooperative farming experiment known as &quot;Cumberland Farms&quot; under President Franklin Roosevelt&#x27;s Federal Emergency Relief Administration. This was one of 43 such projects attempted nationally in depressed areas. It was soon renamed &quot;Skyline Farms&quot; to avoid confusion with another project in neighboring Tennessee. The experiment lasted for a decade before being sold off to private buyers in 1944.

The current town of Skyline is located about a mile north of the original farming colony.

==Geography==
Skyline is located at (34.802946, -86.123494). The town is situated atop the Cumberland Plateau in western Jackson County. The plateau towns of Hytop and Pleasant Groves lie to the north and southwest, respectively. State Route 79 traverses Skyline, connecting the town with Scottsboro in the valley to the south and Tennessee to the north. State Route 146 intersects SR 79 just north of Skyline, and connects the area with the Paint Rock Valley to the west.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 834 people, 367 households, and 258 families residing in the town.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 843 people, 323 households, and 251 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 357 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 94.90% White, 2.73% Native American, 0.12% Asian, and 2.25% from two or more races. 0.71% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 323 households, out of which 30.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 65.6% were married couples living together, 9.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.0% were non-families. 19.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.61 and the average family size was 2.98.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 23.7% under the age of 18, 11.2% from 18 to 24, 27.4% from 25 to 44, 25.7% from 45 to 64, and 12.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.7 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $29,250, and the median income for a family was $31,985. Males had a median income of $28,026 versus $20,341 for females. The per capita income for the town was $12,780. About 9.4% of families and 13.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.1% of those under age 18 and 22.0% of those age 65 or over.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q65558" start="0" end="7" title="Skyline, Alabama" label="Skyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="21" end="35" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="37" end="44" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="297" end="315" title="Franklin Roosevelt" label="Franklin Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067870" start="323" end="362" title="Federal Emergency Relief Administration" label="Federal Emergency Relief Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193904" start="508" end="523" title="Cumberland Homesteads" label="another project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="539" end="548" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143656" start="817" end="835" title="Cumberland Plateau" label="Cumberland Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q66495" start="884" end="889" title="Hytop, Alabama" label="Hytop"/>
<link wikidata="Q66699" start="894" end="909" title="Pleasant Groves, Alabama" label="Pleasant Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q873721" start="956" end="970" title="Alabama State Route 79" label="State Route 79"/>
<link wikidata="Q79577" start="1015" end="1025" title="Scottsboro, Alabama" label="Scottsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="1057" end="1066" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q875250" start="1081" end="1096" title="Alabama State Route 146" label="State Route 146"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124947" start="1168" end="1185" title="Paint Rock River" label="Paint Rock Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1217" end="1235" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1325" end="1350" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1459" end="1465" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1679" end="1684" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1692" end="1707" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1715" end="1720" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1785" end="1793" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1797" end="1803" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1926" end="1941" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2737" end="2754" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2847" end="2859" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104759" wikidata="Q79563" url="?curid=104759" title="Stevenson, Alabama">
<text>Stevenson is a city in Jackson County, Alabama, United States, and is included in the Chattanooga-Cleveland-Dalton, TN-GA-AL Combined Statistical Area. Sources listed either 1866 or 1867 as the year of incorporation, but that seems to conflict with the dates given for the town being granted a charter. It did not first appear on the U.S. Census until 1880, where it was the second largest town in Jackson County behind Scottsboro. Since 1900, it has been the third largest town behind either Scottsboro and Bridgeport or vice versa. At the 2020 census, the population of the city was 1,955, down from 2,046 in 2010.

==Geography==
Stevenson is located at (34.869442, -85.831829).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (5.71%) is water.

==Demographics==
===2000 census===
In the 2000 census, there were 1,770 people, 795 households, and 508 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 948 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 72.88% White, 22.37% Black or African American, 0.90% Native American, 0.11% Asian, 1.30% from other races, and 2.43% from two or more races. 1.53% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 795 households, of which 24.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 45.4% were married couples living together, 14.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 36.1% were non-families. 34.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.23 and the average family size was 2.83.

21.3% of the population were under the age of 18, 8.0% from 18 to 24, 27.8% from 25 to 44, 26.4% from 45 to 64, and 16.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.2 males.

The median household income was $26,908 and the median family income was $34,125. Males had a median income of $27,188 compared with $21,375 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,806. About 15.5% of families and 19.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 26.7% of those under age 18 and 22.1% of those age 65 or over.

===2010 census===
In the 2010 census, there were 2,046 people, 904 households, and 554 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 1,041 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 73.8% White, 17.4% Black or African American, 1.1% Native American, 0.4% Asian, 2.6% from other races, and 4.3% from two or more races. 3.9% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 904 households, of which 24.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.7% were married couples living together, 15.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 38.7% were non-families. 35.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 16.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.26 and the average family size was 2.90.

22.3% of the population were under the age of 18, 7.9% from 18 to 24, 24.1% from 25 to 44, 28.6% from 45 to 64, and 17.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41.5 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.8 males.

The median household income was $241 and the median family income was $634. Males had a median income of $210 compared with $917 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,647. About 26.6% of families and 31.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 44.9% of those under age 18 and 25.3% of those age 65 or over.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,955 people, 729 households, and 461 families residing in the city.

== Stevenson Depot ==

The Stevenson Railroad Depot Museum, located in downtown Stevenson, is dedicated to preserving an important part of railroading history through the display of related artifacts. In addition, the museum displays artifacts recalling Native American culture, pioneer life, and Civil War events.

The depot, which was built in 1872 and listed in the National Register of Historic Places, stands on the ruins of Stevenson&#x27;s first railroad depot, which was built around 1852 for common use by the Nashville Chattanooga and the Memphis &amp; Charleston Railroads. That original depot was destroyed either during, or shortly after, the Civil War. Bricks salvaged may have been used in the building of the present structure.

== Fort Harker ==

Constructed by the Union Army in summer 1862 and expanded in 1864, using soldiers and slaves, Fort Harker was built on a broad hill a quarter-mile east of the town of Stevenson. It overlooked Crow Creek and was well within firing range of Stevenson’s strategic railroad lines, supply depots and warehouses. Ft. Harker was an earthen redoubt, square, with walls that were high, surrounded by an dry moat. It contained 7 cannon platforms, a bomb-proof powder magazine, a draw-bridge entrance and an 8-sided wooden blockhouse at its center. Fort Harker was critical to Union plans. No major fighting occurred here, but skirmishes and sniper attacks were common as territory traded hands between Union and Confederate forces. One other large fort, two smaller redoubts and at least seven blockhouses were constructed along the railroad lines at Stevenson during the Civil War. Stevenson was the major junction for the Memphis and Charleston Railroad and the Nashville and Chattanooga Railroad. In addition to forts, the Union Army established a medical facility and a refugee camp at Stevenson. The remains of Gen. Rosecrans’ headquarters is on the National Register of Historic Places. Both may be seen near downtown Stevenson today.

== Depot Days ==
Every June, the town of Stevenson holds the annual Depot Days celebration. This celebration includes many different aspects of the southern town&#x27;s culture and celebrates the great things that Stevenson represents. The week-long celebration is concluded with a parade, a day full of activities, and a street dance in the middle of Downtown Stevenson.

== North Jackson High School ==
Stevenson is the location of the North Jackson High School. In 1993, the school won the Alabama 4A State Title in football. They reached the finals again in 2002, when they were defeated by UMS-Wright 7-3.

==Notable people==
* Hank Allison, former NFL player
* Jacob Lyda, country music singer
* Carl McNabb, former professional baseball player
* Mack Stewart, former professional baseball player
* Byron Wimberly, former professional football player

==Gallery==
==References==
==External links==
*Stevenson Depot museum
*Stevenson Depot Days. Com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79563" start="0" end="9" title="Stevenson, Alabama" label="Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="15" end="19" title="city" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="23" end="46" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087906" start="86" end="150" title="Chattanooga-Cleveland-Dalton, TN-GA-AL Combined Statistical Area" label="Chattanooga-Cleveland-Dalton, TN-GA-AL Combined Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q79577" start="420" end="430" title="Scottsboro, Alabama" label="Scottsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q79654" start="508" end="518" title="Bridgeport, Alabama" label="Bridgeport"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="699" end="717" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="837" end="843" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1049" end="1054" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1063" end="1068" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1072" end="1088" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1096" end="1111" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1119" end="1124" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1137" end="1148" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1213" end="1221" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1225" end="1231" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1350" end="1365" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="1964" end="1987" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2118" end="2135" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2229" end="2241" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2347" end="2353" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2560" end="2565" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2573" end="2578" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2582" end="2598" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2605" end="2620" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2627" end="2632" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2644" end="2655" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2718" end="2726" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2730" end="2736" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2855" end="2870" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="3471" end="3494" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3613" end="3630" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3724" end="3736" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3841" end="3866" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155513" start="3976" end="4007" title="Stevenson Railroad Depot and Hotel" label="Stevenson Railroad Depot Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q648081" start="4468" end="4489" title="Nashville, Chattanooga and St. Louis Railway" label="Nashville Chattanooga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920179" start="4498" end="4531" title="Memphis &amp;amp; Charleston Railroad" label="Memphis &amp;amp; Charleston Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471294" start="4807" end="4818" title="Fort Harker (Alabama)" label="Fort Harker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920179" start="5627" end="5658" title="Memphis and Charleston Railroad" label="Memphis and Charleston Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q648081" start="5667" end="5701" title="Nashville and Chattanooga Railroad" label="Nashville and Chattanooga Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q541708" start="5824" end="5833" title="William Rosecrans" label="Rosecrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="5858" end="5894" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648272" start="6578" end="6590" title="Hank Allison" label="Hank Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118957" start="6612" end="6622" title="Jacob Lyda" label="Jacob Lyda"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="6624" end="6637" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040539" start="6647" end="6658" title="Carl McNabb" label="Carl McNabb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724255" start="6698" end="6710" title="Mack Stewart" label="Mack Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003834" start="6750" end="6764" title="Byron Wimberly" label="Byron Wimberly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104760" wikidata="Q67108" url="?curid=104760" title="Woodville, Alabama">
<text>Woodville is a town in Jackson County, Alabama, United States. It was officially established by an act of the Alabama State Legislature on December 13, 1819, one day before Alabama became a state. It was later incorporated on May 12, 1890, but lost its charter in 1897. It reincorporated in 1912. As of the 2010 census, the population of the town is 746, down from 761 in 2000.

==History==
Woodville was settled about 1815 by Henry Derrick and is the oldest town in Jackson County. It was named for early residents Richard and Annie Wood. Woodville became the seat of Decatur County, Alabama in December 1821, but was attached to Jackson County when Decatur County was abolished the following year. The surrounding area was the site of considerable guerrilla warfare and small actions during the American Civil War, including the Skirmish at Paint Rock Bridge.

==Geography==
Woodville is located at (34.626775, -86.274832). The town is situated along State Route 35, with an older section of town lying a few blocks west of SR 35 along County Road 8, facing the railroad tracks. U.S. Route 72, which intersects SR 35 in the southern part of Woodville, connects the town with Scottsboro to the east and Huntsville to the west. The Cumberland Plateau rises just north of Woodville, and the Paint Rock River passes just to the west. The Fern Cave National Wildlife Refuge lies to the northwest.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 761 people, 301 households, and 232 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 322 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 96.98% White, 1.71% Native American, 0.13% Asian, and 1.18% from two or more races. 0.92% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 301 households, out of which 32.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 63.5% were married couples living together, 10.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.9% were non-families. 22.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 2.92.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 24.4% under the age of 18, 8.9% from 18 to 24, 29.0% from 25 to 44, 23.8% from 45 to 64, and 13.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 87.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.4 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $35,000, and the median income for a family was $37,426. Males had a median income of $27,946 versus $17,292 for females. The per capita income for the town was $15,796. About 9.7% of families and 11.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.5% of those under age 18 and 20.5% of those age 65 or over.

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67108" start="0" end="9" title="Woodville, Alabama" label="Woodville"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="23" end="37" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="39" end="46" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270265" start="110" end="135" title="Alabama State Legislature" label="Alabama State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248772" start="569" end="592" title="Decatur County, Alabama" label="Decatur County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="797" end="815" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187986" start="831" end="860" title="Skirmish at Paint Rock Bridge" label="Skirmish at Paint Rock Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q873102" start="953" end="967" title="Alabama State Route 35" label="State Route 35"/>
<link wikidata="Q410334" start="1081" end="1094" title="U.S. Route 72" label="U.S. Route 72"/>
<link wikidata="Q79577" start="1177" end="1187" title="Scottsboro, Alabama" label="Scottsboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q79860" start="1204" end="1214" title="Huntsville, Alabama" label="Huntsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143656" start="1232" end="1250" title="Cumberland Plateau" label="Cumberland Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124947" start="1290" end="1306" title="Paint Rock River" label="Paint Rock River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444446" start="1336" end="1370" title="Fern Cave National Wildlife Refuge" label="Fern Cave National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1412" end="1430" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1501" end="1507" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1721" end="1726" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1734" end="1749" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1757" end="1762" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1827" end="1835" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1839" end="1845" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1968" end="1983" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2780" end="2797" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2890" end="2902" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104761" wikidata="Q79989" url="?curid=104761" title="Adamsville, Alabama">
<text>Adamsville is a city in western Jefferson County, Alabama, United States. It is north from the Birmingham suburb of Pleasant Grove. It initially incorporated in 1901 (although the 1910 U.S. Census stated 1900), but disincorporated in 1915. It later reincorporated in 1953. According to the 2010 census, this town had a population of 4,522, down from its peak population of 4,965 in 2000.

==Geography==
Adamsville is located at (33.590411, -86.949166).

According to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which is land and 0.05% is water.

==Demographics==
===Adamsville===
Adamsville first appeared on the 1910 U.S. Census as an incorporated town. It disincorporated in 1915 and did not appear on the census again until 1950, when it reported as an unincorporated village. It reincorporated in 1953 as town and has appeared on every successive census to date. In the 1960s, it upgraded from town to city status.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 4,366 people, 1,471 households, and 1,032 families residing in the city.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census, there were 4,522 people, 1,752 households and 1,253 families living in the town. The population density was . There were 1,990 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 52.3% White, 44.9% Black or African American, 0.5% Native American, 0.3% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 1.1% from other races, and 0.8% from two or more races. 2.3% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 1,752 households, of which 27.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 47.6% were married couples living together, 18.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.5% were non-families. 24.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.4% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.57 and the average family size was 3.08.

23.6% of the population were under the age of 18, 8.1% from 18 to 24, 25.1% from 25 to 44, 27.2% from 45 to 64, and 15.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39.9 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.4 males.

The median household income was $52,167 and the median family income was $56,551. Males had a median income of $41,176 compared with $31,349 for females. The per capita income for the town was $23,461. About 7.9% of families and 11.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.1% of those under age 18 and 10.1% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
At the 2000 census, there were 4,965 people, 1,930 households and 1,464 families living in the town. The population density was . There were 2,042 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 75.79% White, 22.82% Black or African American, 0.40% Native American, 0.14% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.16% from other races, and 0.66% from two or more races. 0.52% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 1,930 households, of which 32.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 59.1% were married couples living together, 13.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.1% were non-families. 21.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.56 and the average family size was 2.97.

23.1% of the population were under the age of 18, 8.0% from 18 to 24, 27.6% from 25 to 44, 25.1% from 45 to 64, and 16.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.2 males.

The median household income was $39,563 and the median family income was $46,270. Males had a median income of $36,188 compared with $22,292 for females. The per capita income for the town was $18,496. About 5.1% of families and 6.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 10.3% of those under age 18 and 9.1% of those age 65 or over.

==Adamsville Census Division (1960-70)==

The Jefferson County Census Division of Adamsville was created in 1960 as part of a general reorganization of counties, which included the town of Adamsville and the surrounding areas. From 1910-1960, Adamsville had been in the unnamed 39th precinct of Jefferson County. In 1980, Adamsville became a part of the Graysville-Adamsville Census Division.

==Notable people==
* Henry E. Erwin, Medal of Honor recipient during World War II
* Brandon Johnson, former NFL linebacker and 2001 Minor High School graduate
* Jim King, head football coach of the University of West Alabama from 1973 to 1976
* Bryan Thomas, former linebacker and defensive end for the New York Jets and 1996 graduate of Minor High School
* Chris Williams, professional basketball player and 1998 graduate of Minor High School
* Nick Williams, NFL defensive end and 2008 graduate of Minor High School

==Gallery==
==References==
=== Notes ===
===References===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79989" start="0" end="10" title="Adamsville, Alabama" label="Adamsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="32" end="57" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="95" end="105" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q79542" start="116" end="130" title="Pleasant Grove, Alabama" label="Pleasant Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="290" end="301" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="471" end="498" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="972" end="997" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="1109" end="1120" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="2266" end="2289" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2420" end="2437" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2530" end="2542" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="2643" end="2654" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="3805" end="3828" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3959" end="3976" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4068" end="4080" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q80020" start="4509" end="4519" title="Graysville, Alabama" label="Graysville"/>
<link wikidata="Q9287824" start="4570" end="4584" title="Henry E. Erwin" label="Henry E. Erwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="4586" end="4600" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4618" end="4630" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956916" start="4633" end="4648" title="Brandon Johnson (linebacker)" label="Brandon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196134" start="4710" end="4718" title="Jim King (American football)" label="Jim King"/>
<link wikidata="Q637346" start="4747" end="4773" title="University of West Alabama" label="University of West Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980419" start="4794" end="4806" title="Bryan Thomas (American football)" label="Bryan Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q528145" start="4815" end="4825" title="linebacker" label="linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q219602" start="4852" end="4865" title="New York Jets" label="New York Jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108478" start="4907" end="4921" title="Chris Williams (basketball)" label="Chris Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q14918354" start="4995" end="5008" title="Nick Williams (defensive lineman)" label="Nick Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="5010" end="5013" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q903354" start="5014" end="5027" title="defensive end" label="defensive end"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104764" wikidata="Q67419" url="?curid=104764" title="Argo, Alabama">
<text>Argo is a city in Jefferson and St. Clair counties, Alabama, United States. It incorporated in 1987. At the 2020 census, the population was 4,368.

==Geography==

Argo is located at (33.700210, -86.512357).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (0.81%) is water.

==Demographics==

Argo first appeared on the 1990 U.S. Census as an incorporated city.

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 4,368 people, 1,348 households, and 1,146 families residing in the city.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census, there were 4,071 people, 1,393 households, and 583 families living in the city. The population density is . There were 1,492 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 94.1% White, 3.6% Black or African American, 0.4% Native American, 0.3% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, and 1.3% from two or more races. 0.5% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 1,393 households 41.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 70.3% were married couples living together, 8.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 17.1% were non-families. 14.0% of households were one person and 4.4% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.92 and the average family size was 3.22.

The age distribution was 29.2% under the age of 18, 6.9% from 18 to 24, 31.7% from 25 to 44, 24.2% from 45 to 64, and 8.1% 65 or older. The median age was 34.6 years. For every 100 females, there were 99.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.4 males.

The median household income was $53,917 and the median family income was $60,313. Males had a median income of $39,000 versus $35,072 for females. The per capita income for the city was $21,409. About 8.2% of families and 9.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.3% of those under age 18 and 2.8% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 Census data===
At the 2000 census, there were 1,780 people, 664 households, and 501 families living in the city. The population density is . There were 726 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 98.82% White, 0.17% Black or African American, 0.06% Native American, 0.06% Asian, 0.06% Pacific Islander, and 0.84% from two or more races. 0.73% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 664 households 39.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 65.5% were married couples living together, 6.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.4% were non-families. 21.4% of households were one person and 7.4% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.68 and the average family size was 3.14.

The age distribution was 28.0% under the age of 18, 6.5% from 18 to 24, 33.8% from 25 to 44, 23.1% from 45 to 64, and 8.6% 65 or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 108.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 104.8 males.

The median household income was $41,167 and the median family income was $53,088. Males had a median income of $33,875 versus $28,625 for females. The per capita income for the city was $18,226. About 7.5% of families and 8.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.1% of those under age 18 and 15.0% of those age 65 or over.

===Historic Demographics===
==References==
=== Notes ===
===References===
==External links==
*Argo page on St Clair CO. Site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67419" start="0" end="4" title="Argo, Alabama" label="Argo"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="18" end="27" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q503451" start="32" end="41" title="St. Clair County, Alabama" label="St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="52" end="59" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="108" end="119" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="225" end="243" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="433" end="458" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="570" end="581" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="753" end="766" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1878" end="1890" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="1995" end="2006" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2174" end="2187" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3304" end="3316" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104765" wikidata="Q79973" url="?curid=104765" title="Bessemer, Alabama">
<text>Bessemer is a city in Jefferson County, Alabama, United States and a southwestern suburb of Birmingham. The population was 26,019 at the 2020 census. It is within the Birmingham–Hoover, AL Metropolitan Statistical Area, of which Jefferson County is the center. It developed rapidly as an industrial city in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

==History==
The town was founded in the Reconstruction Era by the Bessemer Land and Improvement Company, named after Henry Bessemer and owned by coal magnate Henry F. DeBardeleben. He had inherited Daniel Pratt&#x27;s investments. The mayor and councilmen voted to incorporate the city of Bessemer on September 9, 1887. Located 16 miles southwest of Birmingham, Bessemer grew rapidly and its promoters believed that it might overtake the other city in economic power.

Given the iron ore, coal and limestone deposits in the area, the city became a center of steelmaking from about 1890 through the 20th century. It attracted rural migrants from across the South, as well as European immigrants. By the 1950s, the city was majority African American in population.

The industry went through considerable restructuring in the late 20th century, and jobs moved out of the area. Steel is no longer made there.

In 2019, it was named Alabama&#x27;s &quot;Worst City to Live in&quot; by 24/7 Wall Street.

==Geography==
Bessemer is located approximately southwest of Birmingham.

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (0.55%) is water.

Bessemer is situated in the midst of the iron ore and limestone district of Alabama, in the southern part of Jones Valley (about wide). Iron ore was mined on the hills on the city&#x27;s southeast side, coal was, and still is mined to the north and west, and limestone deposits were also nearby. All three ingredients were necessary for steelmaking, which led to the area becoming a major steel center from about 1890 through the twentieth century. Steel is no longer made within the city limits but is still manufactured in the neighboring city of Fairfield.

===Climate===
The climate in this area is characterized by hot, humid summers and generally mild to cool winters. Bessemer has a humid subtropical climate, abbreviated &quot;Cfa&quot; on climate maps, within the Köppen Climate Classification system.
==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 census, there were 26,019 people, 10,492 households, and 6,378 families residing in the city.

===2013 ACS===
In the 2013 American Community Survey, there were 27,336 people living in the city. 72.0% were African American, 24.0% White, 0.1% Native American, 0.2% Asian, 0.1% from some other race and 0.4% from two or more races. 3.2% were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

===2000 census===
As of the 2000 census, there were 29,672 people, 11,537 households, and 7,868 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 12,790 housing units, with an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 69.6% Black or African American, 28.9% White, 0.3% Native American, 0.2% Asian, &lt;0.1% Pacific Islander, 0.3% from other races, and 0.7% from two or more races. 1.1% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 11,537 households, out of which 30.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 34.6% were married couples living together, 29.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.8% were non-families. 29.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 3.12.

In the city, the population was spread out, with 26.8% under the age of 18, 9.6% from 18 to 24, 26.1% from 25 to 44, 21.1% from 45 to 64, and 16.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 82.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 75.8 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $23,066, and the median income for a family was $28,230. Males had a median income of $29,413 versus $21,552 for females. The per capita income for the city was $12,232. About 24.2% of families and 27.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 37.8% of those under age 18 and 24.7% of those age 65 or over.

==Economy==
In 1900, Bessemer ranked eighth in the population in Alabama, second in the amount of capital invested in manufacturing, and fourth in the value of its manufactured product for the year. By 1911, ore mining, iron smelting, and the manufacture of iron and coke were the chief industries of Bessemer. Truck farming was an important industry, dating from the area&#x27;s agricultural past.

Both blacks and whites from rural areas were attracted to the city for its new work opportunities. Gradually African Americans moved into industrial jobs and became part of integrated unions. Such jobs enabled many working-class families to enjoy middle-class incomes.

Today, ore mining has ended, as supplies were exhausted. Manufacturing remains a factor, with the U.S. Pipe and Foundry ductile pipe plant on the city&#x27;s north side. In May 2007, U.S. Pipe announced that it would be building a new $45-million foundry near the current plant. The site was selected, among other reasons, for having available space for potential future expansions. U.S. Pipe is the largest domestic producer of ductile iron pipe in sizes 4 inch through 64 inch.

Bessemer was once home to a large railroad car manufacturing factory, operated by Pullman Standard for many decades and later by Trinity Industries. With railroad restructuring in the late 20th century and other manufacturing moving offshore, this plant ceased most production in the 1990s. In 2012, BLOX LLC (bloxbuilt.com) a manufacturer of modular components for healthcare facilities moved into this facility.

The decline of mining and exodus of the steelmaking and railcar manufacturing industries resulted in extensive loss of jobs. Bessemer has lost population since a peak population in 1970. It faced an economic crisis in the early to mid-1980s, as unemployed workers constituted more than one-third of the workforce. Since that time the city has been successful in diversifying its economy, through the efforts of the Bessemer Area Chamber of Commerce and the Bessemer Industrial Development Board. It is recognized for its business growth. In June 2018, Amazon announced that it would build a new , $325 million fulfillment center in Bessemer, which will initially create 1,500 new jobs.

==Crime==
According to the Uniform Crime Report statistics compiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in 2022, there were 469 violent crimes and 2,057 property crimes per 100,000 residents. Of these, the violent crimes consisted of 10 murders, 17 forcible rapes, 76 robberies and 366 aggravated assaults, while 221 burglaries, 1,542 larceny-thefts, 286 motor vehicle thefts and 8 acts of arson defined the property offenses.

According to NeighborhoodScout, Bessemer ranks first in terms of violent crimes for U.S. cities with 25,000 or more people as of 2019.

==Arts and culture==
The performance center Bessemer Civic Center provides multiple performance spaces for music and theatre.

==Government==
Bessemer uses the mayor–city council form of government. The council has seven members, elected from single-member districts. As of 2016, Kenneth Gulley is mayor, a position elected at-large. He was first elected in 2010 and reelected to a second term in 2014.

A satellite Jefferson County Courthouse is located in downtown Bessemer. There is a special county government district, known as the &quot;Bessemer Cutoff&quot;, which was established in the middle of the 20th century when Bessemer was a major city in its own right. A separate county government was considered a possibility, but there was not sufficient land area to meet legislative requirements for a county. The &quot;Cutoff&quot; had a separate series of Alabama license plates, with a different numeric prefix than the rest of the county.

Bessemer has since been surpassed in size by Birmingham suburbs such as Hoover, Vestavia Hills, and Homewood. But Bessemer retains the branch county courthouse to this day. The term &quot;Bessemer Cutoff&quot; continues to be used regularly by area residents.

The United States Postal Service operates the Bessemer Post Office.

The state Alabama Department of Corrections operates the William E. Donaldson Correctional Facility, a prison for men, in unincorporated Jefferson County, Alabama, near Bessemer. The prison includes one of the two Alabama death rows for men.

==Education==
===Public schools===
Bessemer has its own school system independent of Jefferson County schools, Bessemer City School District. The system includes:
* Hard Elementary
* Jonesboro Elementary
* Greenwood Elementary
* Abrams Elementary
* Westhills Elementary
* Bessemer City Middle
* Bessemer City High School (formally Jess Lanier)

The Board of Education also operates the Quitman Mitchell Opportunity Center, which includes an adult learning center, Even Start child care center, and New Horizon Alternative School.

===Private schools===
K–12 private schools in the Bessemer include Rock Christian School and Bessemer Academy, which was founded as a segregation academy.

===Community college===
Lawson State Community College operates the former Bessemer Technical College campus. The two schools merged in 2005 as a cost-saving measure.

==Media==
&quot;The Western Star&quot; is a weekly newspaper which covers Bessemer and nearby communities.

&quot;The Birmingham News&quot; is published three days per week, and also publishes a weekly section devoted to news from Bessemer and nearby communities.

One radio station, WZGX (1450 AM), operates within the city; it broadcasts some Spanish-language programming and music to appeal to the growing Mexican-American population of Jefferson County. It also continues a tradition of broadcasting high school football games on Friday nights. All of metro Birmingham&#x27;s stations are heard in Bessemer, as well as several stations broadcasting from Tuscaloosa.

Television station WDBB (channel 17) is licensed to Bessemer, but broadcasts from studios in Birmingham, simulcasting with WTTO (channel 21). All of Birmingham&#x27;s television stations may be viewed in Bessemer, and some have established news bureaus there.

==Infrastructure==
===Transportation===
In 1911, the town was served by five railroad lines: Alabama Great Southern (Queen &amp; Crescent route), the Louisville &amp; Nashville Railroad, the Kansas City, Memphis &amp; Birmingham (St. Louis &amp; San Francisco Railroad system), the Birmingham Southern Railroad, and the Atlanta, Birmingham and Atlantic Railways. Passenger service decreased after people started choosing to travel by automobiles, increasingly so after World War II. In addition, there was widespread restructuring in the railroad industry that also applied to freight lines.

By 2006, the companies listed above had consolidated into CSX Transportation, which has lines to Birmingham and Brookwood, and the Norfolk Southern Railway, with lines to Birmingham, Mobile and New Orleans. Birmingham Southern continues in service. A major railroad feature is the &quot;High Line&quot;, constructed by Tennessee Coal &amp; Iron (predecessor to U.S. Steel) to ship iron ore from the mines on the city&#x27;s south side to the steel works in nearby Fairfield. This elevated line traverses the eastern side of the city. Though tracks were removed over much of the High Line when the mines closed, part of the line is still used by the Birmingham Southern. All of the roadbed and bridges remain in place.

Transit service in Bessemer is provided by Birmingham-Jefferson County Transit Authority, which operates Max Transit bus service.

Bessemer is served by the small Bessemer Airport to the southeast of the city. Commercial service in the region is provided by the much larger Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International Airport, located north of downtown Birmingham, about 21 miles away in total.

Major highways in Bessemer include I-20/59, I-459, U.S. Route 11, and State Route 150, which connects Bessemer with Hoover.

==Notable people==
* David Bonnett, NASCAR driver
* Neil Bonnett, NASCAR driver
* McKinley Boykin, professional football player
* Alex Bradford, composer, singer, arranger, and choir director
* Mildred Brown, journalist
* David L. DeJarnette, archaeologist, generally considered the &quot;Father of Alabama Archaeology&quot;
* Thornton Dial, African-American folk artist
* Nelsan Ellis, actor and playwright
* Anthony Henton, former NFL linebacker
* Mike Hill, Broadcaster, ESPN/Fox Sports and other national outlets
* Virginia Hill, actress, mob courier and girlfriend of Bugsy Siegel
* Andre Holland, actor
* Frank House, born in Bessemer, major league baseball player
* Bo Jackson, Heisman Trophy winner, NFL and MLB player
* Lamar Johnson, former MLB first baseman
* Eddie LeVert, singer
* Gucci Mane, rapper
* Reese McCall, former NFL tight end
* David McCampbell, naval aviator, Medal of Honor recipient, and the US Navy&#x27;s all-time leading ace with 34 aerial victories during World War II.
* Edward McClain, Alabama state legislator
* Deborah E. McDowell, English professor and author of a 1997 memoir of life in Bessemer, &quot;Leaving Pipe Shop&quot;
* Elijah Nevett, NFL player
* Kerry Rhodes, NFL player
*Curtis Rowe, professional basketball player 
* DeMeco Ryans, NFL player and head coach
* Glenn Shadix, born in Bessemer, actor
* John Paul Thomas, artist, educator and scholar; born in Bessemer
* Ontario Tillman, member of the Alabama House of Representatives born in Bessemer and resident
* Olanda Truitt, NFL player
* Larry Watkins, former NFL running back
* Jack Whitten, abstract painter
* Andre Williams, singer and producer
* Gran Wilson, opera singer
* Rod Windsor, NFL player
* Jameis Winston, Heisman Trophy winner, quarterback for the Cleveland Browns

==Notable animal==
* Matilda (chicken), Guinness World Record holder

==See also==

* SS &quot;Bessemer Victory&quot; – World War II cargo ship named for Bessemer
* Bessemer union drive - unionization movement of workers at Amazon

==References==
==External links==
* City of Bessemer – Official Website
* Bessemer Area Chamber of Commerce</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79973" start="0" end="8" title="Bessemer, Alabama" label="Bessemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="22" end="38" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="40" end="47" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="92" end="102" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="137" end="148" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q79950" start="178" end="184" title="Hoover, Alabama" label="Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550945" start="189" end="218" title="Birmingham metropolitan area, Alabama" label="Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="388" end="406" title="Reconstruction Era" label="Reconstruction Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q310201" start="465" end="479" title="Henry Bessemer" label="Henry Bessemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20684015" start="506" end="527" title="Henry F. DeBardeleben" label="Henry F. DeBardeleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218486" start="546" end="558" title="Daniel Pratt (industrialist)" label="Daniel Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1439" end="1466" title="United States Census Bureau" label="United States Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="1580" end="1588" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="1593" end="1602" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="1742" end="1746" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q79722" start="2088" end="2097" title="Fairfield, Alabama" label="Fairfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="2229" end="2254" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="2312" end="2341" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="2396" end="2407" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="2523" end="2548" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2606" end="2622" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2630" end="2635" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2642" end="2657" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2664" end="2669" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2740" end="2748" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2752" end="2758" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="2801" end="2812" title="2000 United States census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3029" end="3034" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3038" end="3054" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3062" end="3067" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3074" end="3089" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3096" end="3101" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3112" end="3128" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3140" end="3151" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3214" end="3222" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="3226" end="3232" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="4170" end="4187" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4281" end="4293" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="4627" end="4631" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="4636" end="4640" title="coke (fuel)" label="coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311607" start="5468" end="5485" title="ductile iron pipe" label="ductile iron pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002710" start="5602" end="5618" title="Pullman Standard" label="Pullman Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="6487" end="6493" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q438714" start="6649" end="6669" title="Uniform Crime Report" label="Uniform Crime Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="6697" end="6728" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907234" start="7072" end="7089" title="NeighborhoodScout" label="NeighborhoodScout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896423" start="7239" end="7260" title="Bessemer Civic Center" label="Bessemer Civic Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="7355" end="7360" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="7361" end="7373" title="city council" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052894" start="7438" end="7461" title="single-member districts" label="single-member districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="7519" end="7527" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="7611" end="7627" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137809" start="7628" end="7638" title="Courthouse" label="Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q22706" start="8067" end="8080" title="license plate" label="license plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q79950" start="8217" end="8223" title="Hoover, Alabama" label="Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q79695" start="8225" end="8239" title="Vestavia Hills, Alabama" label="Vestavia Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q79700" start="8245" end="8253" title="Homewood, Alabama" label="Homewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="8410" end="8438" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705244" start="8485" end="8518" title="Alabama Department of Corrections" label="Alabama Department of Corrections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008227" start="8532" end="8574" title="William E. Donaldson Correctional Facility" label="William E. Donaldson Correctional Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="8597" end="8611" title="unincorporated area" label="unincorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="8612" end="8628" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="8630" end="8637" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23302591" start="9013" end="9038" title="Bessemer City High School (Alabama)" label="Bessemer City High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q107210930" start="9342" end="9358" title="Bessemer Academy" label="Bessemer Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446325" start="9383" end="9402" title="segregation academy" label="segregation academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505007" start="9429" end="9459" title="Lawson State Community College" label="Lawson State Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718111" start="9687" end="9706" title="The Birmingham News" label="The Birmingham News"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="9842" end="9855" title="radio station" label="radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q14679588" start="9857" end="9861" title="WZGX" label="WZGX"/>
<link wikidata="Q79580" start="10231" end="10241" title="Tuscaloosa, Alabama" label="Tuscaloosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616075" start="10244" end="10262" title="Television station" label="Television station"/>
<link wikidata="Q111660600" start="10263" end="10267" title="WDBB" label="WDBB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538008" start="10367" end="10371" title="WTTO" label="WTTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="10582" end="10590" title="railroad" label="railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829455" start="10598" end="10620" title="Alabama Great Southern" label="Alabama Great Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q918747" start="10655" end="10690" title="Louisville &amp;amp; Nashville Railroad" label="Louisville &amp;amp; Nashville Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320362" start="10735" end="10773" title="St. Louis &amp;amp; San Francisco Railroad" label="St. Louis &amp;amp; San Francisco Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916832" start="10787" end="10815" title="Birmingham Southern Railroad" label="Birmingham Southern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4815964" start="10825" end="10865" title="Atlanta, Birmingham and Atlantic Railway" label="Atlanta, Birmingham and Atlantic Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="11156" end="11174" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q985677" start="11210" end="11219" title="Brookwood, Alabama" label="Brookwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="11229" end="11253" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="11281" end="11287" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="11292" end="11303" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q72539" start="11459" end="11469" title="U.S. Steel" label="U.S. Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q79722" start="11562" end="11571" title="Fairfield, Alabama" label="Fairfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916583" start="11860" end="11905" title="Birmingham-Jefferson County Transit Authority" label="Birmingham-Jefferson County Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q619644" start="11980" end="11996" title="Bessemer Airport" label="Bessemer Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q865724" start="12091" end="12137" title="Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International Airport" label="Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q876760" start="12243" end="12247" title="Interstate 20 (Alabama)" label="I-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q94378" start="12248" end="12250" title="Interstate 59 (Alabama)" label="59"/>
<link wikidata="Q876790" start="12252" end="12257" title="Interstate 459" label="I-459"/>
<link wikidata="Q65138586" start="12259" end="12272" title="U.S. Route 11 in Alabama" label="U.S. Route 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q875288" start="12278" end="12293" title="State Route 150 (Alabama)" label="State Route 150"/>
<link wikidata="Q79950" start="12324" end="12330" title="Hoover, Alabama" label="Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q87485999" start="12354" end="12367" title="David Bonnett" label="David Bonnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="12369" end="12375" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984154" start="12385" end="12397" title="Neil Bonnett" label="Neil Bonnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="12399" end="12405" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994215" start="12415" end="12430" title="McKinley Boykin" label="McKinley Boykin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="12445" end="12453" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716727" start="12463" end="12476" title="Alex Bradford" label="Alex Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850947" start="12527" end="12540" title="Mildred Brown" label="Mildred Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q28793933" start="12555" end="12574" title="David L. DeJarnette" label="David L. DeJarnette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796523" start="12660" end="12673" title="Thornton Dial" label="Thornton Dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q40299" start="12706" end="12718" title="Nelsan Ellis" label="Nelsan Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772705" start="12743" end="12757" title="Anthony Henton" label="Anthony Henton"/>
<link wikidata="Q528145" start="12770" end="12780" title="linebacker" label="linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847237" start="12783" end="12792" title="Mike Hill (sportscaster)" label="Mike Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498921" start="12852" end="12865" title="Virginia Hill" label="Virginia Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754805" start="12921" end="12934" title="Andre Holland" label="Andre Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487334" start="12944" end="12955" title="Frank House (baseball)" label="Frank House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="12975" end="12996" title="major league baseball" label="major league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q887401" start="13006" end="13016" title="Bo Jackson" label="Bo Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035067" start="13018" end="13032" title="Heisman Trophy" label="Heisman Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="13041" end="13044" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="13049" end="13052" title="MLB" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480876" start="13062" end="13075" title="Lamar Johnson (baseball)" label="Lamar Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q737445" start="13104" end="13116" title="Eddie LeVert" label="Eddie LeVert"/>
<link wikidata="Q206032" start="13127" end="13137" title="Gucci Mane" label="Gucci Mane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307000" start="13148" end="13160" title="Reese McCall" label="Reese McCall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153176" start="13173" end="13182" title="tight end" label="tight end"/>
<link wikidata="Q359321" start="13185" end="13201" title="David McCampbell" label="David McCampbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344386" start="13336" end="13350" title="Edward McClain (Alabama politician)" label="Edward McClain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248236" start="13379" end="13398" title="Deborah E. McDowell" label="Deborah E. McDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360974" start="13499" end="13512" title="Elijah Nevett" label="Elijah Nevett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="13514" end="13517" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394634" start="13527" end="13539" title="Kerry Rhodes" label="Kerry Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="13541" end="13544" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609491" start="13553" end="13564" title="Curtis Rowe" label="Curtis Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="13579" end="13589" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q781588" start="13600" end="13612" title="DeMeco Ryans" label="DeMeco Ryans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="13614" end="13617" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q720553" start="13642" end="13654" title="Glenn Shadix" label="Glenn Shadix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16015316" start="13682" end="13698" title="John Paul Thomas" label="John Paul Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q122860564" start="13749" end="13764" title="Ontario Tillman" label="Ontario Tillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q909041" start="13780" end="13812" title="Alabama House of Representatives" label="Alabama House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083087" start="13845" end="13858" title="Olanda Truitt" label="Olanda Truitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="13860" end="13863" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491262" start="13873" end="13886" title="Larry Watkins" label="Larry Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q912985" start="13899" end="13911" title="running back" label="running back"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115781" start="13914" end="13926" title="Jack Whitten" label="Jack Whitten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846286" start="13947" end="13961" title="Andre Williams (musician)" label="Andre Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594072" start="13985" end="13996" title="Gran Wilson" label="Gran Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356413" start="14013" end="14024" title="Rod Windsor" label="Rod Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="14026" end="14029" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127917" start="14039" end="14053" title="Jameis Winston" label="Jameis Winston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035067" start="14055" end="14069" title="Heisman Trophy" label="Heisman Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223527" start="14098" end="14114" title="Cleveland Browns" label="Cleveland Browns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787490" start="14137" end="14154" title="Matilda (chicken)" label="Matilda (chicken)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393255" start="14202" end="14233" title="SS Bessemer Victory" label="SS &amp;quot;Bessemer Victory&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14281" end="14301" title="Amazon worker organization#2020-21 Bessemer union drive" label="Bessemer union drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="14340" end="14346" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104766" wikidata="Q80047" url="?curid=104766" title="Brighton, Alabama">
<text>Brighton is a city near Birmingham, Alabama, United States and located just east of Hueytown. At the 2020 census, the population was 2,337. It is part of the Birmingham-Hoover Metropolitan Statistical Area, which in 2010 had a population of about 1,128,047, approximately one-quarter of Alabama&#x27;s population.

It is one of four cities in Jefferson County named after cities in Great Britain. Many of the city&#x27;s early settlers were of English descent; they named the town after the English tourist and resort city of Brighton, which is located on the English Channel.

==Geography==
Brighton is located at .

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land.

==History==
Brighton was not settled by European Americans until the late 19th century. Brighton was officially founded in 1892, when developer G.B. Edwards subdivided a tract of land and sold lots. It was named after Brighton, East Sussex in England UK. It was situated along a dummy railroad line built in 1889 by the Bessemer &amp; Birmingham Railroad Company to connect those two growing industrial cities.

The Old Huntsville Road was renamed as Main Street and the city was incorporated in 1901. By that year, at least 100 families were living in Brighton. The town had a population of 1,502 by the 1910 census, with seventeen commercial establishments, including eight grocery stores.

The city&#x27;s fortunes have been closely linked to those of Woodward Iron Company. Together with coal mining in this area, the iron company was integral to the industrial development in this part of Alabama, which is based on the much larger cities of Birmingham, Bessemer, and Gadsden. After industrial restructuring in the late 1970s and when the iron company moved out, the town has declined in population since its peak in 1980.

Brighton Cemetery, which is still operating, contains the graves of persons of Scottish, English and German descent who came to work at Woodward.

In August 1908, coal miner and union leader William Miller, who was black, was accused of blowing up the home of a white mine operator Finley Fuller. It was during a period of labor unrest as mine workers tried to organize unions. Miller was lynched by a white mob that dragged him out of the Brighton jail. They hanged and killed him not far from Brighton City Hall. Later, it was found that whites opposed to unionization had bombed Fuller&#x27;s home; by linking the crime to a black man, they intended to increase general opposition to the union&#x27;s drive for better wages.

In 2015, after the Equal Justice Initiative (EJI) published its study &quot;Lynching in America: Confronting the Legacy of Racial Terror&quot;, the city of Brighton resolved to place a historical marker to commemorate Miller for his work with the union and as a victim of lynching. They worked in cooperation with EJI and placed the marker in a ceremony near City Hall. Brighton was the first city in Alabama to install such a memorial. In a related effort, scholarships will be awarded to high school students for writing essays about Alabama&#x27;s racial history.

==City government==
Brighton has a Mayor–council government. It operates both police and fire departments.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 2,337 people, 1,180 households, and 519 families residing in the city.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census, there were 2,945 people, 1,105 households, and 696 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 1,360 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 81.0% Black or African American, 6.5% White, 1.0% Native American, 0.0% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 10.8% from other races, and 0.9% from two or more races. 13.8% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 1,105 households 21.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 24.6% were married couples living together, 31.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 37.0% were non-families. 32.8% of households were one person and 12.4% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.64 and the average family size was 3.39.

The age distribution was 22.8% under the age of 18, 11.5% from 18 to 24, 23.4% from 25 to 44, 27.2% from 45 to 64, and 15.1% 65 or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 102.1 males.

The median household income was $25,929 and the median family income was $31,472. Males had a median income of $20,838 versus $28,250 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,858. About 14.1% of families and 16.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.6% of those under age 18 and 21.9% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
At the 2000 census, there were 3,640 people, 1,413 households, and 921 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 1,636 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 9.01% White, 89.12% Black or African American, 0.38% Native American, 0.03% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.88% from other races, and 0.55% from two or more races. 1.73% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 1,413 households 25.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 29.9% were married couples living together, 29.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.8% were non-families. 32.5% of households were one person and 14.7% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.57 and the average family size was 3.29.

The age distribution was 25.5% under the age of 18, 10.3% from 18 to 24, 26.0% from 25 to 44, 21.8% from 45 to 64, and 16.3% 65 or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 87.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 78.9 males.

The median household income was $21,364 and the median family income was $27,926. Males had a median income of $24,018 versus $20,192 for females. The per capita income for the city was $11,002. About 20.2% of families and 27.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 38.3% of those under age 18 and 20.3% of those age 65 or over.

==Notable people==
*Charles Avery (1892–1974), blues and boogie-woogie pianist
*Parnell Dickinson, former professional football player
*Albert Hall, stage, TV and film actor
*Henry Panion, music director for Stevie Wonder, Whitney Houston, and the Winans
*Josephus C. Vines, mayor of Brighton
*Dennis Weatherby, inventor, scientist, and university administrator
*Linda Love (Linda Burroughs), International Blues Singer and actress
*Asmar A. Baraka (former Alex Banks, Jr.), former professional football player
*Douglas Bender,former professional baseball player

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80047" start="0" end="8" title="Brighton, Alabama" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="24" end="43" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="45" end="58" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q79257" start="84" end="92" title="Hueytown, Alabama" label="Hueytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="101" end="112" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550945" start="158" end="205" title="Birmingham–Hoover Metropolitan Area" label="Birmingham-Hoover Metropolitan Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="343" end="359" title="Jefferson County, AL" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="526" end="534" title="Brighton, UK" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="635" end="653" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605362" start="976" end="990" title="steam dummy" label="dummy railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8033572" start="1452" end="1473" title="Woodward Iron Company" label="Woodward Iron Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985086" start="2215" end="2222" title="Lynching in the United States" label="lynched"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867897" start="2574" end="2598" title="Equal Justice Initiative" label="Equal Justice Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="3158" end="3182" title="Mayor–council government" label="Mayor–council government"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3277" end="3302" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="3412" end="3423" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3596" end="3609" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4751" end="4763" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="4864" end="4875" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5048" end="5061" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="6208" end="6220" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q115813108" start="6316" end="6329" title="Charles Avery (pianist)" label="Charles Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139315" start="6376" end="6393" title="Parnell Dickinson" label="Parnell Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387383" start="6432" end="6443" title="Albert Hall (actor)" label="Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726691" start="6471" end="6483" title="Henry Panion" label="Henry Panion"/>
<link wikidata="Q88328092" start="6552" end="6569" title="Josephus C. Vines" label="Josephus C. Vines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259058" start="6590" end="6606" title="Dennis Weatherby" label="Dennis Weatherby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6659" end="6687" title="Linda Love (Linda Burroughs)" label="Linda Love (Linda Burroughs)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6729" end="6769" title="Asmar A. Baraka (former Alex Banks, Jr.)" label="Asmar A. Baraka (former Alex Banks, Jr.)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6808" end="6822" title="Douglas Bender" label="Douglas Bender"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104767" wikidata="Q66072" url="?curid=104767" title="Brookside, Alabama">
<text>Brookside is a town in north-central Jefferson County, Alabama, United States. As of the 2020 census, the population of the town was 1,253. It is a former mining town.

==History==
The Brookside mine was opened in 1886 by the Coalburg Coal and Coke Company. It was purchased one year later by the Sloss Iron and Steel Company as a source of fuel for their blast furnaces in Birmingham. Following the practice of the time, the mined coal was processed into coke in rows of beehive ovens banked into the hillside below the mine opening. In 1897 a Robinson-Ramsey Coal Washer was installed, increasing the efficiency of coke burning and therefore the overall efficiency of the mine. Other advanced equipment was also installed at Brookside, placing it at the forefront of mining technology in the Birmingham District at the turn of the century.

Brookside served as the headquarters for four Sloss-owned mines in the immediate area (Cardiff, Coalburg, Brazil and Brookside). Because the capacity of Brookside&#x27;s processing equipment exceeded the mine output, some of the slack from the Brazil mine was brought to Brookside for washing and coking.

Brookside was incorporated in 1898. The descriptive name Brookside stems from the Five-Mile creek that flows through the town.

Sloss, like other employers in the booming industrial expansion of the early 20th century, had difficulty recruiting skilled labor. Recruitment efforts extended internationally and Brookside became the home of many Czechoslovakian immigrants and their families who made their way to the mines. As Brookside became a destination for Eastern European miners in the area, the culture of the town reflected their ethnic traditions. A Russian Orthodox church was founded and served to strengthen community ties. This church was one of the first Russian Orthodox churches built south of the Mason-Dixon. Unlike other mines where skilled whites and unskilled blacks could be played against each other by the owners, the Brookside miners were tightly organized and carried out a successful (albeit violent) strike in 1906.

Between 1910 and 1920, mining operations jumped around to several seams and the number of miners fluctuated between a low of 54 in 1910 and a high of over 600 in 1914. In 1913 the mechanical coal cutters used previously were supplanted by hand picks. A new church building for St. Nicholas was completed in 1916. The 1920 Alabama coal strike, combined with a global depreciation in the coal market, led to a shutdown of the mine. When the strike was settled in 1921, Brookside mine was never re-opened.

In 1924, Brookside served as one of the settings for the Famous Players–Lasky&#x27;s 1925 feature film &quot;Coming Through&quot;, which was based on Jack Bethea&#x27;s novel &quot;Bed Rock&quot;. Silent film stars Thomas Meighan, Lila Lee and Wallace Beery stayed with local families during production. (Jones-2007)

Sloss removed all of the surface works and held on to the mine property. In 1952 Sloss merged with the U.S. Pipe and Foundry Company, a subsidiary of Jim Walter Industries since 1969.

===Saint Nicholas Russian Orthodox Church===
Brookside remains a small town with a distinct Eastern European flavor. Founded in 1894, its onion dome church was re-faced with brick in 1965 and still holds services for approximately 70 congregants. The “Annual Russian/Slavic Food Festival,” observed the first full weekend of each November, brings visitors to tour the temple, see traditional Eastern European dances, and sample time-honored ethnic plate lunches and baked goods prepared by the Sisterhood of Saint Olga.

==Geography==
Brookside is located at (33.631867, -86.913068). It lies along the banks of Five Mile Creek, a tributary of the Locust Fork of the Black Warrior River, in the southern end of the Cumberland Plateau.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , of which are land and 0.17% is water.

==Government==
===Police===
In 2022, an investigative report by John Archibald of AL.com (the website of &quot;The Birmingham News&quot;, &quot;The Huntsville Times&quot;, and the &quot;Press-Register&quot; of Mobile) uncovered a surge in Brookside Police&#x27;s aggressive and arbitrary ticketing of motorists passing through the city. Brookside had an unusually high ratio of police officers to residents (nine officers in a 1,253-person town, or one officer for every 144 residents), having grown from just one officer in 2018. In 2020 its officers, who drove unmarked cars and wore uniforms without Brookside insignia, made more arrests for misdemeanors than it has residents. The town went from towing 50 vehicles in 2018 to 789 in 2020. These tickets cost motorists thousands of dollars and have become the city&#x27;s largest source of revenue. In 2021, more than half of Brookside&#x27;s revenues stemmed from fines and forfeitures. The town and police department are now defending several lawsuits which have accused Brookside police of fabricating charges and making up laws in order to produce more ticket revenue. One federal lawsuit alleges malicious prosecution of a pastor and his sister, who were charged with impersonating police officers, in retaliation for their having filed a complaint that a Brookside officer allegedly stopped the pastor and used a racist slur against him. The police have written over 400 fines in two years for driving in the left lane despite its not being illegal.

On January 25, 2022, Brookside Police Chief Mike Jones resigned &quot;in the wake of revelations&quot; over the reported policing policy. Elected representatives and officials on both sides of the Alabama Legislature committed to challenging &quot;aggressive policing and churning of often-minor traffic stops&quot; by Brookside Police Department, including Republican Lt. Gov. Will Ainsworth and Democratic Party chair Chris England. A &quot;Newsweek&quot; article reiterated the accusations and reported that Brookside mayor Mike Bryan called the town&#x27;s policing &quot;a positive story,&quot; saying of the reports that &quot;Everybody&#x27;s got a story&quot; and &quot;99% of them are lying.&quot; Mark Levie Pettway, sheriff for the overarching Jefferson County, stated that &quot;I wouldn’t be surprised if they (FBI) opened up an investigation. You can’t do what’s going on over there.&quot;

One person claimed that an officer wore &quot;a Norse sign sometimes appropriated by white supremacists – on a ring and one of his gun clips.&quot; AL.com later reported that at least seven officers had left the department, and that the remainder had adopted new uniforms and vehicles to present a less-paramilitary appearance.

The Jefferson County district attorney and criminal courts have thrown out cases originating in Brookside, including traffic offenses and drug felonies, citing Brookside police officers&#x27; lack of credibility as witnesses.

The &quot;reports of abuses&quot; by the Brookside Police department caught the attention of the Alabama Senate, which unanimously passed a bill limiting the amount of money cities can keep from fines.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,253 people, 475 households, and 329 families residing in the town.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census, there were 1,363 people, 521 households, and 381 families living in the town. The population density was . There were 577 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 79.5% White, 18.5% Black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 0.2% from other races, and 1.4% from two or more races. 0.7% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 521 households, 30.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.7% were married couples living together, 21.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.9% were non-families. 23.2% of households were one person and 7.7% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.62 and the average family size was 3.07.

The age distribution was 25.5% under the age of 18, 8.6% from 18 to 24, 24.5% from 25 to 44, 29.9% from 45 to 64, and 11.4% 65 or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.3 males.

The median household income was $41,848 and the median family income was $55,833. Males had a median income of $50,473 versus $31,208 for females. The per capita income for the town was $21,486. About 13.1% of the families and 14.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.3% of those under age 18 and 21.1% of those aged 65 or over.

===2000 census===
At the 2000 census, there were 1,393 people, 546 households, and 393 families living in the town. The population density was . There were 613 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 90.52% White, 8.69% Black or African American, 0.36% Native American, 0.14% from other races, and 0.29% from two or more races. 0.93% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 546 households 31.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.6% were married couples living together, 15.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.0% were non-families. 26.2% of households were one person and 10.8% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.55 and the average family size was 3.08.

The age distribution was 24.8% under the age of 18, 9.4% from 18 to 24, 28.6% from 25 to 44, 24.3% from 45 to 64, and 12.8% 65 or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.8 males.

The median household income was $29,792 and the median family income was $34,821. Males had a median income of $30,900 versus $21,563 for females. The per capita income for the town was $14,242. About 14.7% of families and 18.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 30.6% of those under age 18 and 16.7% of those age 65 or over.

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*

==External links==
* (has not been updated for several years)
*&quot;What happens when cops start policing for profit&quot; - CNN
*Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS) documentation:
**
*Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) documentation:
**
**
**</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q66072" start="0" end="9" title="Brookside, Alabama" label="Brookside"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="37" end="62" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="89" end="100" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7541393" start="297" end="325" title="Sloss Furnaces" label="Sloss Iron and Steel Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="356" end="369" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="374" end="384" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="456" end="460" title="coke (fuel)" label="coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879811" start="472" end="484" title="beehive oven" label="beehive oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916685" start="794" end="813" title="Birmingham District" label="Birmingham District"/>
<link wikidata="Q67605" start="930" end="937" title="Cardiff, Alabama" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510156" start="939" end="947" title="Coalburg, Alabama" label="Coalburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="1492" end="1506" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="1707" end="1723" title="Russian Orthodox" label="Russian Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="2076" end="2082" title="labor strike" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198963" start="2410" end="2434" title="1920 Alabama coal strike" label="1920 Alabama coal strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739165" start="2654" end="2674" title="Famous Players–Lasky" label="Famous Players–Lasky"/>
<link wikidata="Q378565" start="2682" end="2686" title="1925 in film" label="1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151950" start="2706" end="2720" title="Coming Through (1925 film)" label="Coming Through"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482786" start="2812" end="2826" title="Thomas Meighan" label="Thomas Meighan"/>
<link wikidata="Q434413" start="2828" end="2836" title="Lila Lee" label="Lila Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q322179" start="2841" end="2854" title="Wallace Beery" label="Wallace Beery"/>
<link wikidata="Q244621" start="3238" end="3248" title="onion dome" label="onion dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="3492" end="3508" title="Eastern European" label="Eastern European"/>
<link wikidata="Q193198" start="3608" end="3618" title="Saint Olga" label="Saint Olga"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3852" end="3870" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q55283669" start="4006" end="4020" title="John Archibald (writer)" label="John Archibald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718111" start="4053" end="4072" title="The Birmingham News" label="The Birmingham News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741121" start="4086" end="4106" title="The Huntsville Times" label="The Huntsville Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241596" start="4128" end="4142" title="Press-Register" label="Press-Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="4152" end="4158" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q54861624" start="5830" end="5844" title="Will Ainsworth" label="Will Ainsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q20676560" start="5872" end="5885" title="Christopher J. England" label="Chris England"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="6207" end="6223" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="6276" end="6279" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="7162" end="7187" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="7295" end="7306" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7475" end="7488" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8594" end="8606" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="8708" end="8719" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8888" end="8901" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="10008" end="10020" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q913956" start="10267" end="10301" title="Historic American Buildings Survey" label="Historic American Buildings Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q913956" start="10328" end="10364" title="Historic American Engineering Record" label="Historic American Engineering Record"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104768" wikidata="Q966493" url="?curid=104768" title="Cahaba Heights, Vestavia Hills">
<text>Cahaba Heights is a neighborhood of Vestavia Hills, a city in Jefferson County, Alabama, United States. Before annexation in 2002, it was a census-designated place (CDP) in 1990 and 2000; the population was 5,203 at the 2000 census.

==Geography==
Cahaba Heights is located at (33.459256, -86.732086).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the CDP had a total area of , all of it land.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 5,203 people, 2,603 households, and 1,272 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 2,730 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 95.94% White, 1.17% Black or African American, 0.21% Native American, 1.44% Asian, 0.37% from other races, and 0.86% from two or more races. 0.75% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 2,603 households, out of which 19.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 38.1% were married couples living together, 8.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 51.1% were non-families. 41.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 8.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 1.99 and the average family size was 2.75.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 17.4% under the age of 18, 10.1% from 18 to 24, 38.4% from 25 to 44, 20.4% from 45 to 64, and 13.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 86.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.4 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $48,250, and the median income for a family was $61,759. Males had a median income of $41,569 versus $32,674 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $29,895. About 1.9% of families and 4.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 2.9% of those under age 18 and 0.9% of those age 65 or over.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q966493" start="0" end="14" title="Cahaba Heights, Vestavia Hills" label="Cahaba Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q123705" start="20" end="32" title="neighborhood" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q79695" start="36" end="50" title="Vestavia Hills, Alabama" label="Vestavia Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="62" end="78" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="80" end="87" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6936298" start="111" end="121" title="Municipal annexation in the United States" label="annexation"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="140" end="163" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="220" end="231" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="320" end="338" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="415" end="421" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="641" end="646" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="654" end="659" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="663" end="679" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="687" end="702" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="710" end="715" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="728" end="739" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="804" end="812" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="816" end="822" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="947" end="962" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1756" end="1773" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1864" end="1876" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104769" wikidata="Q67605" url="?curid=104769" title="Cardiff, Alabama">
<text>Cardiff is a town in Jefferson County, Alabama, United States west of Gardendale. At the 2010 census the population was 55, placing it as the least-populated incorporated area in Jefferson County. It is named after the capital of Wales. It is one of four Jefferson County cities named after cities in Great Britain, the others being Birmingham, Leeds and Brighton.

==Geography==
Cardiff is located at (33.645384, −86.932965). on Five Mile Creek, a tributary of the Locust Fork of the Black Warrior River. It is immediately downstream of Brookside. The region is part of the Cumberland Plateau, with shallow but deeply incised stream valleys dissecting sedimentary rock, including significant seams of bituminous coal.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 82 people, 33 households, and 26 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 38 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 93.90% White and 6.10% Black or African American.

There were 33 households, out of which 27.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.6% were married couples living together, 12.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 21.2% were non-families. 18.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.48 and the average family size was 2.85.

In the town, the population was spread out, with 22.0% under the age of 18, 8.5% from 18 to 24, 32.9% from 25 to 44, 18.3% from 45 to 64, and 18.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100 females, there were 86.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.2 males.

The median income for a household in the town was $34,107, and the median income for a family was $45,000. Males had a median income of $28,906 versus $18,125 for females. The per capita income for the town was $16,067. There were 5.6% of families and 8.1% of the population living below the poverty line, including no under eighteens and none of those over 64.

==History==
Coal mining was the historical basis of the economy. The town, for years the smallest incorporated town in the State of Alabama, declined along with the decline of underground coal mining and the rise of strip mining. The epochal flood of May 2003 destroyed a number of buildings in that part of Cardiff close to Five Mile Creek. The town is now but a dent in the land; scarce of life with a scant 20–30 people and covered with kudzu. Cardiff is becoming a ghost town.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67605" start="0" end="7" title="Cardiff, Alabama" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="21" end="37" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="39" end="46" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="48" end="61" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q79679" start="70" end="80" title="Gardendale, Alabama" label="Gardendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="89" end="100" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="219" end="235" title="Cardiff" label="capital of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q727892" start="485" end="504" title="Black Warrior River" label="Black Warrior River"/>
<link wikidata="Q66072" start="538" end="547" title="Brookside, Alabama" label="Brookside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143656" start="575" end="593" title="Cumberland Plateau" label="Cumberland Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q732607" start="702" end="717" title="bituminous coal" label="bituminous coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="737" end="755" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="826" end="832" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1042" end="1047" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1058" end="1063" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1067" end="1083" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1193" end="1208" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2005" end="2022" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2121" end="2133" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="2204" end="2215" title="Coal mining" label="Coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q756944" start="2408" end="2420" title="surface mining" label="strip mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q15525444" start="2632" end="2637" title="kudzu" label="kudzu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104771" wikidata="Q80092" url="?curid=104771" title="Center Point, Alabama">
<text>Center Point is a city and a former census-designated place (CDP) in northeastern Jefferson County, Alabama, United States. It is part of the Birmingham metropolitan area. At the 2020 census, the population was 16,406. However, after its incorporation in 2002, the city&#x27;s boundaries are much smaller than those of the CDP. As of the 2010 census, the population of the incorporated city was 16,921. The public high school for Center Point is Center Point High School grades 9th-12th. The public middle school for Center Point is Erwin Middle School grades 6th-8th. Center Point has 2 public elementary schools, Erwin Intermediate School grades 3rd-5th and Center Point Elementary School grades K-2nd. Center Point current mayor is Bobby Scott, who was elected October 6, 2020.

==History==
The city of Center Point originally started as a small farm community, founded by the Reed family of North Carolina, which was around the same time other families were coming in to settle the towns of Trussville, Springville, Clay, and Pinson. By 1924, the Rock School was built, which now stands as the Center Point City Hall, as well as several business such as a post office and blacksmith shop. Center Point remained an unincorporated and small community from the 1920s through the 1950s, but in 1947 a viable water supply was discovered enabling Center Point to become self-sufficient and set up for further development. During the 1950s, there was steady growth in the area as more people continued to move eastward from the center of Birmingham, seeing the nearby neighborhoods East Lake, Huffman, and Roebuck swell with new houses and people. However, by the 1960s, Center Point began to rapidly develop, with over 80% of all homes in city limits built within a ten year span from 1960-1970. The rapid growth soon overcrowded Hewitt-Trussville High School in nearby Trussville past capacity limit, which had been the high school serving Center Point for decades. Jefferson County Schools soon elected to introduce a new high school, E.B. Erwin High School in 1965. By 1967, Center Point was recognized as the largest census-designated place (CDP) in the United States with over 67,000 people. From the 1970s through mid-1990s, Center Point was a thriving suburb of Birmingham and was one of the largest surrounding communities. By the late 1990s however, urban blight, financial decay, and violence had already plagued Birmingham&#x27;s eastern neighborhoods such as Woodlawn and East Lake, which soon began to spill into still unincorporated Center Point. The decay was accelerated by the clearing/demolition of East Lake housing bordering Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International Airport, which the city of Birmingham was attempting to expand, as well as the rapid annexation attempts made by the city around Center Point and other areas in the 1980s-1990s. The city paid the East Lake homeowners relocation money as reimbursement for the house and property. The decay brought about a severe socioeconomic shift, which saw the complete demographic flip of the area addition to financial and retail losses to newly growing suburbs around Birmingham. The city incorporated in 2002 in a rush for control over their own fate and to deter any further control measures/annexation by the city of Birmingham. Eventually, this decay led to the area&#x27;s school quality decline and began to display the rarely-observed “suburban blight”. By 2020 according to the U.S. Census, the city had reached a point where over 1/3 of the city was below the poverty level, in addition to high crime rates, murder rates, and falling population.

On January 23, 2012, an intense EF3 tornado struck the city, which destroyed the Center Point Elementary School buildings as well as dozens of structures throughout the city.

==Geography==
It is located at .

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the CDP had a total area of , of which was land and (0.25%) was water.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 16,406 people, 6,029 households, and 4,018 families residing in the city.

===2010 census===
According to the 2010 census, there were 16,921 people living in the City of Center Point. The racial / ethnic makeup of Center Point was 32.6% White, 62.9% Black or African-American, 0.4% Asian, 0.2% Native American or Alaska Native, 0.02% Native Hawaiian, 2.8% other races, and 1.1% were two or more races. Hispanics of any race were 4.8% of the population.

===2000 census===
At the 2000 census, there were 22,784 people, 8,826 households, and 6,434 families in the CDP. The population density was . There were 9,292 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 72.90% White, 24.23% Black or African American, 0.28% Native American, 0.55% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 1.02% from other races, and 0.98% from two or more races. 2.23% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 8,826 households 35.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.7% were married couples living together, 15.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.1% were non-families. 23.7% of households were one person and 8.6% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.56 and the average family size was 3.02.

The age distribution was 26.6% under the age of 18, 8.8% from 18 to 24, 30.2% from 25 to 44, 21.3% from 45 to 64, and 13.1% 65 or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 89.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.8 males.

The median household income was $40,929 and the median family income was $46,427. Males had a median income of $35,500 versus $25,544 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $18,160. About 7.7% of families and 9.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.2% of those under age 18 and 9.6% of those age 65 or over.

==Notable person==
* Dan Sartain, rock and roll musician

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80092" start="0" end="12" title="Center Point, Alabama" label="Center Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="82" end="98" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="100" end="107" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="109" end="122" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550945" start="142" end="170" title="Birmingham, Alabama, metropolitan area" label="Birmingham metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="179" end="190" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="238" end="251" title="incorporation (municipal government)" label="incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="338" end="349" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059333" start="446" end="470" title="Center Point High School" label="Center Point High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q79691" start="995" end="1005" title="Trussville, Alabama" label="Trussville"/>
<link wikidata="Q80023" start="1007" end="1018" title="Springville, Alabama" label="Springville"/>
<link wikidata="Q79472" start="1020" end="1024" title="Clay, Alabama" label="Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q79303" start="1030" end="1036" title="Pinson, Alabama" label="Pinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748478" start="1828" end="1857" title="Hewitt-Trussville High School" label="Hewitt-Trussville High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175447" start="1965" end="1989" title="Jefferson County Schools (Alabama)" label="Jefferson County Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321574" start="2035" end="2057" title="E.B. Erwin High School" label="E.B. Erwin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="2267" end="2277" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032991" start="2469" end="2477" title="Woodlawn, Birmingham, Alabama" label="Woodlawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q865724" start="2643" end="2689" title="Birmingham–Shuttlesworth International Airport" label="Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q122395122" start="3651" end="3670" title="2012 Center Point–Clay tornado" label="intense EF3 tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3854" end="3872" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3992" end="4017" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="4140" end="4151" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="4509" end="4520" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4688" end="4701" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="5843" end="5855" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214341" start="5951" end="5962" title="Dan Sartain" label="Dan Sartain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="5964" end="5977" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104772" wikidata="Q1290735" url="?curid=104772" title="Chalkville, Alabama">
<text>Chalkville is a former census-designated place in Jefferson County, Alabama, United States. At the 2000 census the population was 3,829. The area is now part of the city of Clay.

==Geography==
Chalkville is located at (33.667902, -86.649643).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the community has a total area of , of which is land and (1.03%) is water.

==Demographics==
As of the census of 2000, there were 3,829 people, 1,275 households, and 1,105 families residing in the community. The population density was . There were 1,313 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the community was 96.32% White, 2.32% Black or African American, 0.24% Native American, 0.47% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 0.08% from other races, and 0.52% from two or more races. 0.57% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 1,275 households, out of which 49.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 74.1% were married couples living together, 9.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 13.3% were non-families. 10.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 2.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.97 and the average family size was 3.21.

In the community, the population was spread out, with 29.8% under the age of 18, 7.7% from 18 to 24, 32.9% from 25 to 44, 22.4% from 45 to 64, and 7.2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.9 males.

The median income for a household in the community was $55,114, and the median income for a family was $56,518. Males had a median income of $34,977 versus $29,266 for females. The per capita income for the community was $19,929. About 2.8% of families and 2.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under age 18 and 12.9% of those age 65 or over.

==Government and infrastructure==
The Alabama Department of Youth Services formerly maintained the Chalkville Campus. It ended operations after a tornado in January 2012.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1290735" start="0" end="10" title="Chalkville, Alabama" label="Chalkville"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="23" end="46" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="50" end="66" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="68" end="75" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79472" start="173" end="177" title="Clay, Alabama" label="Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="262" end="280" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="385" end="391" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="623" end="628" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="636" end="641" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="645" end="661" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="669" end="684" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="692" end="697" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="705" end="721" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="734" end="745" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="810" end="818" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="822" end="828" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="953" end="968" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1772" end="1789" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1886" end="1898" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705250" start="2011" end="2047" title="Alabama Department of Youth Services" label="Alabama Department of Youth Services"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104773" wikidata="Q79472" url="?curid=104773" title="Clay, Alabama">
<text>Clay is a city in northeastern Jefferson County, Alabama, United States. It is part of the Birmingham–Hoover–Cullman Combined Statistical Area in the north-central part of the state. Local government is run by a mayor and city council.

Before incorporation on June 6, 2000, it was a census-designated place (CDP). The population nearly doubled in the next decade, reaching 9,708 at the 2010 census, as it has attracted commuters to jobs in the urban areas.

The oldest church in Jefferson County, Mount Calvary Presbyterian Church, is located in Clay. The congregation has been meeting continually since 1806, when it was established by early Scots-American settlers.

On January 23, 2012, a total of 231 homes and businesses were either damaged or destroyed when an EF3 tornado passed through several subdivisions. Damage was heavy in downtown Center Point. Some of the homes were flattened. Trees were snapped and uprooted along the path and the Center Point Elementary School was damaged. A sixteen-year-old student from Jefferson County International Baccalaureate School died before reaching cover during the tornado.

==Geography==

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the CDP had a total area of , of which was land and (0.29%) was water.

==Media==
The local newspaper is &quot;The Trussville Tribune&quot;. &quot;The Tribune&quot;, which covers government, sports, crime, and community events in Trussville, Clay and Pinson, is published each Wednesday. It provides current news online.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 10,291 people, 3,555 households, and 2,674 families residing in the city.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census, there were 9,708 people, 3,574 households, and 2,780 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 3,799 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 84.1% White, 13.3% Black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 0.6% Asian, 0.6% from other races, and 1.1% from two or more races. 1.3% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 3,574 households 32.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 64.3% were married couples living together, 9.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 22.2% were non-families. 20.0% of households were one person and 9.2% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.72 and the average family size was 3.13.

The age distribution was 23.9% under the age of 18, 8.8% from 18 to 24, 24.2% from 25 to 44, 31.9% from 45 to 64, and 11.1% 65 or older. The median age was 40.1 years. For every 100 females, there were 94.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.5 males.

The median household income was $70,273 and the median family income was $82,911. Males had a median income of $52,800 versus $42,813 for females. The per capita income for the city was $28,000. About 1.7% of families and 3.6% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.7% of those under age 18 and 8.7% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
At the 2000 census, there were 4,947 people, 1,636 households, and 1,421 families living in the CDP. The population density was . There were 1,683 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 97.96% White, 0.71% Black or African American, 0.30% Native American, 0.40% Asian, 0.12% from other races, and 0.51% from two or more races. 0.40% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 1,636 households 49.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 76.4% were married couples living together, 8.3% had a female householder with no husband present, and 13.1% were non-families. 11.2% of households were one person and 3.9% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 3.02 and the average family size was 3.26.

The age distribution was 30.7% under the age of 18, 7.4% from 18 to 24, 33.6% from 25 to 44, 22.4% from 45 to 64, and 5.9% 65 or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.9 males.

The median household income was $61,042 and the median family income was $64,798. Males had a median income of $40,092 versus $28,787 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $21,323. About 3.9% of families and 4.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.3% of those under age 18 and 11.7% of those age 65 or over.

==Notable people==
* Nico Collins, NFL player
* Clayne Crawford, actor
* Courtney Porter, Miss Alabama 2011
* YBN Nahmir, rapper

==References==
==External links==

*&quot;Clay News&quot; - Local newspaper 
*City official site
*Clay Chamber of Commerce </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79472" start="0" end="4" title="Clay, Alabama" label="Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="31" end="47" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="49" end="56" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550945" start="91" end="142" title="Birmingham–Hoover–Cullman Combined Statistical Area" label="Birmingham–Hoover–Cullman Combined Statistical Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="244" end="257" title="incorporation (municipal government)" label="incorporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="284" end="307" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="387" end="398" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q429050" start="768" end="771" title="EF3" label="EF3"/>
<link wikidata="Q80092" start="846" end="858" title="Center Point, Alabama" label="Center Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175432" start="1025" end="1076" title="Jefferson County International Baccalaureate School" label="Jefferson County International Baccalaureate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1157" end="1175" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1545" end="1570" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="1683" end="1694" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1869" end="1882" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2996" end="3008" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3107" end="3118" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3292" end="3305" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4420" end="4432" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q80982985" start="4528" end="4540" title="Nico Collins" label="Nico Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="4542" end="4545" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978725" start="4555" end="4570" title="Clayne Crawford" label="Clayne Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875975" start="4580" end="4595" title="Courtney Porter" label="Courtney Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875975" start="4597" end="4609" title="Miss Alabama" label="Miss Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q45121636" start="4617" end="4627" title="YBN Nahmir" label="YBN Nahmir"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104775" wikidata="Q1018615" url="?curid=104775" title="Concord, Alabama">
<text>Concord is a census-designated place in Jefferson County, Alabama, United States. At the 2010 census the population was 1,837, up from 1,809 in 2000. It is northwest from the Birmingham suburb of Hueytown.
==Geography==
Concord is located at (33.469092, -87.038163).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which is land and (0.59%) is water.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===
As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,690 people, 631 households, and 501 families residing in the CDP.

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 1,837 people, 817 households, and 573 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 791 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 98.34% White, 0.28% Black or African American, 0.55% Native American, 0.22% Asian, 0.28% from other races, and 0.33% from two or more races. 0.28% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 754 households, out of which 27.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 66.5% were married couples living together, 7.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.0% were non-families. 22.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size was 2.81.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 19.8% under the age of 18, 7.5% from 18 to 24, 27.4% from 25 to 44, 27.2% from 45 to 64, and 18.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 91.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.3 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $63,150, and the median income for a family was $55,129. Males had a median income of $35,825 versus $26,406 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $24,490. About 1.5% of families and 2.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including none of those under age 18 and 8.0% of those age 65 or over.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1018615" start="0" end="7" title="Concord, Alabama" label="Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="40" end="65" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="175" end="185" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q79257" start="196" end="204" title="Hueytown, Alabama" label="Hueytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="285" end="303" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="420" end="445" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="555" end="561" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="775" end="780" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="788" end="793" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="797" end="813" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="821" end="836" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="844" end="849" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="862" end="873" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="938" end="946" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="950" end="956" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1079" end="1094" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1888" end="1905" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1996" end="2008" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104776" wikidata="Q1018651" url="?curid=104776" title="Edgewater, Alabama">
<text>Edgewater is a census-designated place in Jefferson County, Alabama, United States. It is northeast from the Birmingham suburb of Pleasant Grove. Its population was 883 at the 2010 census. This area was damaged by tornadoes on April 15, 1956 and April 8, 1998. The 1998 tornado was rated F5 on the Fujita scale.

==History==
Edgewater was originally built as a company town by Tennessee Coal, Iron and Railroad Company.

==Geography==
Edgewater is located at (33.523106, -86.956525).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of , of which is land and (1.67%) is water.

==Demographics==
Edgewater was initially listed on the 1950 U.S. Census as an unincorporated community. It did not appear again until 2000 when it was designated a CDP (Census Designated Place).

===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 746 people, 253 households, and 214 families residing in the CDP.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 730 people, 295 households, and 192 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 323 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the CDP was 37.95% White, 61.10% Black or African American, 0.14% from other races, and 0.82% from two or more races. 1.10% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 295 households, out of which 25.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 34.6% were married couples living together, 24.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.6% were non-families. 31.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 3.12.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 22.5% under the age of 18, 7.4% from 18 to 24, 25.2% from 25 to 44, 27.8% from 45 to 64, and 17.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 97.3 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.6 males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $21,322, and the median income for a family was $47,240. Males had a median income of $26,786 versus $20,962 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $14,240. About 2.5% of families and 10.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 9.3% of those under age 18 and 14.4% of those age 65 or over.

==Notable people==
* Sam Frazier Jr., blues singer, songwriter, guitar and harmonica player
* Mule Suttles, Negro league baseball player and member of the Baseball Hall of Fame

==References==
==External links==

*History of Edgewater, Alabama</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1018651" start="0" end="9" title="Edgewater, Alabama" label="Edgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="42" end="67" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="109" end="119" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q79542" start="130" end="144" title="Pleasant Grove, Alabama" label="Pleasant Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="176" end="187" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781873" start="227" end="241" title="April 1956 Birmingham tornado" label="April 15, 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781900" start="265" end="277" title="April 6–9, 1998 tornado outbreak" label="1998 tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q380770" start="298" end="310" title="Fujita scale" label="Fujita scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q627236" start="361" end="373" title="company town" label="company town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700040" start="377" end="418" title="Tennessee Coal, Iron and Railroad Company" label="Tennessee Coal, Iron and Railroad Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="502" end="520" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="817" end="842" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="950" end="956" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1168" end="1173" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1182" end="1187" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1191" end="1207" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1220" end="1231" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1296" end="1304" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1308" end="1314" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1437" end="1452" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2247" end="2264" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2356" end="2368" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407489" start="2464" end="2479" title="Sam Frazier Jr." label="Sam Frazier Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="2481" end="2486" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933897" start="2537" end="2549" title="Mule Suttles" label="Mule Suttles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="2551" end="2572" title="Negro league baseball" label="Negro league baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="2598" end="2619" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104777" wikidata="Q79722" url="?curid=104777" title="Fairfield, Alabama">
<text>Fairfield is a city in western Jefferson County, Alabama, United States. It is part of the Birmingham metropolitan area and is located southeast of Pleasant Grove. The population was 10,000 at the 2020 census.

==History==
This city was founded in 1910 in which the featured speaker at the dedication ceremony was former President Theodore Roosevelt. It was originally named Corey, after an executive of U.S. Steel Corporation. The name was later changed to the city in which the President of U.S. Steel lived, Fairfield, Connecticut. It was planned as a model city by the Tennessee Coal, Iron and Railroad Company to house workers in their new Fairfield Works plant, now owned by U.S. Steel, similar to its northeastern city of Ensley.

It was incorporated on January 1, 1919.

In May 2020, the city entered bankruptcy. Jefferson County had declared bankruptcy in 2011.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 10,000 people, 4,441 households, and 2,532 families residing in the city.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census, there were 11,117 people, 4,229 households, and 2,738 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 4,935 housing units at an average density of 1,410 per square mile (536.4/,/km). The racial makeup of the city was 94.6% Black or African American, 4.2% White, 0.0% Native American, 0.0% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 0.7% from other races, and 0.4% from two or more races. 1.1% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 4,229 households 24.9% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 28.3% were married couples living together, 31.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.3% were non-families. 32.7% of households were one person and 12.4% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.45 and the average family size was 3.10.

The age distribution was 23.0% under the age of 18, 14.3% from 18 to 24, 20.7% from 25 to 44, 28.9% from 45 to 64, and 13.0% 65 or older. The median age was 36.8 years. For every 100 females, there were 79.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 81.1 males.

The median household income was $34,242 and the median family income was $41,841. Males had a median income of $34,854 versus $29,788 for females. The per capita income for the city was $18,221. About 22.2% of families and 24.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 40.5% of those under age 18 and 21.7% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
At the 2000 census, there were 12,381 people, 4,600 households, and 3,141 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 4,960 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 8.90% White, 90.23% Black or African American, 0.06% Native American, 0.15% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.17% from other races, and 0.48% from two or more races. 0.59% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 4,600 households 34.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 35.6% were married couples living together, 28.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 31.7% were non-families. 29.2% of households were one person and 12.0% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.55 and the average family size was 3.17.

The age distribution was 26.7% under the age of 18, 11.9% from 18 to 24, 25.2% from 25 to 44, 22.3% from 45 to 64, and 13.8% 65 or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 79.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 73.4 males.

The median household income was $27,845 and the median family income was $38,552. Males had a median income of $30,833 versus $25,143 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,607. About 16.5% of families and 21.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 27.7% of those under age 18 and 25.3% of those age 65 or over.

==Education==
Fairfield has its own school system, independent from Jefferson County. The system includes three elementary schools, Forest Hills Middle School, Fairfield High Preparatory School (formerly Fairfield High School), and an alternative all-grades school.

The city is also home to Miles College, a historically black college operated by the CME Church. The school was founded in 1898.

==Industry and business==
Though the United States&#x27; steel-making industry has gone through a decline through the last half of the 20th century, U.S. Steel&#x27;s Fairfield Works continues to be a major employer, though not in the levels seen around the 1950s. Advances in steel-making technology have enabled the works to produce roughly the same amount of product as during that era, but with a much smaller workforce.

Portions of the works have been closed over the years, but many parts of the complex have been reopened by smaller industries, some of which are steel-related.

Fairfield is traversed by I-20/I-59. Three railroads serve the area: CSX Transportation (former Louisville and Nashville Railroad), Norfolk Southern Railway (former Southern Railway), and short-line Birmingham Southern Railroad, which is headquartered in Fairfield.

The city&#x27;s downtown area features a number of small businesses, primarily service-related. Other retail businesses are concentrated along Aronov Drive, northwest of Western Hills Mall, though those strip malls have declined due to closures of Kmart, Winn-Dixie, and Sears locations. Walmart shut its doors in early 2016. All public bus transportation was terminated in July 2016 for failure to pay the bill. The water board has threatened to cut off all water to public buildings because of non payment. On May 20, 2020, the city of Fairfield filed for bankruptcy.

===Western Hills Mall===

Western Hills Mall is the city&#x27;s major shopping mall.

==Notable people==
* U. W. Clemon Federal judge who was born in Fairfield.
* Red Cochran and Jim Tolbert former NFL players were born in Fairfield.
* Oliver W. Dillard, Major General US Army Retired, graduated from the Fairfield Industrial High School
* Cleveland Eaton Jazz musician with the Count Basie Orchestra was born in Fairfield.
* Dennis Edwards, Singer with The Temptations, was born in Fairfield.
* Walter Gilbert, member of the College Football Hall of Fame.
* Tim Johnson, former professional football linebacker.
* Doug Jones, lawyer, United States Attorney and Senator. Born in Fairfield.
* Larry Langford former Fairfield Mayor, Jefferson County Commission President, and mayor of Birmingham]] resided in Fairfield.
* George Lindsey Actor in &quot;The Andy Griffith Show&quot;) was born in Fairfield.
* James MacKay Georgia and congressman was born in Fairfield.
* Spider Martin Photographer was born in Fairfield.
* Willie Mays attended school in Fairfield played baseball, football, and basketball.
*Demetrius Newton, civil rights lawyer and member of the Alabama House of Representatives.
* Allene Roberts Actress &quot;The Red House&quot;) was born in Fairfield.

==References==
==External links==
*Fairfield Main Street Inc</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79722" start="0" end="9" title="Fairfield, Alabama" label="Fairfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="31" end="47" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="49" end="56" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550945" start="91" end="119" title="Birmingham, Alabama, metropolitan area" label="Birmingham metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q79542" start="148" end="162" title="Pleasant Grove, Alabama" label="Pleasant Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="197" end="208" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="331" end="349" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q754635" start="511" end="533" title="Fairfield, Connecticut" label="Fairfield, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700040" start="573" end="614" title="Tennessee Coal, Iron and Railroad Company" label="Tennessee Coal, Iron and Railroad Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q72539" start="681" end="691" title="U.S. Steel" label="U.S. Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380028" start="729" end="735" title="Ensley (Birmingham)" label="Ensley"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="809" end="819" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="903" end="921" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1011" end="1036" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="1149" end="1160" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1370" end="1383" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2524" end="2536" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="2637" end="2648" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2824" end="2837" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3984" end="3996" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="4184" end="4201" title="elementary school" label="elementary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="4217" end="4230" title="Middle School" label="Middle School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430284" start="4232" end="4265" title="Fairfield High Preparatory School" label="Fairfield High Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272814" start="4364" end="4377" title="Miles College" label="Miles College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="4381" end="4407" title="historically black college" label="historically black college"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081108" start="4424" end="4434" title="CME Church" label="CME Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4506" end="4519" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q93686" start="5082" end="5086" title="Interstate 20" label="I-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q94378" start="5087" end="5091" title="I-59" label="I-59"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="5125" end="5143" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q918747" start="5152" end="5185" title="Louisville and Nashville Railroad" label="Louisville and Nashville Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="5188" end="5212" title="Norfolk Southern Railway" label="Norfolk Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q663120" start="5221" end="5237" title="Southern Railway (US)" label="Southern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916832" start="5255" end="5283" title="Birmingham Southern Railroad" label="Birmingham Southern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624088" start="5526" end="5536" title="strip mall" label="strip mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753080" start="5571" end="5576" title="Kmart (United States)" label="Kmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264366" start="5578" end="5588" title="Winn-Dixie (supermarket)" label="Winn-Dixie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="5594" end="5599" title="Sears" label="Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863550" start="6001" end="6013" title="U. W. Clemon" label="U. W. Clemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950276" start="6057" end="6068" title="Red Cochran" label="Red Cochran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198523" start="6073" end="6084" title="Jim Tolbert" label="Jim Tolbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="6092" end="6095" title="National Football League" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q15263943" start="6130" end="6147" title="Oliver W. Dillard" label="Oliver W. Dillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132128" start="6234" end="6249" title="Cleveland Eaton" label="Cleveland Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137041" start="6273" end="6294" title="Count Basie Orchestra" label="Count Basie Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189111" start="6320" end="6334" title="Dennis Edwards" label="Dennis Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q846373" start="6348" end="6363" title="The Temptations" label="The Temptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964955" start="6390" end="6404" title="Walter Gilbert (American football)" label="Walter Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q747833" start="6420" end="6449" title="College Football Hall of Fame" label="College Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803726" start="6453" end="6464" title="Tim Johnson (linebacker)" label="Tim Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q528145" start="6495" end="6505" title="linebacker" label="linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q30122825" start="6509" end="6519" title="Doug Jones (politician)" label="Doug Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153907" start="6586" end="6600" title="Larry Langford" label="Larry Langford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345198" start="6714" end="6728" title="George Lindsey" label="George Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q526035" start="6744" end="6766" title="The Andy Griffith Show" label="The Andy Griffith Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680753" start="6799" end="6811" title="James MacKay (Georgia politician)" label="James MacKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="6812" end="6819" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577037" start="6861" end="6874" title="Spider Martin" label="Spider Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q561852" start="6913" end="6924" title="Willie Mays" label="Willie Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="6961" end="6969" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="6971" end="6979" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="6985" end="6995" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993334" start="6998" end="7014" title="Demetrius Newton" label="Demetrius Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="7016" end="7028" title="civil rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q909041" start="7054" end="7086" title="Alabama House of Representatives" label="Alabama House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732010" start="7090" end="7104" title="Allene Roberts" label="Allene Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210438" start="7119" end="7132" title="The Red House (film)" label="The Red House"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104778" wikidata="Q1268815" url="?curid=104778" title="Forestdale, Alabama">
<text>Forestdale is an unincorporated community and census-designated place (CDP) in Jefferson County, Alabama, United States. It is north of the Birmingham city neighborhood of Ensley. At the 2020 census, the population was 10,409.

==Geography==
Forestdale is located at (33.574305, -86.902937).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the community has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

At the 2020 United States census, there were 10,409 people, 3,776 households and 2,484 families residing in the CDP.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census, there were 10,162 people, 3,963 households and 2,834 families living in the community. The population density was . There were 4,365 housing units at an average density of. The racial make-up of the community was 71.4% Black or African American, 26.2% White, 0.2% Native American, 0.2% Asian, 0.9% from other races and 1.0% from two or more races. 1.4% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 3,963 households, of which 27.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.5% were married couples living together, 20.8% had a female householder with no husband present and 28.5% were non-families. 25.2% of all households were made up of individuals and 9.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.56 and the average family size was 3.06.

23.2% of the population were under the age of 18, 7.9% from 18 to 24, 23.9% from 25 to 44, 30.2% from 45 to 64 and 14.7% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40.9 years. For every 100 females, there were 86.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.9 males.

The median household income was $52,605 and the median family income was $60,067. Males had a median income of $42,207 and females $36,417. The per capita income was $23,819. About 6.4% of families and 8.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12.6% of those under age 18 and 1.8% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
At the 2000 census, there were 10,509 people, 4,161 households and 3,099 families living in the community. The population density was . There were 4,357 housing units at an average density of . The racial make-up of the community was 52.87% White, 45.92% Black or African American, 0.16% Native American, 0.35% Asian, 0.17% from other races and 0.52% from two or more races. 0.46% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 4,161 households, of which 30.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 58.5% were married couples living together, 13.0% had a female householder with no husband present and 25.5% were non-families. 23.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 11.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.53 and the average family size was 2.97.

22.8% of the population were under the age of 18, 7.4% from 18 to 24, 26.1% from 25 to 44, 26.3% from 45 to 64 and 17.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41 years. For every 100 females, there were 88.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.7 males.

The median household income was $43,111 and the median family income was $51,188. Males had a median income of $36,048 and females $30,135. The per capita income was $19,954. About 4.4% of families and 6.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 5.4% of those under age 18 and 8.8% of those age 65 or over.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1268815" start="0" end="10" title="Forestdale, Alabama" label="Forestdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="17" end="41" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="46" end="69" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="79" end="104" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="140" end="150" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380028" start="172" end="178" title="Ensley (Birmingham)" label="Ensley"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="187" end="198" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="310" end="328" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="420" end="445" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="660" end="678" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="788" end="793" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="797" end="813" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="821" end="826" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="833" end="848" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="855" end="860" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="872" end="883" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="945" end="953" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="957" end="963" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1084" end="1099" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="1836" end="1853" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="1932" end="1944" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2049" end="2055" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="2148" end="2166" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2278" end="2283" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2292" end="2297" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2301" end="2317" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2325" end="2340" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2348" end="2353" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2366" end="2377" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2441" end="2449" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="2453" end="2459" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="2580" end="2595" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940707" start="3191" end="3214" title="median household income" label="median household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="3331" end="3348" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3427" end="3439" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104779" wikidata="Q79219" url="?curid=104779" title="Fultondale, Alabama">
<text>Fultondale is a city in Jefferson County, Alabama, United States and a northern suburb of Birmingham. As of the 2010 census, the population of the city is 8,380.

==History==
Fulton was a mining town in the 1900s. Fulton was incorporated in 1947. The town&#x27;s name is derived from the combination of the names of two nearby communities, Fulton Springs and Glendale.

This area was once known as Fulton Springs. Prior to the building of Interstate 65, US 31 was the main route for travelers northbound from Birmingham towards Nashville, Tennessee. As a result, hotels such as the Keystone Lodge and Buchmann Motor Inn prospered. On the city&#x27;s southern edge was located one of the few drive-in theatres in the Birmingham area (the &quot;Skyview&quot;). This was torn down when I-65 was built in the late 1960s and early 1970s. The Pine Bowl bowling alley is still a long time fixture in the city. Traces of the old routing of US 31 are still noticeable in the city. From just south of the city hall to an old bridge on this city&#x27;s northern side, most of this old routing is known as Stouts Road or in some cases simply &quot;old US 31.&quot;

Fultondale was a relatively stagnant community until the last decade. Growth has occurred in residential areas mainly west of Interstate 65, while retail development has focused along and near the I-65/Walkers Chapel Road exit.

In the early 2000s, the Chapel Hills subdivision was begun on the west side of I-65 off of Ellard Road. In the years following, other new subdivisions have been built off of US Highway 31 including Black Creek Station, Town Square, and Fulton Springs.

On January 25, 2021, an EF3 tornado impacted Fultondale causing significant structural damage to numerous homes, vehicles, and businesses with several being severely damaged or destroyed. One person was killed and 30 others were injured.

==Geography==

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land. Fultondale is located along one of the many ridgelines that comprise the southern end of the Appalachian Mountain chain. The area has been thoroughly mined for coal and other minerals in the past 100 years. The city is served by two major north–south highways, Interstate 65 and US Highway 31. The new Interstate 22 encroaches on the city&#x27;s western edge and on June 20, 2016, the interchange with I-65 just south of Fultondale opened. I-22 will provide direct interstate access to Memphis, Tennessee. Upon completion of Interstate 22, Fultondale will become the fourth Alabama city (after Birmingham, Montgomery, and Mobile) to be directly served by more than one two-digit interstate highway (I-65 &amp; I-22). The only east/west thoroughfare of note is Walkers Chapel Road (west of US 31) and New Castle Road (east of US 31). Rail lines run north–south along the city&#x27;s eastern edge from Boyles Yard in Tarrant to points north and east. Air travel is available from nearby Birmingham International Airport.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 9,876 people, 3,879 households, and 2,393 families residing in the city.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census, there were 8,380 people, 3,504 households, and 2,269 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 3,758 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 75.1% White, 16.6% Black or African American, 0.4% Native American, 1.0% Asian, 4.6% from other races, and 2.0% from two or more races. 10.8% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 3,504 households 28.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.9% were married couples living together, 14.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.2% were non-families. 29.9% of households were one person and 9.1% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.39 and the average family size was 2.95.

The age distribution was 23.1% under the age of 18, 8.8% from 18 to 24, 32.1% from 25 to 44, 23.3% from 45 to 64, and 12.7% 65 or older. The median age was 34.5 years. For every 100 females, there were 92.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.2 males.

The median household income was $44,880 and the median family income was $55,565. Males had a median income of $43,109 versus $35,051 for females. The per capita income for the city was $24,903. About 8.1% of families and 11.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 20.3% of those under age 18 and 9.1% of those age 65 or over.

==Government==
The current mayor is Larry Holcomb, who is in his first term. Members of the City Council are Billy Hughes, Josh Bryant, Timothy McWilliams, Kristi Jennings and Jimmie H. Lay.

In August 2016, then-Mayor Jim Lowery narrowly won the election against candidate Larry Holcomb a former Fultondale fireman, which began Jim Lowery&#x27;s sixth four-year term.

Four years later, on August 26, 2020, Larry Holcomb won the election for mayor with 983 votes to Jim Lowery&#x27;s 750 votes. Three other incumbents were unseated in this election. Kristi Jennings defeated incumbent Joe Bolton with 1,096 votes to Bolton&#x27;s 620 votes. Timothy McWilliams earned 986 votes in his victory against incumbent Tommy Loden, who earned 712 votes. Billy Hughes defeated incumbent Darrell Bates with 1,100 votes to Bates&#x27; 598 votes.

==Media==

Fultondale is located in the Birmingham TV and radio market. Newspapers include The Birmingham News (Sundays, Wednesdays, and Fridays) and The North Jefferson News (weekly).
On May 24, 2012, Advance Publications announced that its three Alabama newspapers (in Birmingham, Mobile and Huntsville) would do away with their print editions on Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. The move was a result of the continuing decline in advertising revenue and circulation for its traditional print products. The move places increased emphasis on their website, al.com, and reorganizes the Alabama properties into two companies: Alabama Media Group, the editorial side; and Advance Central Services Alabama, which will handle production, distribution and back-office services. The changes took effect on October 1, 2012, making Birmingham the second-largest city in the United States not to be served by a daily newspaper; New Orleans became the largest that same day.

==Education==
Fultondale is served by Jefferson County Schools. Fultondale High School is located on Carson Road on the northeast side of the city. Fultondale Elementary School serves grades PreK-6th grade and is located on the southern end of the city off of US Highway 31. In 2020, it was announced that Fultondale High School will get a new building and the Jefferson County International Baccalaureate School will move to the current high school location once renovations are completed. The school is nicknamed the Wildcats (and Junior Wildcats) and both schools&#x27; colors are orange and navy blue.

==Retail and commercial==

Due to difficult topography, for many years Fultondale was limited in its ability to grow. However, as technology improved, the ability to convert what had been difficult to unusable land for retail and commercial purposes improved. The Colonial Promenade Fultondale development was a project of Colonial Properties and the first portion opened in the fall of 2007. It is home to many large as well as small retailers, shops and restaurants. Besides the retail development of Colonial Promenade, other retail development nearby includes various chain restaurants and large retailers. Other older, more mature business establishments line US 31 in the center of the community including supermarkets, casual fast food, banks, a bowling alley and skating rink.

== Parks and recreation ==
Fultondale&#x27;s Black Creek Park is situated adjacent to Black Creek and includes batting cages, the Senior Center, walking trails, the Children&#x27;s Park, and the Fultondale Bark Park with separate play areas for small and large dogs. The dog park is home to the annual Barking at the Moon Festival. The nature trail along Black Creek is part of a rails-to-trails project of approximately three miles in length and crosses historic Stouts Road.

The city also maintains a park and sports complex across from Fultondale Elementary School that is home to the Fultondale Youth Football and Cheer Association games.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79219" start="0" end="10" title="Fultondale, Alabama" label="Fultondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="24" end="40" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="42" end="49" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="51" end="64" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="90" end="100" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="112" end="123" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1660" end="1671" title="Tornadoes of 2021#January 25–27" label="EF3 tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1907" end="1925" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="2454" end="2472" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="3034" end="3059" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="3171" end="3182" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3357" end="3370" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4487" end="4499" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718111" start="5501" end="5520" title="The Birmingham News" label="The Birmingham News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630625" start="5560" end="5584" title="The North Jefferson News" label="The North Jefferson News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175447" start="6425" end="6449" title="Jefferson County Schools (Alabama)" label="Jefferson County Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q131314693" start="6451" end="6473" title="Fultondale High School (2023–present)" label="Fultondale High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148361" start="7317" end="7336" title="Colonial Properties" label="Colonial Properties"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104780" wikidata="Q79679" url="?curid=104780" title="Gardendale, Alabama">
<text>Gardendale is a city in Jefferson County, Alabama, United States and a northern suburb of Birmingham. The population was 16,044 at the 2020 census.

==History==
A large farm settlement near the area today known as Gardendale was settled around 1825. Some years later, other settlers began to move into the community commonly known as Jugtown, a name given to the area based on the presence of a large jug and churn factory that operated in the area. Some years later, Hettie Thomason Cargo, a school teacher, would lead a campaign to change the name of the community after being embarrassed to admit she was from &quot;Jugtown&quot; at a regional teachers&#x27; meeting. In 1906, the name Gardendale was selected, and in 1955, the City of Gardendale was officially incorporated. Today, with more than 16,000 residents (estimated), the city of Gardendale has grown to include more than 400 businesses, 4 schools, and 24 churches.

In 1996, the Olympic torch run passed through the city during the weeks leading up to the 1996 Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta. Before Interstate 65 was constructed, the main route between Nashville, Tennessee and Birmingham, Alabama was U.S. Route 31. Prior to being built as a four-lane road, U.S. 31 was a twisting two-lane road that is still largely visible today. From the north end of Gardendale, it is now Snow Rogers Road, North Road, Moncrief Road, and then Main Street southward through the city to the Fultondale city limit where it becomes Stouts Road. In the fall of 2008, new signs were placed along the original route of Stouts Road through Gardendale denoting its historical significance as a stagecoach route between Tennessee and Birmingham during the 19th century. The first traffic signals in the city were located along U.S. 31 at Tarrant Road, Fieldstown Road, and Moncrief Road as well as Tarrant Road at Pineywood Road. A new signal at the intersection of Fieldstown Road and Main Street near city hall replaced a blinking signal shortly thereafter. Fieldstown Road was a narrow two lane road from U.S. 31 westward until Interstate 65 was built and then Fieldstown Road was re-routed onto the new road in the mid-1980s. An abundance of traffic signals have been erected in the city since those early days. In approximately 1970, the city installed street lights along U.S. 31 from the Fultondale city limits northward to the Moncrief Road intersection. The technology at that time was for blue vapor lights. Today, nearly 40 years later those same blue vapor lights still exist with some being replaced with the more modern bulbs near major intersections. Since 1980, Gardendale has annexed considerable amounts of land on the north, east, and west sides. Much of the eastern area is uninhabited. The western annexation is centered along Fieldstown Road. Most of the newest residential development has been in this area and along Shady Grove Road south of Fieldstown Road. The northern annexation has centered along US 31 and extends nearly farther north than 1980. The city has a working historical society, established January 23, 2006, that is working to record the history of the Gardendale area. They have a museum that is open to the public on Thursdays and Saturdays. It contains a variety of photographs, documents, and other historical memorabilia from Gardendale.

==Geography==
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land. However, with the recent annexation of several thousand acres from the community of Mt. Olive and other unincorporated areas, the city now has an estimated total area of around . Gardendale is situated along one of the three major transportation corridors from the Midwest to the Gulf Coast (I-75, I-65, I-55). A tremendous volume of freight (via rail and truck) passes through or near Gardendale.

Gardendale is served by two major north–south highways: Interstate 65 and U.S. 31. A new interstate highway, Interstate 22 will run northwestward from I-65 near Gardendale towards Memphis, Tennessee. This freeway is open from Coalburg Road near Fultondale just southwest of Gardendale to Memphis. Another future road project is the Northern Beltline which will run from Interstate 59 near Argo westward across northern Jefferson County, crossing I-65 on the northern edge of Gardendale. This highway is currently designated to become Interstate 422. This route is some 15–20 years away from completion. Major east–west roads in Gardendale include Fieldstown Road (there has been some discussion of requesting a state highway designation for this road between US 31 and I-65 and perhaps westward towards I-22) which runs from U.S. 31 in Gardendale westward, Tarrant Road which runs from the city eastward, and Mt. Olive Road which runs northwestward from the city. Another future road project may be an extension of Fieldstown Road east of U.S. 31 to connect to the Castle Pines development (which is in the city but only accessible via a roundabout route nearly long) and then across New Castle Road, and then further east to connect to Carson Road. Gardendale is located in an area that once yielded large amounts of coal. Gardendale is located at the southwestern end of one of the Appalachian ridgelines running from eastern Tennessee into northeast Alabama. Several old and closed coal mines exist in the area as well as lands that were once strip mined and then replanted for forests. No major waterways are located in Gardendale but several streams feed into the Locust Fork of the Black Warrior River that passes north and west of the city. Much of the land inside the city limits on the east and northeast sides of Gardendale is rocky and hilly with deep ravines. This portion of the city is sparsely populated and has limited access by road. The only major rail line passing near Gardendale is a north–south track passing on the eastern edge of the city from Boyles Yard near Tarrant paralleling New Castle Road northward towards Blount County. This rail line carries freight and is not a passenger line. The nearest passenger train service is by Amtrak at the Birmingham station south of Gardendale. Commercial air travel is located at the nearby Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International Airport.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 16,044 people, 5,551 households, and 3,790 families residing in the city.
2024 estimate 20,014

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 13,893 people, 5,670 households, and 3,979 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 6,040 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 88.4% White, 8.6% Black or African American, 0.3% Native American, 1.2% Asian, 0.0% Pacific Islander, 0.6% from other races, and 1.0% from two or more races. 1.5% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 5,670 households, out of which 27.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.1% were married couples living together, 11.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.8% were non-families. 26.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.42 and the average family size was 2.92.

The median income for a household in the city was $60,244, and the median income for a family was $79,044. Males had a median income of $52,782 versus $41,224 for females. The per capita income for the city was $30,748. About 1.9% of families and 3.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 3.2% of those under age 18 and 6.3% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 11,626 people, 4,733 households, and 3,474 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 4,959 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 97.19% White, 1.48% Black or African American, 0.17% Native American, 0.53% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.14% from other races, and 0.47% from two or more races. 0.65% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 4,733 households, out of which 28.8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 61.3% were married couples living together, 9.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.6% were non-families. 24.6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.42 and the average family size was 2.88.

The median income for a household in the city was $45,786, and the median income for a family was $56,929. Males had a median income of $36,714 versus $29,039 for females. The per capita income for the city was $22,673. About 3.5% of families and 5.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.0% of those under age 18 and 7.3% of those age 65 or over.

==Economy==
Most new business development in the past ten years has been along Fieldstown Road (and Odum Road) on the west side of the city between I-65 and US 31. Additional development, but to a lesser extent, has occurred along Mt. Olive Road near I-65. Several older more mature shopping and dining areas exist along US 31. The new City Center is being developed on Mt. Olive Road just south of Fieldstown Road. The new city hall and offices will be located here.

New retail developments are slated near Interstate 65 at exit 275. This area is within the Gardendale city limits. Exit 275 is one mile from the future exit 274 Interstate 422. The interchange of these two interstates will spur commercial growth at exit 275. The segment of Interstate 422 from Alabama State Route 79 to Interstate 65 is currently slated to be the second segment of Interstate 422 to be constructed. The first segment is a short stretch between Alabama State Route 79 and Alabama State Route 75 near Pinson.

==Arts and culture==
Annual events include the Magnolia Festival which occurs each spring and is held around and near the Civic Center complex on Main Street.

==Government==
Gardendale uses the mayor/council form of government. Past mayors include J.I. Pesnell, Gilbert Jacks, James Yarbrough, Horace Parker, G. William Noble, Kenny Clemons, and Othell Phillips. Stan Hogeland is the current mayor.

The city council consists of five members. The city is divided into five geographic districts with each one electing a council member to represent it on the city council. The election cycle for the mayor and council members is every four years during the same years as presidential elections. The mayoral position became a full-time paid position following the 2008 elections. The city council chooses a member to become council president, who presides over the council meetings. The current council consists of: Bryan Knox (District 1), Adam Berendt (District 2), Alvin Currington (District 3, council president), Greg Colvert (District 4), and Will Hardman (District 5).

Gardendale has a full-time Police Department (Chief Scott Banks) and Fire Department (Chief Joe Thomas). The Fire &amp; Rescue Department has three stations with station 1 located on Decatur Highway and station 2 located on Fieldstown Road and station 3 located on Tarrant Road. Fieldstown Volunteers, which is located in the western portion of the city, is a combination emergency response/disaster relief squad that mainly responds to large emergencies and provides support to other agencies.

Gardendale has a new City Hall that opened in 2015 on Main Street near the Civic Center. The previous city hall has been demolished and the property was sold to CVS for use as a pharmacy. The new Gardendale Civic Center is located on Main Street across from Gardendale High School. The Gardendale Public Library is located on Mt. Olive Road just south of the intersection of Mt. Olive Road and Fieldstown Road. A new municipal justice complex including court, police department, and jail has been located within the former Food World building facing US 31 just north of the city center area. Gardendale has several parks and athletic facilities. G. William Noble Park (formerly known as Moncrief Park) contains 6 baseball fields, 8 tennis courts, a football field, and 3 playgrounds as well as picnic and party facilities. It is located just off Moncrief Road on the northside of the city. The tennis courts are well maintained, and host many different events as do the baseball fields. G. William Noble Park is well kept and gets new playground equipment periodically. Luman Harris Park is a girls softball facility located just off Pineywood Road in the southeast part of the city. Also located there is the Miracle Park which is used for mentally and physically handicapped children. Mini Park, consisting of a playground for smaller children is located on Keith Circle, just north of Tarrant Road, four tenths of a mile east of US 31. Celebration Park is located on Fieldstown Road on the western edge of the city and contains two soccer fields and a walking track, a &quot;splash pad&quot; water park for children. Memorial Park is located between Main Street and US 31 in the north central part of the city and honors those who have served in the US Armed Forces. Past park facilities included two tennis courts and the old civic center which were located adjacent to city hall in the center of the city, two tennis courts located on Tarrant Road in the eastern edge of the city, a mini park located at the corner of Peterson Drive and Tarrant Road which contained an asphalt basketball court, and a softball field that was located behind the south end of Bragg Middle School.

==Education==

===Public===
Gardendale is served by several schools operated by the Jefferson County Schools school district. Gardendale Elementary School which opened in 1969 and replaced the older elementary school located about 300 yards east of the current school. Bragg Middle School was built later to handle the growing student population. Until Bragg was opened, Gardendale High School handled grades 7–12. Both Gardendale High School and Bragg Middle School use the nickname &quot;Rockets&quot; and share the same colors of maroon and gray. Gardendale High School is rated as a 6A school for athletic competition for the two-year period beginning in the fall of 2010. Also located on the north side of Gardendale is Snow Rogers Elementary School. Snow Rogers school is unique in that although it is inside Gardendale city limits, it is a feeder school for both Bragg Middle School in Gardendale as well as North Jefferson Middle School located in nearby Kimberly, Alabama. These schools in turn feed into Gardendale High School and Mortimer Jordan High School located in nearby Kimberly, Alabama. Residential addresses of Snow Rogers students determine which school they go to once leaving Snow Rogers Elementary. Mt. Olive Elementary is located in the nearby unincorporated Mt. Olive community. Gardendale High School used the Rogers campus as well as temporary classroom buildings while a new high school was being constructed on the site of the former high school (which was built in the mid-1960s). The new high school opened in early 2010. Gardendale High School graduated its first students in 1968.

In November 2013, the city requested to break off its schools from those of Jefferson County and form its own mostly-White school system. The county schools had a majority of Black students. By establishing its own school district, Gardendale has ensured its schools will mostly have White students. Other towns in the county have followed this route and so moved toward &quot;de facto&quot; racial segregation. In early 2018, the attempt to break away from the county schools was squashed by the 11th Circuit Court of Appeals. Judge Madeline Haikala awarded the NAACP money on the grounds that the city government did not act in good faith, with the fine being almost $850,000. She stated the appellate argument had a &quot;lack of candor&quot;.

Gardendale continues to impose its 10 mill tax while, at the same time, Jefferson County is imposing its countywide 8.8 mill tax for schools.

===Private===
Tabernacle Christian School is located on the northern side of the city, run by Gardendale Baptist Tabernacle. Their athletic teams carry the nickname &quot;Torches&quot;. Gardendale Christian Academy is also located on the northern side as a school and daycare run by Gardendale Church of the Nazarene. GCA&#x27;s mascot is &quot;King&#x27;s Knights&quot;.

===Adult===
Gardendale was once home to the Rogers Area Vocational School which has now been demolished to make way for soccer &amp; baseball fields as well as student parking.

==Media==
Gardendale is located within the Birmingham television and radio market, the 39th largest market in the United States.

Newspapers covering Gardendale include &quot;The Birmingham News&quot; (3x weekly, based in neighboring Birmingham); &quot;The North Jefferson News&quot; was once based in the city but merged with the Cullman Times in April 2020 and ceased operations under the North Jefferson News name at that time.

Radio station WPYA (97.3 FM) is licensed and identified on air as a Gardendale radio station. This station is a Top 40 (CHR) station that covers the Birmingham radio market. The broadcast studios and transmitter are not located in Gardendale even though the station is licensed to Gardendale.

==Infrastructure==
===Health care===
In 2019, UAB opened a free-standing emergency room with outpatient clinics and helipad access. Large hospitals offering secondary and tertiary care, including a trauma center, are located nearby in Birmingham, the home of the University of Alabama School of Medicine, the UAB hospitals, Baptist Brookwood hospital system, and St. Vincent&#x27;s hospital system . Gardendale is served by several small health centers/clinics that are part of these larger healthcare systems.

==Notable people==
* Mario Addison - professional football player
* Jack Biddle - state legislator
* Jordan Howard - professional football player for Philadelphia Eagles
* Pat Keedy - former professional baseball player for 1985 California Angels,1987 Chicago White Sox and 1989 Cleveland Indians
* Trey Mullinax - PGA professional golfer
* John Salter - mixed martial arts fighter
* Willie Wyatt - former Alabama Crimson Tide Football and Arena Football League player
* Chris Fryar - drummer for the Zac Brown Band

==References==
==External links==
* City of Gardendale
* Gardendale Chamber of Commerce
* Gardendale-Martha Moore Public Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79679" start="0" end="10" title="Gardendale, Alabama" label="Gardendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="16" end="20" title="city" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="24" end="40" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="42" end="49" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="90" end="100" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="135" end="146" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="765" end="777" title="Municipal corporation" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q170320" start="943" end="956" title="Olympic torch" label="Olympic torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="1020" end="1045" title="1996 Summer Olympic Games" label="1996 Summer Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="1049" end="1056" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840770" start="1168" end="1181" title="U.S. Route 31 in Alabama" label="U.S. Route 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q94403" start="2075" end="2088" title="Interstate 65" label="Interstate 65"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="3360" end="3378" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274884" start="3505" end="3514" title="Mount Olive, Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Mt. Olive"/>
<link wikidata="Q876810" start="3876" end="3889" title="Interstate 65 in Alabama" label="Interstate 65"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840770" start="3894" end="3901" title="U.S. Route 31 in Alabama" label="U.S. 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q876768" start="3929" end="3942" title="Interstate 22" label="Interstate 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="4000" end="4018" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q79219" start="4065" end="4075" title="Fultondale, Alabama" label="Fultondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q94378" start="4190" end="4203" title="Interstate 59" label="Interstate 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q67419" start="4209" end="4213" title="Argo, Alabama" label="Argo"/>
<link wikidata="Q876733" start="4354" end="4368" title="Interstate 422" label="Interstate 422"/>
<link wikidata="Q865724" start="6177" end="6223" title="Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International Airport" label="Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="6272" end="6297" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="6434" end="6440" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6662" end="6667" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6674" end="6679" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6683" end="6699" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6706" end="6721" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6728" end="6733" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6740" end="6756" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6768" end="6779" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6842" end="6850" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6854" end="6860" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="6985" end="7000" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="7476" end="7493" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="7585" end="7597" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="7699" end="7705" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7928" end="7933" title="Race (United States Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7941" end="7946" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7950" end="7966" title="Race (United States Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7974" end="7989" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7997" end="8002" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8010" end="8026" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8039" end="8050" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8115" end="8123" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="8127" end="8133" title="Race (United States Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="8258" end="8273" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="8748" end="8765" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8857" end="8869" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q94403" start="9452" end="9465" title="Interstate 65" label="Interstate 65"/>
<link wikidata="Q876733" start="9573" end="9587" title="Interstate 422" label="Interstate 422"/>
<link wikidata="Q876733" start="9686" end="9700" title="Interstate 422" label="Interstate 422"/>
<link wikidata="Q873721" start="9706" end="9728" title="Alabama State Route 79" label="Alabama State Route 79"/>
<link wikidata="Q94403" start="9732" end="9745" title="Interstate 65" label="Interstate 65"/>
<link wikidata="Q876733" start="9794" end="9808" title="Interstate 422" label="Interstate 422"/>
<link wikidata="Q873721" start="9873" end="9895" title="Alabama State Route 79" label="Alabama State Route 79"/>
<link wikidata="Q873684" start="9900" end="9922" title="Alabama State Route 75" label="Alabama State Route 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q79303" start="9928" end="9934" title="Pinson, Alabama" label="Pinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175447" start="13776" end="13800" title="Jefferson County Schools (Alabama)" label="Jefferson County Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522438" start="14063" end="14085" title="Gardendale High School" label="Gardendale High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="15384" end="15400" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q250446" start="15805" end="15834" title="11th Circuit Court of Appeals" label="11th Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q108859969" start="15842" end="15858" title="Madeline Haikala" label="Madeline Haikala"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="15871" end="15876" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16041" end="16047" title=":wikt:candor" label="candor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673033" start="16213" end="16240" title="Tabernacle Christian School" label="Tabernacle Christian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="16793" end="16803" title="Birmingham, AL" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718111" start="16925" end="16944" title="The Birmingham News" label="The Birmingham News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630625" start="17003" end="17027" title="The North Jefferson News" label="The North Jefferson News"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="17711" end="17721" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895038" start="17739" end="17779" title="University of Alabama School of Medicine" label="University of Alabama School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764512" start="18009" end="18022" title="Mario Addison" label="Mario Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q124650482" start="18056" end="18067" title="Jack Biddle (politician)" label="Jack Biddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621498" start="18089" end="18102" title="Jordan Howard" label="Jordan Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143606" start="18160" end="18169" title="Pat Keedy" label="Pat Keedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24451667" start="18287" end="18300" title="Trey Mullinax" label="Trey Mullinax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363321" start="18303" end="18306" title="Professional Golfers&amp;#x27; Association of America" label="PGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256537" start="18329" end="18340" title="John Salter" label="John Salter"/>
<link wikidata="Q114466" start="18343" end="18361" title="mixed martial arts" label="mixed martial arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021909" start="18372" end="18384" title="Willie Wyatt" label="Willie Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705216" start="18394" end="18423" title="Alabama Crimson Tide Football" label="Alabama Crimson Tide Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725641" start="18428" end="18449" title="Arena Football League" label="Arena Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106602" start="18459" end="18470" title="Chris Fryar" label="Chris Fryar"/>
<link wikidata="Q139154" start="18489" end="18503" title="Zac Brown Band" label="Zac Brown Band"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104781" wikidata="Q1268766" url="?curid=104781" title="Grayson Valley, Alabama">
<text>Grayson Valley is an unincorporated community and census-designated place in the northeastern Birmingham area, in Jefferson County, Alabama, United States. It is located between the Spring Lake neighborhood of Birmingham, Alabama and the Birmingham suburbs of Clay, Trussville, and Center Point. At the 2020 census, the population was 5,982.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 5,982 people, 2,598 households, and 1,718 families residing in the CDP.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1268766" start="0" end="14" title="Grayson Valley, Alabama" label="Grayson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="21" end="45" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="50" end="73" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="94" end="109" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham area"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="114" end="130" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="132" end="139" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="210" end="229" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="238" end="248" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q79472" start="260" end="264" title="Clay, Alabama" label="Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q79691" start="266" end="276" title="Trussville, Alabama" label="Trussville"/>
<link wikidata="Q80092" start="282" end="294" title="Center Point, Alabama" label="Center Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="303" end="314" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="389" end="414" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104782" wikidata="Q80020" url="?curid=104782" title="Graysville, Alabama">
<text>Graysville is a city in northwestern Jefferson County, Alabama, United States, located north of Adamsville. At the 2020 census, the population was 1,950.

==History==
In the late 1800s and early 1900s, this city was called Gin Town. Because it had the only cotton gin for miles around, the community grew. It incorporated as Graysville initially in 1897. As the town grew, the need for businesses and houses of worship grew as well. One street over from this site, the Union Church was established in the early 1900s. All people of all denominations met and worshiped there as it was the only church for miles around. In 1927, the town charter was revoked on the grounds of &quot;inactivity.&quot;

This city was reincorporated on November 17, 1945. The first meeting of the town council took place at the old school house on January 16, 1946. Later that year, the original city council established the Graysville Water Works system. In 1949, the city council established the Graysville Gas Board which eventually became the Graysville Municipal Gas System. During the 1950s and 1960s, the local coal mines and steel mills attracted families from all over Alabama. As a result of this growth, Graysville established the city&#x27;s first series of home developments and subdivisions. During the 1980s and 1990s, Graysville expanded its city limits by annexing multiple acres in what was then unincorporated in Jefferson County.

Its communities were damaged by an EF3 tornado on January 23, 2012.

==Geography==
Graysville is located at (33.626955, -86.962255). According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 1,950 people, 765 households, and 542 families residing in the city.

===2010 census===
At the 2010 census, there were 2,165 people, 907 households, and 607 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 1,066 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 73.9% White, 23.6% Black or African American, 0.4% Native American, 0.2% Asian, 0.4% from other races, and 1.4% from two or more races. 1.7% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 907 households 20.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 47.0% were married couples living together, 14.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.1% were non-families. 30.2% of households were one person and 12.6% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.39 and the average family size was 2.93.

The age distribution was 20.3% under the age of 18, 7.1% from 18 to 24, 24.0% from 25 to 44, 28.7% from 45 to 64, and 19.9% 65 or older. The median age was 44.3 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.0 males.

The median household income was $35,750 and the median family income was $44,926. Males had a median income of $37,156 versus $30,917 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,308. About 15.9% of families and 20.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 21.5% of those under age 18 and 13.0% of those age 65 or over.

===2000 census===
At the 2000 census, there were 2,344 people, 976 households, and 696 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 1,090 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 75.26% White, 23.12% Black or African American, 0.43% Native American, 0.34% Asian, 0.17% from other races, and 0.68% from two or more races. 0.47% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 976 households 24.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.3% were married couples living together, 16.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.6% were non-families. 25.7% of households were one person and 14.0% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size was 2.85.

The age distribution was 20.9% under the age of 18, 8.2% from 18 to 24, 25.0% from 25 to 44, 25.4% from 45 to 64, and 20.4% 65 or older. The median age was 42 years. For every 100 females, there were 86.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 83.0 males.

The median household income was $30,994 and the median family income was $35,938. Males had a median income of $30,692 versus $25,446 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,328. About 8.2% of families and 11.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 16.5% of those under age 18 and 13.2% of those age 65 or over.

==References==
==External links==
*City of Graysville
*Graysville Public Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80020" start="0" end="10" title="Graysville, Alabama" label="Graysville"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="37" end="53" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="55" end="62" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79989" start="96" end="106" title="Adamsville, Alabama" label="Adamsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="115" end="126" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826053" start="1479" end="1495" title="Tornadoes of 2012" label="January 23, 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="1579" end="1597" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="1687" end="1712" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="1820" end="1831" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2002" end="2015" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="3131" end="3143" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="3244" end="3255" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3426" end="3439" title="Race and ethnicity in the United States Census#2010 census" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="4559" end="4571" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104783" wikidata="Q79499" url="?curid=104783" title="Helena, Alabama">
<text>Helena () is a city in Jefferson and Shelby counties in the state of Alabama. Helena is considered a suburb of Birmingham and part of the Birmingham-Hoover Metropolitan Area. As of 2022, the population estimate was 21,862.

Helena initially incorporated in 1877, but reincorporated in 1917 after errors were discovered in the initial incorporation papers. Its population was not recorded separately in the U.S. Census until 1920, reflecting the later date of incorporation.

==History==
===Early settlers===
The area was long the territory of the historic Muscogee people, known by English colonists as the Creek Indians. While Scots-Irish and English traders had interaction with them, and there was some armed conflict in the early 19th century, most European-American settlers did not come to this area until 1849. This was after the United States had conducted Indian Removal of the Creek and other Southeastern tribes in the 1830s, to lands west of the Mississippi River.

The first European-American settlers to Helena, which they initially named Cove, were veterans of the final campaigns of the War of 1812. Members of Andrew Jackson&#x27;s army were attracted to the quiet, peaceful valleys and streams after the Battle of Horseshoe Bend. By 1856, the Cove post office opened. Shortly thereafter, the settlers changed the name of the town to Hillsboro.

===Civil War===
The onset of the American Civil War brought the need for the South to increase its manufacturing production and develop new industries, in service of the Confederate States of America. Coal and iron ore mines were dug throughout this area and the construction of the Louisville &amp; Nashville Railroad provided new transportation connections. Helena became an important industrial center for the wartime efforts. Around 1864 a rolling mill was built on Buck Creek, near the rail lines to process the iron from Selma.

Peter Boyle, an engineer for the railroad working on a new line, met and courted Helen Lee. He would name the rail station that supported the rolling mill after her. Eventually the town was named Helena after the train station.

====Wilson&#x27;s Raid====
As the final battles of the Civil War were being fought, Union forces amassed a force for a cavalry raid to attack the South&#x27;s war fighting capability, as Sherman&#x27;s march had done the previous year. Led by James Harrison Wilson, this force passed through the town of Helena on March 30, 1865, where they destroyed much of the newly developed industry and residential buildings.

===Reconstruction===
Within a few years of the end of the Civil War and the beginning of the reconstruction era, industrialists were again developing the area coal and iron ore resources. The railroads were rebuilt and coke ovens were established by the Eureka Company in 1870. The rolling mill was rebuilt in 1873, with support spurred by Rufus Cobb, later elected as a two-term governor. Much of what was Hillsboro had been absorbed by the expanding Helena area. The town was surveyed by Joseph Squire in 1873 and incorporated in 1877.

By 1880, Helena contained
six mercantile stores, one drugstore, two hotels, and several boarding houses… The rolling mill had been expanded and modernized and the number of merchants had increased.A rail yard was added by the Louisville &amp; Nashville Railroad Company.

===Depression era=== 
Helena was first incorporated in 1877 but had to reincorporated in 1917 after the initial incorporation paperwork was found to contain errors. Charles Hind was elected mayor the same year. Much of the industry began to decline as the economy contracted in the years after World War I. The rolling mill was closed in 1923 and many mine closures followed. As the Great Depression set in during the 1930s, the town fell on hard times. Many residents left to find work elsewhere.

==== 1933 Tornado ====

Around 3 AM on May 5, 1933, residents were awoken to a massive tornado that ripped through the heart of Helena. A total of twelve persons were killed; 75 people were reported as injured. Many of the original houses were completely destroyed and railroad cars were overturned. The property damage was estimated to be in the range of $100,000 to $150,000 (not adjusted).

===Modern expansion===
Helena remained a small town in the largely rural county until suburban growth from Birmingham reached the city in the late 20th century. Numerous residential and commercial developments have taken place, spurring improvements to city facilities and services. By the early 21st century, Helena had large population gains, with related growing pains in trying to provide services, as a result of its convenient location and high quality of life.

====2021 tornado====
Another tornado struck the town on March 25, 2021, causing EF1 damage to several homes and downing trees throughout several neighborhoods. The tornado eventually reached low-end EF3 strength northeast of town.

==Geography==
Helena is located at (33.279715, -86.856060).

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and (0.12%) is covered by water. The Cahaba River and its tributary Buck Creek run through Helena. Buck Creek is dammed upstream of Alabama State Route 261 in the Old Town area to form Lake Davidson. It was used both for recreation and to generate water wheel power at the turn of the 20th century. Fishing, wading, and canoeing are popular uses of both waterways.

Helena sits at the foothills of the very southern extent of the Appalachian Mountains as they descend into the Gulf of Mexico coastal plain. The area is largely rolling hills with numerous small streams, and undeveloped areas are primarily mixed woodlands.

Downtown Birmingham is 20 mi (32 km) north via Alabama Route 261 to US-31 or I-65.
===Climate===
The climate of Helena is typical of the Deep South, with long, hot, humid summers and short, relatively mild winters. Summer high temperatures are commonly in the upper 90s and low 100s F; winter lows are usually in the 20s F. Measurable snowfall is rare, occurring only a few times a decade. Thunderstorms are frequent occurrences during the summer. The Helena area experiences two severe weather peaks, early spring (March–April) and late fall (November), with tornadoes being frequent hazards during both peaks.
 Hurricanes coming ashore on the northern Gulf coast occasionally reach Helena with tropical storm-force winds.

==Demographics==
===2020 census===

As of the 2020 United States census, there were 20,914 people, 6,718 households, and 5,119 families residing in the city.

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, 16,793 people, 3,828 households, and 3,043 families resided in the city. The population density was . The 3,983 housing units averaged 233.3 per square mile (90.1/km). The racial makeup of the city was 82.5% White, 13.1% Black or African American, 0.20% Native American, 0.65% Asian, 1.1% Pacific Islander, 0.35% from other races, and 0.52% from two or more races; 3.3% of the population was Hispanic or Latino of any race.

Of the 3,828 households, 43.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 70.2% were married couples living together, 7.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 20.5% were not families; 17.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 3.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.69 and the average family size was 3.06.

In the city, the population was distributed as 28.7% under the age of 18, 6.0% from 18 to 24, 42.7% from 25 to 44, 17.5% from 45 to 64, and 5.1% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.9 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.6 males.

The median income for a household in the city was $62,908, and for a family was $66,250. Males had a median income of $45,291 versus $32,431 for females. The per capita income for the city was $26,323. About 1.4% of families and 2.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.2% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

==Economy==
The local economy is broadly diversified among professional, service, and manufacturing jobs. Many of the residents of Helena commute to work in other communities within the greater Birmingham area. No employer is dominant in the city, and recent economic growth has mainly come in the service industries to support the increased population. Well-known local industries include the Vulcan Materials Company construction aggregate quarry and the Plantation Pipeline depot and tank farm. A developed industrial park includes a wide variety of manufacturers.

==Arts and culture==
Helena holds numerous arts and crafts fairs, and musical performances throughout the year in public spaces.
Helena Old Town Live Summer Concert Series bring thousands into Amphitheater Park to hear great music.Helena&#x27;s residents also have easy access to cultural attractions in the greater Birmingham area, such as the Birmingham Zoo, Birmingham Museum of Art, McWane Center, and Vulcan statue and park.

During 2005, Helena gained nationwide notice as the hometown of singer Bo Bice, who was a finalist on the popular Fox program &quot;American Idol&quot;. Magnolia Springs Manor was the host of Sacha Baron Cohen’s character Borat in his famous 2006 hit film.

===Annual cultural events===
Major annual community events largely reflect traditional small-town American life. They include an Easter Egg Hunt, Buck Creek Festival, 4th of July picnic, concert and fireworks; Fall Carnival, Spring Fling, and Christmas Parade.

===Museums and other points of interest===
Major points of interest include the Cahaba River, Old Town Amphitheater, and the Old Town district, which includes the 19th-century jail and railroad freight depot, as well as commercial structures from the 19th century. The Kenneth R. Penhale Museum opened in October 2011 in the Old Town district.

==Sports==
Outdoor sports are popular in Helena. Football attracts the most participants and spectators at all levels; golf, basketball, baseball, softball, and soccer are also popular among residents. Some children participate in city-sponsored sports and school-sponsored sports. Others participate in sports at the nearby Pelham YMCA.

Numerous minor-league sports franchises are located in the Greater Birmingham area, within which Helena is located. Local sports venues (in that area) include the Hoover Metropolitan Stadium (Hoover Met), Regions Field in Southside of Birmingham, Legion Field in Birmingham, the Birmingham-Jefferson Convention Complex (BJCC), and Barber Motorsports Park in Leeds. College sports, which are most popular in Helena, just like the rest of Alabama, use several of these venues. College sports fans in Helena most commonly support the Alabama Crimson Tide, Auburn Tigers, UAB Blazers, and Samford Bulldogs, and many are alumni of those schools.

==Parks and recreation==
Numerous parks are provided within Helena by the city and Shelby County. These parks feature open green spaces, playground equipment, a fishing pond, and a baseball field complex often used for tournaments and recreational leagues. The Helena Sports Complex opened in 2003 and features a community center and spaces for baseball, softball, cheerleading, basketball, and soccer. The most popular parks in Helena include Joe Tucker Park and Cahaba Lily Park. The Old Town Helena Amphitheater, along the banks of Buck Creek, features a stage and grass seating area where numerous productions are staged, including the popular Summer Sundown Cinemas (free movies) and 4th of July celebration. The Cahaba River and its tributary Buck Creek run through Helena. Buck Creek is dammed upstream of Alabama Highway 261 in the Old Town area to form Lake Davidson. Fishing, wading, and canoeing are popular uses of both waterways.

==Government==

The city has an elected mayor-council form of government. The mayor and council is elected at-large Those elected in 2020 are:
* Mayor - Brian Puckett
Helena City Council: 
* Chris Willis - Place 1
* Christopher R. VanCleave - Place 2 (Pro-Tempore)
* Alice Lobell (City Council President) - Place 3
* Laura Joseph - Place 4
* Hewy Woodman - Place 5
The city operates the following departments:
* Administrative
* Building Inspectiins,Planning
* Cou
* Fire
* Human Resources
* Parks &amp; Recreation
* Police
* Public Works
* Revenue and Finance
* Utility Board

The city enjoys full-time, paid public safety services through the Helena Police Department and Helena Fire Department. The Helena Fire Department has three fire stations and includes volunteer firefighters in addition to the paid staff. The Helena Police Department includes a K-9 unit. Together with the fire department, it sponsors a Law Enforcement Explorer Post with Learning-for-Life, a division of Boy Scouts of America.


==Education==
Public education for students from kindergarten to 12th grade is provided by the Shelby County School System, including Helena Elementary School, Helena Intermediate School, Helena Middle School, and Helena High School. A new high school, to accommodate the increased number of students, was constructed and opened in the fall of the 2014–15 year.

==Media==
Helena is within the Birmingham/Tuscaloosa/Anniston media market. Its major local television stations are WBRC Fox 6, WBIQ APT (PBS) 10, WVTM (NBC) 13, WTTO CW 21, ABC 33/40, WIAT CBS 42, WPXH ION 44, and WABM MyNetworkTV 68. Helena is also served by all the Birmingham radio stations, including 100.5 WJQX, an ESPN Radio station licensed to Helena. The &quot;Birmingham News&quot; is Helena&#x27;s major daily newspaper. It publishes a special Shelby County section, the &quot;Shelby News&quot;, in addition to the regular Birmingham edition, which is distributed to Helena subscribers.

The &quot;Shelby County Reporter&quot; is a weekly newspaper covering Shelby County, including Helena.

Additionally, the &quot;Helena - The Magazine&quot; is published monthly by the City of Helena as a public service; it is mailed to all Helena residents. The &quot;Helena - The Magazine&quot; is a news and culture magazine-style publication, that runs 52 pages, and includes reporting on past and future community events, profiles on local businesses and residents, and monthly columns by area physicians and elected government officials.

==Infrastructure==

===Transportation===
Helena is located near two major interstates. I-459, which joins major east–west interstates I-20 and I-59, is located 9 miles to the north; north-south oriented I-65 is 3 miles east of Old Town Helena. AL-261 runs through the heart of Helena and connects the city to neighboring Pelham, where it intersects US-31, located 2 miles east of Old Town. Here it becomes Valleydale Road and continues to its terminus at US-280, ultimately connecting Helena with eastern Hoover.

CSX Transportation provides rail service on two separate lines, the S&amp;NA South subdivision between Birmingham and Montgomery, and the Lineville subdivision between Birmingham and Atlanta, Georgia.

General aviation and private jet services are available at the nearby Bessemer Airport (EKY) about 8 miles north of Old Town. Extensive commercial flights are available at the Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International Airport (BHM) about 25 miles to the northeast. Intercity rail service is available on the Amtrak Crescent, 19 miles to the north in Birmingham.

===Utilities===
Electric service is provided by Alabama Power Company; water, sewage, and garbage pick-up by the city; and cable television and internet provided by multiple providers.

===Healthcare===
Numerous medical professionals practice in Helena. Many cater to family and individual patient&#x27;s needs in areas such as counseling, dentistry, psychiatry, physical therapy and primary care. The city also benefits from its proximity to Birmingham&#x27;s extensive medical community, including several major hospitals and University of Alabama at Birmingham medical schools. The closest hospital is Baptist Shelby in Alabaster.

==Notable people==

*Bo Bice, &quot;American Idol&quot;&#x27;s 2005 runner-up
*Liz Cochran, 2009 Miss Alabama and competitor in the 2010 Miss America Pageant, was born here.
*Vonetta Flowers, Olympic Gold Medal gymnast 
*Rebecca Luker, actor and singer, who appeared in several musicals
*Leigh Hulsey, member of the Alabama House of Representatives and former member of the city council
*Richard Fitts, Boston Red Sox pitcher, was born here.
*Brent Hinds, guitarist and vocalist of Mastodon (band) grew up in Helena.

==Images==
==References==


==External links==
* City of Helena, Alabama</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q79499" start="0" end="6" title="Helena, Alabama" label="Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q112271" start="23" end="32" title="Jefferson County, Alabama" label="Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q501084" start="37" end="43" title="Shelby County, Alabama" label="Shelby"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="60" end="65" title="U.S. state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="69" end="76" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="111" end="121" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550945" start="138" end="173" title="Birmingham-Hoover Metropolitan Area" label="Birmingham-Hoover Metropolitan Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="556" end="571" title="Muscogee people" label="Muscogee people"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="607" end="620" title="Creek Indians" label="Creek Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519192" start="865" end="879" title="Indian Removal" label="Indian Removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="958" end="975" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="1103" end="1114" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="1127" end="1141" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871247" start="1222" end="1246" title="Battle of Horseshoe Bend (1814)" label="Battle of Horseshoe Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1396" end="1414" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="1533" end="1562" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q918747" start="1646" end="1681" title="Louisville &amp;amp; Nashville Railroad" label="Louisville &amp;amp; Nashville Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q452648" start="1807" end="1819" title="rolling mill" label="rolling mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052780" start="2314" end="2334" title="Sherman&amp;#x27;s March to the Sea" label="Sherman&amp;#x27;s march"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806582" start="2370" end="2391" title="James Harrison Wilson" label="James Harrison Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="2636" end="2654" title="reconstruction era" label="reconstruction era"/>
<link wikidata="Q546411" start="2883" end="2893" title="Rufus Cobb" label="Rufus Cobb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3033" end="3046" title="Joseph Squire" label="Joseph Squire"/>
<link wikidata="Q918747" start="3308" end="3343" title="Louisville &amp;amp; Nashville Railroad" label="Louisville &amp;amp; Nashville Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="3737" end="3753" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004816" start="3892" end="3903" title="Tornado outbreak sequence of May 4–10, 1933" label="May 5, 1933"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4772" end="4786" title="Tornado outbreak sequence of March 24–28, 2021#West Blocton–Helena–Eagle Point–Vandiver, Alabama" label="March 25, 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="5026" end="5044" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933076" start="5131" end="5143" title="Cahaba River" label="Cahaba River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982827" start="5162" end="5172" title="Buck Creek (Cahaba River tributary)" label="Buck Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q876503" start="5226" end="5249" title="Alabama State Route 261" label="Alabama State Route 261"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="5524" end="5545" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="5571" end="5585" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q409352" start="5786" end="5791" title="U.S. Route 31" label="US-31"/>
<link wikidata="Q876810" start="5795" end="5799" title="Interstate 65 in Alabama" label="I-65"/>
<link wikidata="Q864007" start="5855" end="5865" title="Deep South" label="Deep South"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="6414" end="6428" title="tropical storm" label="tropical storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="6489" end="6514" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="6630" end="6636" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="6818" end="6831" title="Race (United States Census)" label="racial makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="7953" end="7970" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="8062" end="8074" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685287" start="8542" end="8566" title="Vulcan Materials Company" label="Vulcan Materials Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238502" start="8567" end="8589" title="construction aggregate" label="construction aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q865749" start="9062" end="9076" title="Birmingham Zoo" label="Birmingham Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q865736" start="9078" end="9102" title="Birmingham Museum of Art" label="Birmingham Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802755" start="9104" end="9117" title="McWane Center" label="McWane Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943500" start="9123" end="9136" title="Vulcan statue" label="Vulcan statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q553543" start="9219" end="9226" title="Bo Bice" label="Bo Bice"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="9262" end="9265" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q201052" start="9280" end="9293" title="American Idol" label="American Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q29055" start="9340" end="9357" title="Sacha Baron Cohen" label="Sacha Baron Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="9573" end="9584" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="4th of July"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="10062" end="10070" title="American football" label="Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550945" start="10411" end="10429" title="Birmingham-Hoover, AL Metropolitan Statistical Area" label="Greater Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5898820" start="10515" end="10542" title="Hoover Metropolitan Stadium" label="Hoover Metropolitan Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309279" start="10557" end="10570" title="Regions Field" label="Regions Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q14679477" start="10574" end="10583" title="Southside, Birmingham, Alabama" label="Southside"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="10587" end="10597" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3175504" start="10599" end="10611" title="Legion Field" label="Legion Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q865715" start="10631" end="10670" title="Birmingham-Jefferson Convention Complex" label="Birmingham-Jefferson Convention Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q807806" start="10683" end="10706" title="Barber Motorsports Park" label="Barber Motorsports Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q79869" start="10710" end="10715" title="Leeds, Alabama" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146583" start="10717" end="10731" title="College sports" label="College sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q971195" start="10883" end="10903" title="Alabama Crimson Tide" label="Alabama Crimson Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528311" start="10905" end="10918" title="Auburn Tigers" label="Auburn Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906313" start="10920" end="10931" title="UAB Blazers" label="UAB Blazers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409309" start="10937" end="10953" title="Samford Bulldogs" label="Samford Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q501084" start="11077" end="11090" title="Shelby County, Alabama" label="Shelby County"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11255" end="11276" title="Helena Sports Complex" label="Helena Sports Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="11683" end="11694" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="4th of July"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933076" start="11712" end="11724" title="Cahaba River" label="Cahaba River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682992" start="12045" end="12053" title="at-large" label="at-large"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270014" start="13371" end="13383" title="media market" label="media market"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564623" start="13425" end="13435" title="WBRC" label="WBRC Fox 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705302" start="13437" end="13454" title="Alabama Public Television" label="WBIQ APT (PBS) 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957034" start="13456" end="13469" title="WVTM-TV" label="WVTM (NBC) 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538008" start="13471" end="13481" title="WTTO" label="WTTO CW 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564624" start="13483" end="13492" title="WBMA-LD" label="ABC 33/40"/>
<link wikidata="Q14679560" start="13494" end="13505" title="WIAT" label="WIAT CBS 42"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954556" start="13507" end="13518" title="WPXH" label="WPXH ION 44"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946292" start="13524" end="13543" title="WABM" label="WABM MyNetworkTV 68"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946660" start="13615" end="13625" title="WJQX" label="100.5 WJQX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046168" start="13630" end="13640" title="ESPN Radio" label="ESPN Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718111" start="13679" end="13694" title="Birmingham News" label="Birmingham News"/>
<link wikidata="Q876790" start="14539" end="14544" title="I-459" label="I-459"/>
<link wikidata="Q93686" start="14586" end="14590" title="Interstate 20" label="I-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q94378" start="14595" end="14599" title="I-59" label="I-59"/>
<link wikidata="Q94403" start="14655" end="14659" title="I-65" label="I-65"/>
<link wikidata="Q876503" start="14696" end="14702" title="Alabama State Route 261" label="AL-261"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840770" start="14801" end="14806" title="U.S. Route 31 in Alabama" label="US-31"/>
<link wikidata="Q155520" start="14907" end="14913" title="US-280" label="US-280"/>
<link wikidata="Q856783" start="14966" end="14984" title="CSX Transportation" label="CSX Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29364" start="15084" end="15094" title="Montgomery, Alabama" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="15149" end="15165" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q619644" start="15238" end="15254" title="Bessemer Airport" label="Bessemer Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q865724" start="15344" end="15390" title="Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International Airport" label="Birmingham-Shuttlesworth International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q756508" start="15480" end="15488" title="Crescent (Amtrak)" label="Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705296" start="15576" end="15597" title="Alabama Power Company" label="Alabama Power Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472663" start="16056" end="16091" title="University of Alabama at Birmingham" label="University of Alabama at Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q79936" start="16151" end="16160" title="Alabaster, Alabama" label="Alabaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q553543" start="16184" end="16191" title="Bo Bice" label="Bo Bice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875975" start="16242" end="16253" title="Liz Cochran" label="Liz Cochran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875975" start="16260" end="16272" title="Miss Alabama" label="Miss Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q859497" start="16300" end="16320" title="Miss America Pageant" label="Miss America Pageant"/>
<link wikidata="Q433488" start="16338" end="16353" title="Vonetta Flowers" label="Vonetta Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301818" start="16384" end="16397" title="Rebecca Luker" label="Rebecca Luker"/>
<link wikidata="Q122860750" start="16451" end="16463" title="Leigh Hulsey" label="Leigh Hulsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q909041" start="16479" end="16511" title="Alabama House of Representatives" label="Alabama House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q105833909" start="16551" end="16564" title="Richard Fitts" label="Richard Fitts"/>
<link wikidata="Q909746" start="16606" end="16617" title="Brent Hinds" label="Brent Hinds"/>
<link wikidata="Q548844" start="16645" end="16660" title="Mastodon (band)" label="Mastodon (band)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="104784" wikidata="Q52928" url="?curid=104784" title="Charles XIII">
<text>Charles XIII or Carl XIII (; 7 October 1748 – 5 February 1818) was King of Sweden from 1809 and King of Norway from 1814 to his death. He was the second son (and younger brother to King Gustav III) of King Adolf Frederick of Sweden and Louisa Ulrika of Prussia, sister of Frederick the Great.

Though known as King Charles XIII in Sweden, he was actually the seventh Swedish king by that name, as Charles IX (reigned 1604–1611) had adopted his numeral after studying a fictitious history of Sweden. In Norway, he is known as Charles II.

==Early life==

Prince Charles was placed under the tutelage of Hedvig Elisabet Strömfelt and then Ulrica Schönström. He was appointed grand admiral when he was but few days old. He was described as a good dancer at the amateur theatre of the royal court. Reportedly he was not very close to his mother. The Queen preferred her youngest children, Sophie Albertine and Frederick Adolf.

Charles was, however, his father&#x27;s favorite, and similar to him in personality. He was also described as close to his brother Gustav during their childhood.

Because of his position as the heir to the throne after his elder brother Gustav, he was early targeted as a useful tool for the opposition to his brother: already in the 1760s, the Caps (party) tried to use him against his brother the crown prince through his then love interest countess Brita Horn, daughter of the Cap&#x27;s politician Adam Horn. Gustav, however, was always careful to prevent Charles from being used by the opposition, which came to its first test during the December Crisis (1768), when Charles, ultimately, did not let himself be used by the Caps party. In 1770, he made a journey through Germany and France alone.

==Reign of Gustav III==

After the death of his father in 1771, when his brother the crown prince was abroad, the Caps once again attempted to use him against his brother, now King Gustav III of Sweden, and his mother Louisa Ulrika used this in order to have her own rights as a dowager queen respected by the Caps. Upon the departure of his mother to Prussia, and the return of his brother, however, Gustav III managed to win him to his side.

In 1772 he cooperated in the Revolution of 1772 of his elder brother, King Gustav. He was given the task of using his connections in the Caps party to neutralize it and secure the southern provinces by use of the military, tasks he performed successfully and for which the king rewarded him with the title Duke of Södermanland.

Duke Charles in early years was the object of his mother&#x27;s plans to arrange political marriages for her children. On the wish of his mother, he was to be married to her niece, his cousin Philippine of Brandenburg-Schwedt, a plan to which he had agreed in 1770. The government, however, refused to issue negotiations because of the costs. After the accession of Gustav III and the coup d&#x27;état which introduced absolute monarchy, his brother terminated these plans against their mother&#x27;s will in October 1772, and began negotiations for a marriage between Charles and his cousin Hedwig Elizabeth Charlotte of Holstein-Gottorp. As King Gustav had not consummated his own marriage, he wished to place the task of providing an heir to the throne with his brother. Charles agreed to the marriage in August 1773, and the marriage took place the following year. After a false alarm of a pregnancy of Hedwig Elizabeth Charlotte in 1775, the king finally consummated his own marriage. Charles and his wife lived separate private lives and each had extramarital affairs. During the great succession scandal of 1778, when queen dowager Louisa Ulrika questioned the paternity of the issue of Gustav III, Charles sided with his brother the king against their mother, this despite the fact that it was in fact he who had informed her of the rumors regarding the legitimacy, something he however withheld from the king.

Charles was described as dependent and easily influenced. His numerous affairs gave him the reputation of being a libertine. He was reputed for his many lovers, of which the more well known were Augusta von Fersen, Charlotte Eckerman, Françoise-Éléonore Villain, Mariana Koskull and Charlotte Slottsberg, the last one reputed to have had political influence over him. He unsuccessfully courted Magdalena Rudenschöld, and her refusal of his advances has been pointed out as the cause of the harsh treatment he exposed her to as regent during the Armfelt conspiracy. 
After the late 1790s, when his health deteriorated as a result of a series of rheumatic attacks, his relationship to his consort improved and she gained more influence over him.

The Duke was known for his interest in the supernatural and mysticism, and he was engaged in several secret societies. He was a member of the Freemasons. He was reportedly a client of the fortune teller Ulrica Arfvidsson, and he also favored the medium Henrik Gustaf Ulfvenklou. In 1811, he founded the Order of Charles XIII, a Swedish order of chivalry awarded only to a maximum number of 33 knights, on the condition of confessing the Lutheran Evangelic Religion and being Freemasons. All Princes and Kings of the Bernadotte dynasty, the royal house of Sweden are from baptism, incorporate parts of the royal order of knights and freemasons. In addition are the order of merit granted to members of foreign Grand Lodges affiliated to the so-called Swedish System, such as the Grande Loge Nationale Française, if of royal rank. When the Swedish order of Freemason&#x27;s states that &quot;Freemasonry in Sweden has continued to develop under leadership of their Grand Masters, all of them belonging to the Royal House since more than 200 years&quot;, the origin of which arrives in large from King Charles II of Norway, XIII of Sweden.

Duke Charles was given several political tasks during his tenure as a duke. In 1777, he served as regent during Gustav III&#x27;s stay in Russia. In 1780, he served as formal chief commander during the king&#x27;s stay in Spa. The same year, Gustav III named him regent for his son should he succeed him while still a minor. However, he was not appointed regent during the journey of the king to Italy and France in 1783–84, and in the following years, he came under the influence of Gustaf Adolf Reuterholm, who was in opposition to the monarch, and came to be less trusted by Gustav III.

In 1785, he was offered the Dukedom of Courland by the nobility of the Duchy and given the support of Gustav III. This however never materialized.

On the outbreak of the Russo-Swedish War of 1788 he served with distinction as admiral of the fleet, especially at the battles of Hogland (7 June 1788) and Öland (26 July 1789). On the latter occasion he would have won a signal victory but for the remissness of his second-in-command, Admiral Liljehorn.

The autumn of 1789, Hedvig Elisabeth Charlotte wished to depose Gustav III and place her husband Duke Charles upon the throne. Her ideal was the Swedish Constitution of 1772, which she saw as a good tool for an enlightened aristocracy, and the war and the Union and Security Act had made her a leading part of the opposition. She cooperated with Prince Frederick Adolf of Sweden and Gustaf Adolf Reuterholm. The plan was to force Charles to act as a symbol of the opposition to the Union and Security Act when the time was right. When the time arrived to make Charles act, however, he refused, which effectively foiled the coup.

Charles was in close connection to the opposition against Gustav III, and it is debated whether he knew of and supported the plans to assassinate the king.

==Reign of Gustav IV Adolf==
On the assassination of Gustav III in 1792, Charles acted as regent of Sweden until 1796 on behalf of his nephew, King Gustav IV, who was a minor when his father was shot in the Stockholm opera. Gustav III had designated him regent in his earlier will. When he was dying, he altered the will, and while still appointing Charles regent of his minor son, he was no longer to rule absolute, but restricted by a government consisted of the supporters of Gustav III. After the death of the monarch, however, Charles successfully contested the will and was given unlimited power as sole regent.

The Duke-regent was in practice not willing or capable to manage the state affairs, reportedly because of his lack of energy and staying power. Instead, he entrusted the power of government to his favorite and adviser Gustaf Adolf Reuterholm, whose influence over him was supreme. 
These four years have been considered perhaps the most miserable and degrading period in Swedish history; an Age of Lead succeeding an Age of Gold, as it has been called, and may be briefly described as alternations of fantastic jacobinism and the ruthless despotism. Reuterholm ruled as the uncontested regent de facto the entire tenure of the regency, &quot;only seldom disturbed by other influences or any personal will of charles&quot;. The unexpectedly mild sentences of the involved in the regicide of Gustav III attracted attention. In 1794 the discovery of the Armfelt Conspiracy exposed the opposition of the Gustavian Party. The marriage negotiations of the young king disturbed the relationship to Russia, and the alliance with revolutionary France was greatly disliked by other powers.

On the coming of age of Gustav IV Adolf of Sweden in November 1796, the duke&#x27;s regency ended. His relationship to Gustav IV Adolf was cordial though never close, and he was not entrusted with much responsibility during the rule of his nephew. In 1797 and 1798, he and his consort had their first children, though in neither case the child lived. After this, the Duke and Duchess made a journey through Germany and Austria in 1798–99.

In 1803, the Boheman affair caused a severe conflict between Gustav IV Adolf and the ducal couple. The mystic Karl Adolf Boheman (1764–1831) had been introduced to the couple by Count Magnus Stenbock in 1793 and gained great influence by promising to reveal scientific secrets about the occult. Boheman inducted them into a secret society Yellow Rose in 1801, where both sexes were accepted as members, and to which the Counts and Countesses Ruuth and Brahe as well as the mother of the queen were introduced. Boheman was arrested upon an attempt to recruit the monarch, who accused him of revolutionary agendas and expelled him. The ducal couple were exposed in an informal investigation by the monarch, and the duchess was questioned in the presence of the royal council. In 1808, Charles was again chief commander during Gustav IV Adolf&#x27;s stay in Finland. He is presumed to have been, if not involved, aware of the plans to depose Gustav IV Adolf in 1809. He kept passive during the Coup of 1809, and accepted the post of regent from the victorious party after having assured himself that the deposed monarch was not in mortal danger. Charles was initially not willing to accept the crown, however, out of consideration for the former king&#x27;s son.

==Reign==

On 13 March 1809, those who had dethroned Gustav IV Adolf appointed Charles regent, and he was finally elected king by the Riksdag of the Estates. By the time he became king, he was 60 years old and prematurely decrepit. In November 1809, he was affected by a heart attack, and was not able to participate in government. The new constitution which was introduced also made his involvement in politics difficult. A planned attempt to enlarge the royal power in 1809–10 was not put into effect because of his indecisiveness and health condition.

His incapacity triggered a search for a suitable heir. The initial choice was a Danish prince, Christian August, who took the name Charles August upon being adopted by Charles. However, Charles August died only a few months after his arrival in Sweden. One of Napoleon&#x27;s generals, Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte, was then chosen as his successor. The new crown prince took over the government as soon as he landed in Sweden in 1810. Charles&#x27;s condition deteriorated every year, especially after 1812, and he eventually became but a mute witness during the government councils chaired by the crown prince, having lost his memory and no longer being able to communicate.

By the Union of Sweden and Norway on 4 November 1814, Charles became king of Norway under the name Carl II of Norway. After eight years as king only by title, Charles died without a natural heir on 5 February 1818, and Bernadotte succeeded him as King Charles XIV John.

Charles was the 872nd Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece in Spain.

==Family==
He married his cousin Hedwig Elizabeth Charlotte of Holstein-Gottorp (1759–1818), on 7 July 1774 in Stockholm. They had a son who died in infancy:

# Carl Adolf, Duke of Värmland (Stockholm, 4 July 1798 – Stockholm, 10 July 1798). Lived six days; buried at Riddarholmskyrkan (Riddarholm Church).

With Augusta von Fersen, he had an extramarital son:

# Carl Löwenhielm 1772–1861

Adopted sons:
# Charles August, Crown Prince of Sweden
# Charles XIV John of Sweden

== Honours and arms ==
=== Honours ===
* Sweden:
** Knight of the Order of the Seraphim, &quot;7 October 1748&quot;
** Commander Grand Cross of the Order of the Sword, &quot;7 October 1748&quot;; Grand Cross, 1st Class, &quot;27 July 1788&quot;
** Commander Grand Cross of the Order of the Polar Star, &quot;7 October 1748&quot;
** Commander Grand Cross of the Order of Vasa, &quot;7 October 1748&quot;
** Founder of the Order of Charles XIII, &quot;27 May 1811&quot;
* Kingdom of Prussia: Knight of the Order of the Black Eagle, &quot;18 October 1770&quot;
** Knight of the Order of St. Andrew, &quot;28 August 1796&quot;
** Knight of the Order of St. Alexander Nevsky, &quot;28 August 1796&quot;
* : Knight of the Order of the Elephant, &quot;10 February 1810&quot;
* Spain: Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece, &quot;23 September 1814&quot;

=== Arms ===
==Ancestors==

==See also==
*Gustavian era
*List of Freemasons

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===

==Further reading==
* ch 38 pp 221–48

===Written sources===
* Signum svenska kulturhistoria: Gustavianska tiden
* Ingvar Andersson: Gustavianskt (1979)
* Signum Förlag: Frihetstiden
* Lars Elgklou: Familjen Bernadotte. En kunglig släktkrönika
* Herman Lindqvist: Historien om Sverige. Gustavs dagar
* 

==External links==
* Nordisk familjebok
*Karl XIII av Holstein-Gottorp – Historiesajten</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q52928" start="0" end="12" title="Charles XIII" label="Charles XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q52928" start="16" end="25" title="Charles XIII" label="Carl XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="67" end="81" title="King of Sweden" label="King of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294765" start="96" end="110" title="King of Norway" label="King of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="186" end="196" title="Gustav III" label="Gustav III"/>
<link wikidata="Q52931" start="206" end="231" title="Adolf Frederick of Sweden" label="Adolf Frederick of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q234251" start="236" end="260" title="Louisa Ulrika of Prussia" label="Louisa Ulrika of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="272" end="291" title="Frederick the Great" label="Frederick the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041009" start="367" end="392" title="Carl of Sweden (disambiguation)" label="Swedish king by that name"/>
<link wikidata="Q52939" start="397" end="407" title="Charles IX of Sweden" label="Charles IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812674" start="467" end="497" title="Historia de omnibus Gothorum Sueonumque regibus" label="a fictitious history of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q52928" start="525" end="535" title="Charles XIII" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16596483" start="602" end="627" title="Hedvig Elisabet Strömfelt" label="Hedvig Elisabet Strömfelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q19977070" start="637" end="654" title="Ulrica Schönström" label="Ulrica Schönström"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="673" end="686" title="Swedish Navy#History" label="grand admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q455695" start="758" end="773" title="amateur theatre" label="amateur theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q261929" start="885" end="901" title="Princess Sophia Albertine of Sweden" label="Sophie Albertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872255" start="906" end="921" title="Prince Frederick Adolf of Sweden" label="Frederick Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345901" start="1269" end="1281" title="Caps (party)" label="Caps (party)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22116674" start="1376" end="1386" title="Brita Horn" label="Brita Horn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1426" end="1435" title="Adam Horn" label="Adam Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q27921642" start="1567" end="1589" title="December Crisis (1768)" label="December Crisis (1768)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345901" start="1840" end="1844" title="Caps (party)" label="Caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="1907" end="1917" title="Gustav III" label="Gustav III"/>
<link wikidata="Q10511142" start="2200" end="2218" title="Revolution of 1772" label="Revolution of 1772"/>
<link wikidata="Q626062" start="2485" end="2497" title="Södermanland" label="Södermanland"/>
<link wikidata="Q449181" start="2692" end="2725" title="Philippine of Brandenburg-Schwedt" label="Philippine of Brandenburg-Schwedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q236208" start="3092" end="3138" title="Hedwig Elizabeth Charlotte of Holstein-Gottorp" label="Hedwig Elizabeth Charlotte of Holstein-Gottorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870961" start="4115" end="4133" title="Augusta von Fersen" label="Augusta von Fersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960976" start="4135" end="4153" title="Charlotte Eckerman" label="Charlotte Eckerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275847" start="4155" end="4181" title="Françoise-Éléonore Villain" label="Françoise-Éléonore Villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959578" start="4183" end="4198" title="Mariana Koskull" label="Mariana Koskull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961021" start="4203" end="4223" title="Charlotte Slottsberg" label="Charlotte Slottsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4975813" start="4314" end="4335" title="Magdalena Rudenschöld" label="Magdalena Rudenschöld"/>
<link wikidata="Q98011872" start="4465" end="4483" title="Armfelt Conspiracy" label="Armfelt conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="4708" end="4720" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="4725" end="4734" title="mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="4766" end="4782" title="secret societies" label="secret societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="4807" end="4817" title="Freemasons" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382625" start="4868" end="4885" title="Ulrica Arfvidsson" label="Ulrica Arfvidsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="4911" end="4917" title="Mediumship" label="medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219266" start="4918" end="4942" title="Henrik Gustaf Ulfvenklou" label="Henrik Gustaf Ulfvenklou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028806" start="4968" end="4989" title="Order of Charles XIII" label="Order of Charles XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003221" start="5001" end="5018" title="order of chivalry" label="order of chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q201625" start="5181" end="5199" title="Bernadotte dynasty" label="Bernadotte dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238424" start="5415" end="5429" title="Freemasonry in Sweden" label="Swedish System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542968" start="5443" end="5474" title="Grande Loge Nationale Française" label="Grande Loge Nationale Française"/>
<link wikidata="Q39865" start="6025" end="6028" title="Spa, Belgium" label="Spa"/>
<link wikidata="Q357495" start="6287" end="6310" title="Gustaf Adolf Reuterholm" label="Gustaf Adolf Reuterholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q185072" start="6433" end="6441" title="Courland" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q870196" start="6565" end="6582" title="Gustav III&amp;#x27;s Russian War" label="Russo-Swedish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141396" start="6636" end="6641" title="Swedish Royal Navy" label="fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657874" start="6672" end="6679" title="Battle of Hogland" label="Hogland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036383" start="6698" end="6703" title="Battle of Öland (1789)" label="Öland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015097" start="6992" end="7020" title="Swedish Constitution of 1772" label="Swedish Constitution of 1772"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304332" start="7103" end="7125" title="Union and Security Act" label="Union and Security Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872255" start="7193" end="7225" title="Prince Frederick Adolf of Sweden" label="Prince Frederick Adolf of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q357495" start="7230" end="7253" title="Gustaf Adolf Reuterholm" label="Gustaf Adolf Reuterholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304332" start="7329" end="7351" title="Union and Security Act" label="Union and Security Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q97990002" start="7466" end="7474" title="1789 Conspiracy (Sweden)" label="the coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="7724" end="7730" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q357495" start="8471" end="8494" title="Gustaf Adolf Reuterholm" label="Gustaf Adolf Reuterholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="8670" end="8681" title="Age of Gold" label="Age of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679542" start="8764" end="8774" title="jacobinism" label="jacobinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179352" start="8792" end="8801" title="despotism" label="despotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="8846" end="8854" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9282801" start="9153" end="9168" title="Gustavian Party" label="Gustavian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q52929" start="9358" end="9373" title="Gustav IV Adolf" label="Gustav IV Adolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580666" start="9884" end="9902" title="Karl Adolf Boheman" label="Karl Adolf Boheman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16467527" start="10113" end="10124" title="Yellow Rose (society)" label="Yellow Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q237730" start="10247" end="10266" title="Landgravine Amalie of Hesse-Darmstadt" label="mother of the queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334896" start="10765" end="10777" title="Coup of 1809" label="Coup of 1809"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255390" start="11169" end="11191" title="Riksdag of the Estates" label="Riksdag of the Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q675107" start="11722" end="11736" title="Charles August, Crown Prince of Sweden" label="Charles August"/>
<link wikidata="Q52927" start="11877" end="11901" title="Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte" label="Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q62589" start="12272" end="12298" title="Sweden-Norway" label="Union of Sweden and Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q52927" start="12517" end="12533" title="Charles XIV John" label="Charles XIV John"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="12558" end="12564" title="Knight" label="Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q465774" start="12572" end="12598" title="Order of the Golden Fleece" label="Order of the Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q236208" start="12643" end="12689" title="Hedwig Elizabeth Charlotte of Holstein-Gottorp" label="Hedwig Elizabeth Charlotte of Holstein-Gottorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="12721" end="12730" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q211638" start="12791" end="12799" title="Värmland" label="Värmland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="12801" end="12810" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="12826" end="12835" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q657118" start="12897" end="12914" title="Riddarholm Church" label="Riddarholm Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870961" start="12923" end="12941" title="Augusta von Fersen" label="Augusta von Fersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069154" start="12974" end="12989" title="Carl Löwenhielm" label="Carl Löwenhielm"/>
<link wikidata="Q675107" start="13017" end="13055" title="Charles August, Crown Prince of Sweden" label="Charles August, Crown Prince of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q52927" start="13058" end="13074" title="Charles XIV John" label="Charles XIV John"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="13127" end="13133" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331130" start="13152" end="13173" title="Order of the Seraphim" label="Order of the Seraphim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476049" start="13234" end="13252" title="Order of the Sword" label="Order of the Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q961142" start="13363" end="13386" title="Order of the Polar Star" label="Order of the Polar Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258644" start="13447" end="13460" title="Order of Vasa" label="Order of Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028806" start="13507" end="13528" title="Order of Charles XIII" label="Order of Charles XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="13556" end="13574" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q94145" start="13590" end="13614" title="Order of the Black Eagle" label="Order of the Black Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126563" start="13661" end="13680" title="Order of St. Andrew" label="Order of St. Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514065" start="13726" end="13755" title="Order of St. Alexander Nevsky" label="Order of St. Alexander Nevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q976544" start="13802" end="13823" title="Order of the Elephant" label="Order of the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821150" start="13856" end="13861" title="History of Spain (1810–73)" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q465774" start="13877" end="13903" title="Order of the Golden Fleece" label="Order of the Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300409" start="13978" end="13991" title="Gustavian era" label="Gustavian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417927" start="13993" end="14011" title="List of Freemasons" label="List of Freemasons"/>
</links>
</doc>
